









































sponsored by

Co
py

rig
ht

 ©
 2

01
5 

H
ar

va
rd

 B
us

in
es

s 
Sc

ho
ol

 P
ub

lis
hi

ng
.

A  H A RVA R D  B U S I N E S S  R E V I E W  A N A LY T I C  S E RV I C E S  R E P O RT

DATA BLENDING:  
A POWERFUL METHOD 
FOR FASTER, EASIER 
DECISIONS



SPONSOR PERSPECTIVE

We’re in the middle of a 
significant shift in the way 
organizations blend and analyze 
data, affecting not only the way 
decisions are made, but also 
how businesses operate. Data 
analysts in the line of business, 
who formerly had no choice but 

to rely on highly skilled, highly paid data scientists for 
data access, can now take advantage of self-service 
technologies to achieve analytic independence. These 
technologies enable practically anyone—regardless of 
their technical proficiency—to be a data analyst and 
make data-driven business decisions.

Data blending is the driving force behind this movement, 
freeing up people throughout the organization to 
experiment with data. Rather than putting business data, 
such as valuable insights about customer behavior, into 
the hands of a few, companies can place this data into 
the hands of the many—those, for instance, who will use 
this insight to bring about a better customer experience. 

Alteryx sponsored the study “Data Blending: A Powerful 
Method for Faster, Easier Decisions” by Harvard Business 
Review Analytic Services, to support the empowerment 
of these analysts. Harvard Business Review Analytic 
Services conducted a comprehensive survey of 
business professionals across multiple industries and 
departments, and the results are clear. Data fuels the 
critical business decisions that an organization needs 
to make and having the ability to blend all of the various 
sources of data together to discover insight can, and 
should, happen anywhere in the organization.

At Alteryx, we are leading the enablement of self-service 
for data analysts through an intuitive workflow for data 
blending and advanced analytics that allows them to 
gain deeper business insights in hours, not the weeks 
of traditional approaches. Analysts around the world 
at companies of all sizes are using Alteryx to easily 
blend internal, third-party, and cloud-based data, and 
then analyze it using spatial and predictive drag-and-
drop tools. This is all done in a single workflow, with no 
programming required.

Some corporate technology managers might see this 
analytics-for-everyone trend as a threat to governance 
and security, much like the way the bring-your-own-
device (BYOD) movement was viewed. But that would be 
a mistake, as it actually represents a huge opportunity 
for all. IT departments will continue their critical role of 
ensuring that certain highly private data is indeed secure, 
but by learning from mistakes rather than shutting down 
the data pipeline, they empower their organizations to 
make better, more informed business decisions.

We are excited by the results of this study, as it validates 
our goal to make data blending and analytics accessible 
to everyone. By overcoming the struggles of legacy 
technologies like spreadsheets that were not built to 
handle today’s data requirements, organizations can 
build a more stable, data-driven culture and create an 
environment where business analysts revolutionize the 
way they use data to make decisions.

Rick Schultz 
Senior Vice President, Marketing 
Alteryx, Inc.



DATA  B L E N D I N G :  A  P O W E R F U L  M E T H O D  F O R  FA S T E R ,  E A S I E R  D E C I S I O N S 1

DATA BLENDING:  
A POWERFUL METHOD FOR 
FASTER, EASIER DECISIONS
DATA ANALYTICS, the science of examining an organization’s raw data with the purpose of gleaning 
valuable business information from it, is becoming a critical tool for today’s business managers.

New research from Harvard Business Review Analytic Services shows tremendous bottom-line 
potential from using the latest generation of powerful data analytics tools. Our global survey of 502 
business leaders and executives, academics, and IT managers in more than 15 industry sectors shows 
that a vast majority of executives find data analytics important for their decision making. figure 1 

This importance is due to the growing pressure that managers face to find new ways of squeezing 
more revenue and profits from existing operations. For example, market analyst firm IDC tells cli-
ents they should be able to double the productivity of their business analysts by providing them 
with the right tools and decision-making culture. “There’s a genuine movement toward decision 
making based on data rather than heuristics today,” says Bob Parker, a group vice president at IDC. 

That’s certainly the case at home-improvement retailer The Home Depot. “We’re not building 
new stores at nearly the rate we used to,” says Charles Coleman, a senior analyst at the company.  
“So to grow the company, we’ve come to rely on data analytics instead.”

The trouble is, to make smart and fast business decisions from data, business managers must over-
come multiple challenges while using multiple analytics tools. Among the big challenges is the 
growing number of data sources analysts must gain access to. For another, many of the analytical 
tools on which analysts rely are incapable of processing, or struggle to process. many of the data 
sources. These tools, including Microsoft’s Excel application, have analysts manually poring over 
spreadsheets and creating complex formulas from scratch each time out. All that means business 
analysts rely heavily on their organizations’ data scientists and IT professionals. And that, in turn, 
can mean pulling a support ticket and waiting in line.

A new solution offers help. Known as “data blending,” it’s essentially a data analytics meth-
odology and tool set combined. Data blending gives business analysts self-service solutions 
to cleanse, enrich, and join together the data they require. This can all be delivered in an auto-
mated process. Even better, the data can be taken from any number of disparate areas, both 
internally and externally. Data blending solutions also offer newfound speed and ease-of-use 
through graphical drag-and-drop interfaces that allow the user to see how data is transformed 
through every step in the process and give the user the ability to drill down on details. All this 
empowers managers to make informed and intelligent business decisions quickly and without 
the need to lean on a data scientist or IT professional.



2 H A RVA R D  B U S I N E S S  R E V I E W  A N A LY T I C  S E RV I C E S

RISING DATA SOURCES 
The extent of the data source challenge is remarkable. For typical organizations, the number of 
data sources can range from a minimum of five to, in many cases, more than 15. Worse, nearly 
eight out of 10 survey respondents predict this number will increase within the next two years, 
with almost a third predicting a substantial increase. figure 2

The data source challenges are myriad. Data today can be found in both internal and external 
sources. Internal sources include everything from spreadsheets to data warehouses and data 
marts containing information from enterprise ERP and CRM applications. Many organizations 
also acquire data from third parties, including marketing service providers, trade associations, and 
governments. As for external data sources, these can include cloud-based enterprise applications 
such as Salesforce.com and Marketo, social media, and even data generated from mobile devices. 

Some organizations go even further. At department-store chain Belk Inc., business analysts use 
geographical information—along with customer feedback data from online surveys, social media, 
call centers, and emails—to get a full customer view. “Analyzing that view helps us determine the 
customer’s ‘path to purchase,’ ” says Anu Brookins, Belk’s VP of customer insights and analytics.

OLDER TOOLS CAN’T COPE
With all this data coming in from all these sources, old-school solutions are no longer sufficient. 
That’s because these tools were designed for a far simpler data environment, one that fea-
tured fewer data types, with most data either raw or highly structured. They certainly weren’t 
designed to handle unstructured data, such as social media and videos, or data from the cloud 
and mobile devices.

Extremely important (rating 10)

Somewhat important (rating 6–9)

Neither important nor unimportant (rating 4–5)

Not important (rating 1–3)

31

57

8

FIGURE 1

DATA ANALYTICS MATTER
Percentage rating how important data analytics is to their organization’s decisions
and/or processes.
On a scale of  1 to 10 where 1 = not at all important and 10 = extremely important

4



DATA  B L E N D I N G :  A  P O W E R F U L  M E T H O D  F O R  FA S T E R ,  E A S I E R  D E C I S I O N S 3

After Microsoft’s Excel spreadsheet application, the most prevalent tools used for analysis include 
analytics tools developed in-house, third-party tools, and even some cloud-based ones. figure 3 

While Excel is the preferred spreadsheet application for basic calculations and manipulating 
numeric data, its design dates back well before the current age of big data. Today, accessing large 
numbers of data sources, and cleansing, processing, and blending both internal and external data 
from multiple sources, are de facto requirements. Excel wasn’t designed to do that. As a result, 
whenever data is joined from multiple sources, Excel requires tedious and laborious formulas and 
manual tweaks that leave the resulting spreadsheet highly susceptible to errors. “Excel and in-house 
development tools tend to hit the point of diminishing returns fairly quickly,” says Parker of IDC. 

Little surprise, then, that only 7 percent of respondents rate their current data-analysis tools as 
very or extremely effective. “The dirty little secret of big data,” says Tom Davenport, a professor 
of IT and management at Babson College and the author or co-author of 17 books on those topics, 
“is that most data analysts spend the vast majority of their time cleaning and integrating data—
not actually analyzing it.” 

In his other role as a senior advisor to Deloitte Analytics, Davenport sees many data analysts today 
manually poring over Excel spreadsheets all day, then generating the most basic cut-and-paste 
reports to the departments that need business insight. “Some companies with a global reach can 
have hundreds of data analysts,” he says, “which equates to a huge waste of time.”

FIGURE 2

MANY DATA SOURCES NOW—AND MORE COMING
Percentage saying how many different data sources their organization currently accesses 
for most of its operational decision making.

Percentage rating how they expect the number of data sources to change over the 
next two years.

33%
13%
18%
9%
27%

5 TO 9

10 TO 14

15 OR MORE

DON’T KNOW

FEWER THAN 5

IN
CR

EA
SE

 S
UB

ST
AN

TI
AL

LY

IN
CR

EA
SE

 S
O

M
EW

H
AT

N
O

 C
H

AN
G

E

D
EC

RE
AS

E 
SO

M
EW

H
AT

D
EC

RE
AS

E 
SU

BS
TA

N
TI

AL
LY

D
O

N
’T

 K
N

O
W

CURRENT

48

10

29

7 51

50

40

30

20

10

0



4 H A RVA R D  B U S I N E S S  R E V I E W  A N A LY T I C  S E RV I C E S

Further, as these business analysts struggle with multiple data types and sources, and the old-
school tools, they often have no choice but to lean on in-house data professionals. These IT  
professionals can help analysts both gain access to the data they need and squeeze more out of 
their Excel tools, but they often have to leverage much more sophisticated tools for combining 
data into a useful form for analysis.

More than 60 percent of respondents say their business managers are at least somewhat dependent 
on their IT managers, data scientists, data managers, and other dedicated analytics professionals. 
But fewer than 2 percent say they’re extremely satisfied with those IT professionals’ efforts. And 
a much larger group—nearly 40 percent—say they’re only moderately satisfied.

What’s more, depending on data pros is risky; as a group, they’re becoming scarce. The McKinsey 
Global Institute predicts that the United States could face a shortage of nearly 200,000 skilled 
data pros by 2018. Adds Parker of IDC: “These kinds of data professionals can be hard to find, 
quantify, and keep.” 

Spreadsheets

Analytics tools developed in-house

Third-party analytics tools

Consumer databases

Low-level SQL queries

Cloud-based analytics tools

Don’t know/other

92

52

37

30

3

49

FIGURE 3

SPREADSHEETS STILL DOMINATE
Percentage that say their organization uses the following tools for data analysis. 
Select all that apply.

43



DATA  B L E N D I N G :  A  P O W E R F U L  M E T H O D  F O R  FA S T E R ,  E A S I E R  D E C I S I O N S 5

A NEW SOLUTION: DATA BLENDING 
Add it all together, and business analysts are asking for better tools to help them provide the kinds 
of information managers and executives need to make better decisions. Such a solution needs to 
be “self service”—that is, one where the analysts no longer need to rely on centralized data staff 
for help. Roughly a quarter of respondents rank key features of these tools as extremely import-
ant, including the speed at which they can analyze data; the volume of data that can be processed; 
the ease-of-use of the tools, such as having an intuitive graphical user interface; and the ability 
to drag and drop specific data preparation and data-joining tools to create workflows that can be 
used repeatedly without tedious manual work. figure 4

The good news is that the new methodology known as data blending is making such solutions 
possible. Already, business analysts across several industries are working with data blending 
tools that include powerful data preparation capabilities. These include data extraction, cleans-
ing, blending, and enrichment—all right on the desktop. And with no need for costly help from 
IT professionals.

Data blending is the process of combining data from multiple sources to create an actionable 
analytic data set either for business decision making or for driving a specific business process. 
Data blending is needed when an organization’s data-management processes and infrastructure 
are insufficient for bringing together specific datasets required by business groups. For exam-
ple, data blending can readily bring together disparate data like customer information from a 
cloud sales automation system such as Salesforce.com, clickstream Web data stored in an open-
source big data file system, and lists of data from Excel. Data blending differs from data integra-
tion and data warehousing in that its primary use is not to create a single unified version of the 
truth that’s stored in data, but rather to build an analytic dataset that helps business analysts 
answer specific business questions.

Speed to analyze data

Ease of use

Ability to create reusable workflows

Ability to process large volumes of data

29

25

25

FIGURE 4

SPEED, EASE, VOLUME, REUSE
Percentage of managers who describe the features of tools used to analyze data for 
business decisions as extremely important. 

22



6 H A RVA R D  B U S I N E S S  R E V I E W  A N A LY T I C  S E RV I C E S

Bank of America Merrill Lynch, one of the largest U.S. investment banks, has deployed a data blend-
ing solution to provide self-service analytical tools for its hundreds of business analysts. These 
analysts can now generate more in-depth and predictive client-profitability analyses. They’ve also 
gained true workflow automation, moving far beyond manual processes. And they’ve improved 
their regulatory reporting. All these gains have also reduced the firm’s costs markedly.

Data blending has also found a home at The Home Depot. The company originally sought to 
improve business analysis of its stock-keeping units, or SKUs. That’s the number retailers assign 
to a product to identify its price, product option, and manufacturer. At any given moment,  
The Home Depot uses approximately 160,000 SKUs in its more than 2,000 stores. Until recently, 
analyzing that information involved manually retrieving data from Excel spreadsheets. But now, 
thanks to its data blending solution, The Home Depot analysts can combine that mountain of data 
in an automated fashion. They can also do the work in just a fraction of the time it formerly took:  
a mere 30 to 60 minutes, down dramatically from the previous two weeks. 

For The Home Depot, this greater speed is critical. The company can now more effectively price 
its merchandise according to factors that include competition and market elasticity. Senior analyst 
Coleman says that has not only saved thousands of hours of work, but also improved the com-
pany’s bottom line by as much as 4 percent. “As we speed our rate of analysis,” he says, “we can 
give ourselves time to work through other analytics projects and further develop data strategies.” 

Retailer Belk now uses data blending in every corporate group serving its 300 stores. Its mer-
chandising group can now generate deep, predictive reports that precisely identify customer 
demographics and what customers are likely to buy. Belk’s marketing group, meanwhile, uses 
data blending to determine which ad campaigns have been most—and least—effective. And the 
real estate group uses data blending to generate reports in record time to anticipate the financial 
impact when a store is remodeled. “Across the organization, we’re now asking more and more 
sophisticated questions,” says Belk VP Brookins. “This helps us understand how we can provide 
more value to our customers and increase the loyalty and retention of our customers—which 
ultimately leads to company growth.”

Data blending differs from data integration and 
data warehousing in that its primary use is not to 
create a single unified version of the truth that’s 
stored in data, but rather to build an analytic 
dataset that helps business analysts answer 
specific business questions.



DATA  B L E N D I N G :  A  P O W E R F U L  M E T H O D  F O R  FA S T E R ,  E A S I E R  D E C I S I O N S 7

It’s not just financial services and retailers that are using data blending. Cardinal Health Inc., which 
provides medical products to more than three quarters of all U.S. hospitals, is another. Looking 
to empower its sales and marketing analysts, Cardinal Health deployed a data blending tool. The 
solution’s built-in automation has dramatically sped up its work. Before data blending, Cardinal 
generated 100 customer reports after a month of manually compiling information. Now, with data 
blending, that has jumped to more than 2,000 reports, each packed with charts, graphs, and pre-
dictive business insights. And Cardinal can generate them all in under an hour.

How far might data blending and its associated tools go in the future? Advisory firm Ovum  
predicts that self-service tools will soon “enable a whole new universe of users.” One big area 
could be genomics healthcare, where clinicians deploy such tools to analyze the generated data 
from a person’s DNA to detect, diagnose, and treat various forms of cancer.

Another area ripe for data blending is the Internet of Things. This catchall category comprises 
the vast array of machines, sensors, and wearable devices generating reams of information, and 
it’s one of the main sources of big data. As many as 25 billion “things” will be connected by 2020, 
predicts Gartner. Making that connectivity even smarter will be what data futurist Davenport calls 
the “analytics of things.” That’s where these data blending solutions would help make sense of 
the mountains of data these connected sensors amass. 

Fortunately, companies don’t have to wait for the benefits of data blending. They’re here and 
now. “When I walk through our stores,” says Coleman of The Home Depot, “I see the impact data 
blending has made. I can see product changes right on the shelf. And that’s really exciting.”

METHODOLOGY AND PARTICIPANT PROFILE
Harvard Business Review Analytic Services surveyed a total of 502 individuals. About one-quarter 
(26 percent) were from organizations with over 10,000 employees, another 26 percent were from 
organizations with from 1,000 to 10,000 employees, and 40 percent were from organizations with 
fewer than 500 employees. Respondents’ own operating units were primarily in North America (45 
percent), followed by Asia/Pacific (20 percent), Europe (19 percent), Latin America (9 percent), 
and the Middle East/Africa (6 percent). Participants represent a wide range of industries and 
functional areas, with 17 percent saying they work in general/executive management, 13 percent in 
sales/business development, and 9 percent in marketing/communications.



hbr.org/hbr-analytic-services




