






































Clarifiying complex chemical processes with quantum computers | ETH Zurich


Clarifiying complex chemical
processes with quantum computers

31.07.2017 | News

By:  Fabio Bergamin

Science and the IT industry have high hopes for quantum computing,
but descriptions of possible applications tend to be vague.
Researchers at ETH Zurich have now come up with a concrete
example that demonstrates what quantum computers will actually be
able to achieve in the future.

Search

Search news
Search the news by:

Related article
“The ball is in D-Wave’s

court” (ETH News

19.06.2014)

Don't miss the
latest news
Sign up for our newsletter

Future quantum computers will be able to calculate the reaction mechanism of the en-

zyme nitrogenase. The image shows the active centre of the enzyme and a mathemati-

cal formula that is central for the calculation. (Visualisations: ETH Zurich)

Clarifiying complex chemical processes with quantum computers | ETH Zurich https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/07/clarifiying-complex-chemical...

1 sur 5 07/08/2017 12:14



Specialists expect nothing less than a technological revolution from
quantum computers, which they hope will soon allow them to solve
problems that are currently too complex for classical supercomputers.
Commonly discussed areas of application include data encryption and
decryption, as well as special problems in the fields of physics, quantum
chemistry and materials research.

But when it comes to concrete questions that only quantum computers can
answer, experts have remained relatively vague. Researchers from ETH
Zurich and Microsoft Research are now presenting a specific application
for the first time in the scientific journal PNAS: evaluating a complex
chemical reaction. Based on this example, the scientists show that
quantum computers can indeed deliver scientifically relevant results.

A team of researchers led by ETH professors Markus Reiher and Matthias
Troyer used simulations to demonstrate how a complex chemical reaction
could be calculated with the help of a quantum computer. To accomplish
this, the quantum computer must be of a “moderate size”, says Matthias
Troyer, who is Professor for Computational Physics at ETH Zurich and
currently works for Microsoft. The mechanism of this reaction would be
nearly impossible to assess with a classical supercomputer alone –
especially if the results are to be sufficiently precise.

One of the most complex enzymes
The researchers chose a particularly complex biochemical reaction as the
example for their study: thanks to a special enzyme known as a
nitrogenase, certain microorganisms are able to split atmospheric nitrogen
molecules in order to create chemical compounds with single nitrogen
atoms. It is still unknown how exactly the nitrogenase reaction works. “This
is one of the greatest unsolved mysteries in chemistry,” says Markus
Reiher, Professor for Theoretical Chemistry at ETH Zurich.

Computers that are available today are able to calculate the behaviour of
simple molecules quite precisely. However, this is nearly impossible for the
nitrogenase enzyme and its active centre, which is simply too complex,
explains Reiher.

In this context, complexity is a reflection of how many electrons interact

Clarifiying complex chemical processes with quantum computers | ETH Zurich https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/07/clarifiying-complex-chemical...

2 sur 5 07/08/2017 12:14



with each other within the molecule over relatively long distances. The
more electrons a researcher needs to take into account, the more
sophisticated the computations. “Existing methods and classical
supercomputers can be used to assess molecules with about 50 strongly
interacting electrons at most,” says Reiher. However, there is a significantly
greater number of such electrons at the active centre of a nitrogenase
enzyme. Because with classical computers the effort required to evaluate a
molecule doubles with each additional electron, an unrealistic amount of
computational power is needed.

Another computer architecture
As demonstrated by the ETH researchers, hypothetical quantum
computers with just 100 to 200 quantum bits (qubits) will potentially be able
to compute complex subproblems within a few days. The results of these
computations could then be used to determine the reaction mechanism of
nitrogenase step by step.

That quantum computers are capable of solving such challenging tasks at
all is partially the result of the fact that they are structured differently to
classical computers. Rather than requiring twice as many bits to assess
each additional electron, quantum computers simply need one more qubit.

However, it remains to be seen when such “moderately large” quantum
computers will be available. The currently existing experimental quantum
computers  use on the order of 20 rudimentary qubits respectively. It will
take at least another five years, or more likely ten, before we have
quantum computers with processors of more than 100 high quality qubits,
estimates Reiher.

Mass production and networking
Researchers emphasise the fact that quantum computers cannot handle
all tasks, so they will serve as a supplement to classical computers, rather
than replacing them. “The future will be shaped by the interplay between
classical computers and quantum computers,” says Troyer.

With regard to the nitrogenase reaction, quantum computers will be able to

Clarifiying complex chemical processes with quantum computers | ETH Zurich https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/07/clarifiying-complex-chemical...

3 sur 5 07/08/2017 12:14



Research | Chemistry | Physics | Quantum sciences

Comment

calculate how the electrons are distributed within a specific molecular
structure. However, classical computers will still need to tell quantum
computers which structures are of particular interest and should therefore
be calculated. “Quantum computers need to be thought of more like a co-
processor capable of taking over particular tasks from classical computers,
thus allowing them to become more efficient,” says Reiher.

Explaining the mechanism of the nitrogenase reaction will also require
more than just information about the electron distribution in a single
molecular structure; indeed, this distribution needs to be determined in
thousands of structures. Each computation takes several days. “In order
for quantum computers to be of use in solving these kinds of problems,
they will first need to be mass produced, thereby allowing computations to
take place on multiple computers at the same time,” says Troyer.

Reference
Reiher M, Wiebe N, Svore KM, Wecker D, Troyer M: Elucidating
reaction mechanisms on quantum computers: PNAS 2017, 114:
7555-7560, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1619152114

Leave a comment
We are interested in your comments. Please use our form to send
your comment to us:

 No comments yet
Additional comments are available for the German version of this article.

Clarifiying complex chemical processes with quantum computers | ETH Zurich https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/07/clarifiying-complex-chemical...

4 sur 5 07/08/2017 12:14



Page URL: https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/07/clarifiying-complex-chemical-processes-with-quantum-
computers.html
Fri Aug 04 18:20:28 CEST 2017
© 2017 Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich

Show all comments

Clarifiying complex chemical processes with quantum computers | ETH Zurich https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/07/clarifiying-complex-chemical...

5 sur 5 07/08/2017 12:14


