






































Computer algorithm links facial masculinity to autism | University News : The University of Western Australia


Related areas

INTERNATIONAL

RESEARCH SCIENCE

Follow @uwanews

Stories

Autism researcher awarded
prestigious Eureka Award
Do pheromones exist in humans?
UWA researcher a finalist for
2017 Eureka Prize
Pterygium a red flag for
melanoma, major new study
shows
2016/2017 Payment Summaries
(Group Certificates)

Friday, 25 August 2017

A link between masculine facial features and autism has been
discovered by researchers from The University of Western
Australia, Telethon Kids Institute and Princess Margaret Hospital
for Children.

The first-of-its-kind study used 3D photogrammetry to examine
whether pre-pubescent boys and girls with an Autism Spectrum
Disorder (ASD) displayed more masculine features compared to
those without the condition. The research has been published
today in Scientific Reports by the Nature Publishing Group.

Genetic factors are known to play a major role in ASD however
there is growing evidence that hormonal factors also influence development of the condition.

A computer algorithm designed by UWA researchers was used to generate a gender score for a sample
of 3D facial images to create a scale ranging from very masculine to very feminine. The gender scores
were based on an analysis for 11 facial features such as breadth of a person's nose, distance between
the outer corners of the eyes, upper lip height and width of the mouth and were compared between an
autistic group and a control group. A total 113 girls and 102 boys who were not autistic and 20 girls and
54 boys who were autistic were involved in the study. For each sex, increased facial masculinity was
observed in the ASD group compared to the control group.

Further analysis revealed that increased facial masculinity in the group with autism correlated with more
social communication difficulties as measured on the Autism Diagnostic Observation Scale.

UWA Research associate Syed Zulqarnain Gilani, from UWA’s School of Computer Science and
Software Engineering said the extent of facial masculinity/femininity varied from one individual to
another.

“We have developed an algorithm to measure this variation using 3D images of people, which
calculates a metric for each face, which we refer to as the gender score,” Mr Gilani said.

“When we applied this algorithm to 3D faces of children diagnosed with an ASD, the results and trends
were fascinating.”

The study is the first to report that the faces of boys and girls with ASD are more masculinised than the
faces of typically developing children, according to research associate Diana Tan, from UWA’s School of
Psychological Science.

“In our previous research, we found that a more masculinised facial profile was associated with
increased exposure to prenatal testosterone,” Ms Tan said.

“The current findings highlight a possible connection between prenatal testosterone and ASD.

“A facial characteristic that is unique to ASD provides potential biological markers for this condition. In
the long run, we hope to further explore the possibility for 3D facial images to be used as a
complementary diagnostic tool to aid in the early identification of ASD.”

Media references

Jess Reid (UWA Media and PR Adviser) (+61 4) 13 105 200
Syed Zulqarnain Gilani (UWA School of Computer Science and Software Engineering) (+61 8) 6488
1200

University News

Computer algorithm links facial masculinity to
autism

Computer algorithm links facial masculinity to autism | University News ... http://www.news.uwa.edu.au/201708259876/international/computer-algo...

1 sur 1 16-07-18 à 19:27


