






































Developing a secure, un-hackable net


Developing a secure, un-hackable net

A method of securely communicating between multiple quantum

devices has been developed by a UCL-led team of scientists, bringing

forward the reality of a large-scale, un-hackable quantum network.

To date, communicating via quantum networks has only been possible

between two devices of known provenance that have been built

securely.

With the EU and UK committing €1 billion and £270 million*

respectively into funding quantum technology research, a race is on to

develop the first truly secure, large-scale network between cities that

works for any quantum device.

“We’re in a technology arms race of sorts. When quantum computers

are fully developed, they will break much of today’s encryption whose

security is only based on mathematical assumptions. To pre-emptively

solve this, we are working on new ways of communicating through large

networks that don’t rely on assumptions, but instead use the quantum

laws of physics to ensure security, which would need to be broken to

hack the encryption,” explained lead author, Dr Ciarán Lee (UCL

Physics & Astronomy).

Developing a secure, un-hackable net https://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/0118/110118-unhackable-qua...

1 sur 3 12-01-18 à 19:03



Published in Physical Review Letters and funded by the Engineering

and Physical Sciences Research Council, the study by UCL, the

University of Oxford and the University of Edinburgh scientists details a

new way of communicating securely between three or more quantum

devices, irrespective of who built them.

“Our approach works for a general network where you don’t need to

trust the manufacturer of the device or network for secrecy to be

guaranteed. Our method works by using the network's structure to limit

what an eavesdropper can learn,” said Dr Matty Hoban (University of

Oxford, previously University of Edinburgh).

The approach bridges the gap between the theoretical promise of

perfect security guaranteed by the laws of quantum physics and the

practical implementation of such security in large networks.

It tests the security of the quantum devices prior to engaging in

communications with the whole network. It does this by checking if the

correlations between devices in the network are intrinsically quantum

and cannot have been created by another means.

These correlations are used to establish secret keys which can be used to

encrypt any desired communication. Security is ensured by the unique

property that quantum correlations can only be shared between the

devices that created them, ensuring no hacker can ever come to learn

the key.

The team used two methods – machine learning and causal inference –

to develop the test for the un-hackable communications system. This

approach distributes secret keys in a way that cannot be effectively

intercepted, because through quantum mechanics their secrecy can be

tested and guaranteed.

“Our work can be thought of as creating the software that will run on

hardware currently being built to realise the potential of quantum

communications. In future work, we’d like to work with partners in the

UK national quantum technologies programme to develop this further.

We hope to trial our quantum network approach over the next few

years,” concluded Dr Lee.

The team acknowledge that an un-hackable network could be abused in

Developing a secure, un-hackable net https://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/0118/110118-unhackable-qua...

2 sur 3 12-01-18 à 19:03



the same way that current networks are, but highlight that there is also

a clear benefit to ensuring privacy too.

Links

Research paper in Physical Review Letters

Dr Ciarán Lee's academic profile

UCL Physics & Astronomy

*UK National Quantum Technology Programme

The Quantum Age: technological opportunities by the UK Government

Image

Quantum computing (credit: Kevin Dooley, source: Flickr)

Media contact

Bex Caygill

Tel: +44 (0)20 3108 3846

Email: r.caygill [at] ucl.ac.uk

Developing a secure, un-hackable net https://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/0118/110118-unhackable-qua...

3 sur 3 12-01-18 à 19:03


