






































Facebook could help stop disease outbreak


Facebook could help stop disease
outbreak

By AFP More by this Author

Facebook, phone records could help stop disease

outbreak

Wednesday January 3 2018

Facebook accounts and telephone records can be used to pinpoint the

best individuals to vaccinate to stop a disease outbreak in its tracks,

researchers said Wednesday. FILE PHOTO | NATION MEDIA GROUP 

In Summary

The study tracked the digital and physical contacts of more than 500

university students.

It concluded that people who are central in their digital networks are

also central in their real-life human networks.

The goal of vaccination is to reduce the size of the population at risk of

Facebook could help stop disease outbreak http://www.nation.co.ke/lifestyle/Facebook-could-stop-disease-outbreak...

1 sur 3 06-01-18 à 13:20



infection.

Advertisement

PARIS

Facebook accounts and telephone records can be used to pinpoint the

best individuals to vaccinate to stop a disease outbreak in its tracks,

researchers said Wednesday.

Such people would be "central" in their social networks, and thus

likelier to spread disease-causing germs from one group to another.

Assuming there is an outbreak, and not enough vaccines for every

person in the world, immunising these well-connected individuals

would remove social "bridges" by which germs can spread, experts

wrote in the Journal of the Royal Society Interface.

The study, which tracked the digital and physical contacts of more than

500 university students, concluded that people who are central in their

digital networks are also central in their real-life human networks.

BRIDGE

"If you are a hub for your friends in the sense that you have many

contacts via phone calls or on Facebook, making you a bridge between

diverse communities, chances are high that you are also likely to be a

bridge to connect those communities in case of an epidemic, such as

influenza," study co-author Enys Mones of the Technical University of

Denmark told AFP.

"By understanding the online contacts, we can find individuals who are

such central members of the population and focus targeted counter-

measures on them when there are limited resources for vaccination."

Using computer modelling, the research then calculated that

vaccinating these "central" individuals would be "almost as efficient as

the most optimal (existing) vaccination strategies".

It was also cheaper, as digital activity is easy to trace.

The goal of vaccination is to reduce the size of the population at risk of

infection.

It achieves something called "herd immunity", whereby unvaccinated

people are increasingly unlikely to come into contact with an infectious

Facebook could help stop disease outbreak http://www.nation.co.ke/lifestyle/Facebook-could-stop-disease-outbreak...

2 sur 3 06-01-18 à 13:20



individual.

Facebook could help stop disease outbreak http://www.nation.co.ke/lifestyle/Facebook-could-stop-disease-outbreak...

3 sur 3 06-01-18 à 13:20


