






































Future robots need no motors HKU Engineering invents worldâ•Žs first nickel-hydroxide actuating material that can be triggered by both light and electricity - All News - Media


Future robots need no motors HKU
Engineering invents world’s first nickel-
hydroxide actuating material that can be
triggered by both light and electricity - All
News - Media

Future robots need no motors HKU Engineering
invents world’s first nickel-hydroxide actuating
material that can be triggered by both light and
electricity

31 May 2018

Professor Alfonso Ngan and Dr Kwan Kin-wa introduce the new actuating material
powered by light. 

To develop micro- and biomimetic-robots, artificial muscles and medical devices,
actuating materials that can reversibly change their volume under various stimuli are
researched in the past thirty years to replace traditional bulky and heavy actuators
including motors and pneumatic actuators.

A mechanical engineering team led by Professor Alfonso Ngan Hing-wan, Chair
Professor in Materials Science and Engineering, and Kingboard Professor in Materials
Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, the University of Hong Kong (HKU) published
an article in Science Robotics on 30 May 2018 (EST) that introduces a novel actuating

Future robots need no motors HKU Engineering invents world’s first nick... https://www.hku.hk/press/news_detail_17948.html

1 sur 4 06-06-18 à 19:40



material – nickel hydroxide-oxyhydroxide – that can be powered by visible (Vis) light,
electricity, and other stimuli. The material actuation can be instantaneously triggered
by Vis light to produce a fast deformation and exert a force equivalent to 3000 times
of its own weight. The material cost of a typical actuator is as low as HKD 4 per cm2

and can be easily fabricated within three hours.

Among various stimuli, light-induced actuating materials are highly desirable because
they enable wireless operation of robots. However, very few light driven materials are
available in the past, and their material and production costs are high, which hinder
their development in actual applications such as artificial muscles for robotics and
human assist device, and minimally invasive surgical and diagnostic tools.

Developing actuating materials was identified as the top of the 10 challenges in “The
grand challenges of Science Robotics”1. Research in actuating materials can radically
change the concept of robots which are now mainly motor-driven. Therefore,
materials that can be actuated by wireless stimuli including a change in temperature,
humidity, magnetic fields and light is one of the main research focus in recent years.
 In particular, a material that can be actuated by Vis light and produces strong, quick
and stable actuation has never been achieved. The novel actuating material system –
nickel hydroxide-oxyhydroxide that can be actuated by Vis light at relatively low
intensity to produce high stress and speed comparable to mammalian skeletal
muscles has been developed in this research initiated by engineers in HKU.

In addition to its Vis light actuation properties, this novel material system can also be
actuated by electricity, enabling it to be integrated into the present well-developed
robotics technology. It is also responsive to heat and humidity changes so that they
might potentially be applied in autonomous machines that harness the tiny energy
change in the environment. Because the major component is nickel, the material cost
is low. The fabrication only involves electrodeposition which is a simple process, and
the time required for the fabrication is around three hours, therefore the material can
be easily scaled up and manufactured in industry.

The newly invented nickel hydroxide-oxyhydroxide responses to light almost
instantaneously and produces a force corresponding to about 3000 times of its own
weight (Figure 1).  

1 Yang, Guang-Zhong, et al. "The grand challenges of Science Robotics." Science
Robotics 3.14 (2018): eaar7650.

Figure 1  Actuating force of a 0.3-mg nickel hydroxide-oxyhydroxide actuator of
under periodic light can reach about 1000-mg.

When integrated into a well-designed structure, a “mini arm” made by two hinges of
actuating materials can easily lift an object 50 times of its weight (Figure 2). Similarly,
by utilizing a light blocker, a mini walking-bot in which only the “front leg” bent and

Future robots need no motors HKU Engineering invents world’s first nick... https://www.hku.hk/press/news_detail_17948.html

2 sur 4 06-06-18 à 19:40



straighten alternatively and therefore moves under illumination was made so that it
can walk towards the light source (Figure 3). These demonstrate that future
applications in micro-robotics including rescue robots are possible.

Figure 2 A mini arm with two actuating hinges lifting a weight 50 time heavier than
itself under light.

Figure 3  A mini walking-bot with the “front leg” straightened under light, while the
light blocker blocks the light illumination on the “back leg” and therefore it remains
curled. Therefore, the walking-bot walks towards the light source.

The evidences above revealed that this nickel hydroxide-oxyhydroxide actuating
material can have different applications in the future, including rescue robots or other
mini-robots. The intrinsic actuating properties of the materials obtained from our
research show that by scaling up the fabrication, artificial muscles comparable to that
of mammalian skeletal muscles can be achieved, and applying it in robotics, human
assist device and medical devices are possible.

From a scientific point of view, this nickel hydroxide-oxyhydroxide actuating material
is the world’s first material system that can be actuated directly by Vis light and
electricity without any additional fabrication procedures. This also opens up a new
research field on light-induced actuating behaviour for this material type (hydroxide-
oxyhydroxides) because it has never been reported before.

The research team members are all from the Department of Mechanical Engineering
at HKU Faculty of Engineering, led by Professor Alfonso Ngan’s group in
collaboration with Dr Li Wen-di. ’s group on light actuation experiment and Dr Feng
Shien-ping’s group on electrodeposition experiment. The research has been published
in the prestigious journal Science Robotics on 30 May 2018 with a title of “Light-

Future robots need no motors HKU Engineering invents world’s first nick... https://www.hku.hk/press/news_detail_17948.html

3 sur 4 06-06-18 à 19:40



stimulated actuators based on nickel hydroxide-oxyhydroxide”. The first author of
this paper is Dr Kwan Kin-wa who is currently a post-doctoral fellow in Prof. Ngan’s
group. The corresponding author is Prof. Ngan. The complete author list is as below:
K-W. Kwan, S-J. Li, N-Y. Hau, W-D. Li, S-P. Feng, A.H.W. Ngan. This research is
funded by the Research Grants Council, Hong Kong.

For the journal paper, please click: http://robotics.sciencemag.org/content
/3/18/eaat4051.full

For the powerpoint slides about this research, please click here, and for video clips,
please click here.  (Please credit “The University of Hong Kong” if adopt the images in
the powerpoint and videos.)

Media enquiry:
Faculty of Engineering:
Dr Kwan Kin-wa (Email: kkwkwan@connect.hku.hk)
Professor Alfonso Ngan (Tel: 39177900; Email: hwngan@hku.hk)
Ms Rhea Leung (Tel: 3917-8519/ 9022-7446; Email: rhea.leung@hku.hk)
Communication and Public Affairs Office:
Ms Trinni Choy (Tel: 2859 2606/ Email: pychoy@hku.hk)
Ms Rashida Suffiad (Tel: 2857 8555/ email: rsuffiad@hku.hk)

Future robots need no motors HKU Engineering invents world’s first nick... https://www.hku.hk/press/news_detail_17948.html

4 sur 4 06-06-18 à 19:40


