











































RESEARCH NEWS

Contact 
Janis Eitner | Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft, Munich | Communications | Phone +49 89 1205-1333 | presse@zv.fraunhofer.de  
Anne Rommel | Fraunhofer Institute for Telecommunications, Heinrich Hertz Institut, HHI | Phone +49 30 31002-353 | 
Einsteinufer 37 | 10587 Berlin | www.hhi.fraunhofer.de | anne.rommel@hhi.fraunhofer.de

February 2018 || Page 1 | 3

Camera technology in vehicles

Low-latency image data compression

The number of cameras in cars is increasing. However, through the flood of 
data the internal networks are being pushed to their limits. Special compressi-
on methods reduce the amount of video data, but exhibit a high degree of 
latency for coding. Fraunhofer researchers have adapted video compression in 
such a way that a latency is almost no longer perceivable. It is therefore of 
interest for use in road traffic or for autonomous driving. This technology will 
be on display at the Embedded World from 27 February until 1 March 2018 in 
Nuremberg in hall 4 (booth 4-470).

Up to 12 cameras are currently installed in new vehicle models, mostly in the headlights 
or taillights and the side mirrors. An on-board computer built into the car uses the data 
for the lane assistant, parking assist system or to recognize other road users or possible 
obstacles, for example. "If autonomous driving catches on as quickly as predicted, the 
number of cameras will increase further," forecasts Prof. Benno Stabernack of the 
Fraunhofer Institute for Telecommunications, Heinrich Hertz Institut, HHI in Berlin. 

Ten times more data

This means even more strain on the internal data networks of vehicles. Currently, these 
can process a data volume of around one gigabit per second. In HD quality, this data 
quantity is already reached with one camera. "Compression methods help here," says 
Stabernack. The Fraunhofer HHI, for example, has made a decisive contribution to the 
development of the two video coding standards H.264/Advanced Video Coding (AVC) 
and H.265/MPEG High Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC). "With these methods, the data 
quantities can be sharply reduced. In this way, more than ten times the quantity of data 
can be transmitted," emphasizes the group leader of the "Video Coding and Machine 
Learning" department at the Fraunhofer HHI.

Normally, 30 to 60 images per second are sent from a camera to the vehicle’s central 
computer. By compressing the image data, a small delay in transmission occurs, known 
as the latency. "Usually, this is five to six images per second," explains Stabernack. The 
reason for this is that the methods compare an image with those that have already 
been transmitted in order to determine the difference between the current image and 
its predecessors. The networks then only send the changes from image to image. This 
determination takes a certain amount of time. 



RESEARCH NEWS  

February 2018 || Page 2 | 3

Latency of less than one image per second 

"However, this loss of time can be of decisive importance in road traffic," says Staber-
nack. In order to avoid latency, the professor and his team only use special mechanisms 
of the H.264-coding method, whereby determining the differences in individual images 
no longer takes place between images, but within an image. This makes it a low-
latency method. "With our method the delay is now less than one image per second, 
almost real time. We can therefore now also use the H.264 method for cameras in 
vehicles," is how Stabernack describes the additional value. The technology was 
implemented in the form of a special chip. In the camera it compresses the image data, 
and in the on-board computer it decodes them.

Higher image repetition frequency and resolution.

The researchers in Berlin have had their method patented and sell their know-how to 
the industry in the form of a license. Customers are automotive suppliers, and the first 
vehicle models with the Fraunhofer technology are already on the market. "During 
development we combined our know-how from work on the video compression 
standards and our hardware expertise. The transmission of image data in real time is a 
precondition for the video compression of video data from car cameras becoming 
established. With it, the use of devices with a higher image repetition frequency and 
resolution would then be possible. For camera models which produce even more data 
and are therefore more precise and faster," is how Stabernack summarizes the signifi-
cance of the technology. 

In the next stage, the researchers also want to transfer their method to the HVEC 
standard and put their experience to good use in upcoming standardization formats. 
They are exhibiting their technology at the Embedded World from 27 February until 1 
March 2018 in Nuremberg in hall 4 (booth 4-470).



RESEARCH NEWS 

February 2018 || Page 3 | 3

The Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft is the leading organization for applied research in Europe. Its research activities are conducted by 69 institutes 
and research units at locations throughout Germany. The Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft employs a staff of 24,500, who work with an annual research 
budget totaling 2.1 billion euros. Of this sum, 1.9 billion euros is generated through contract research. More than 70 percent of the Fraunhofer-
Gesellschaft’s contract research revenue is derived from contracts with industry and from publicly financed research projects.  International collabo-
rations with excellent research partners and innovative companies around the world ensure direct access to regions of the greatest importance to 
present and future scientific progress and economic development. 

Cameras are installed, for ex-

ample, in reverse lamps. They 

help with parking or detect 

obstacles. To minimize the 

size of the image data, video 

compression techniques are 

used. Thanks to the develop-

ment work of the Fraunhofer 

HHI, this now happens almost 

without delay.

© iStock | Picture in color 

and printing quality: www.

fraunhofer.de/en/press

The expert

Prof. Benno Stabernack, group leader of the "Video Coding and Machine Learning" 
department at the Fraunhofer Institute for Telecommunications, Heinrich Hertz Institut, 
HHI in Berlin: "The transmission of image data in real time is a precondition for video 
compression also catching on in the case of video data from car cameras. With it, the 
use of devices with a higher image repetition frequency and resolution would then be 
possible."

Experience technology live

The scientists will be demonstrating rapid video compression at the Embedded World 
from 27 February until 1 March 2018 in Nuremberg (hall 4, booth 4-470).

Web

Fraunhofer HHI, Research Group »Embedded Systems«: 
https://www.hhi.fraunhofer.de/en/departments/vca/research-groups/embedded-
systems.html


