






































Commercialize quantum technologies in five years : Nature News & Comment


Subject terms: Quantum physics Technology

NATURE | COMMENT

Commercialize quantum technologies in five years

03 March 2017

Masoud Mohseni, Peter Read, Hartmut Neven and colleagues at Google's Quantum AI Laboratory set out investment opportunities on the

road to the ultimate quantum machines.

Masoud Mohseni, Peter Read, Hartmut Neven, Sergio Boixo, Vasil Denchev, Ryan Babbush, Austin Fowler, Vadim Smelyanskiy

& John Martinis

Commercialize quantum technologies in five years : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583

1 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18



Related stories

Physicists propose

football-pitch-sized

From aspects of quantum entanglement to chemical reactions with large molecules, many features of the world cannot be described efficiently with

conventional computers based on binary logic. The solution, as physicist Richard Feynman realized three decades ago1, is to use quantum

processors that adopt a blend of classical states simultaneously, as matter does. Many technical hurdles must be overcome for such quantum

machines to be practical, however. These include noise control and improving the fidelity of operations acting on the quantum states that encode the

information.

The quantum-computing community is channelling most of its efforts towards building the ultimate machine: a

digital quantum computer that tolerates noise and errors, and that in principle can be applied to any problem. In

theory, such a machine — which will need large processors comprising many quantum bits, or qubits — should be

Erik Lucero

Google's cryostats reach temperatures of 10 millikelvin to run its quantum processors.

Commercialize quantum technologies in five years : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583

2 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18



quantum computer

Quantum computers

ready to leap out of the

lab in 2017

Inside Microsoft’s quest

for a topological quantum

computer

More related stories

able to calculate faster than a conventional computer. Such capability is at least a decade away2. Correcting for

errors requires redundancy, and the number of qubits needed quickly mounts. For example, factorizing a 2,000-bit

number in one day, a task believed to be intractable using classical computers3, would take 100 million qubits, even

if individual quantum operations failed just once in every 10,000 operations. We have yet to assemble digital

quantum processors with tens of qubits.

This conservative view of quantum computing gives the impression that investors will benefit only in the long term.

We contend that short-term returns are possible with the small devices that will emerge within the next five years,

even though these will lack full error correction.

A lack of theoretical guarantees need not preclude success. Heuristic 'hybrid' methods that blend quantum and classical approaches could be the

foundation for powerful future applications. The recent success of neural networks in machine learning is a good example. In the 1990s, when the

computing power required to train deep neural networks was unavailable, it was fashionable in the field to focus on 'convex' methods (based on

functions with a clear minimum solution) that had a strong theoretical basis. Today, these methods are no match for deep learning. The underlying

algorithms of neural networks have hardly changed, yet impressive new performance milestones are being reached, thanks to 'Moore's law'.

Similarly, although there is no proof today that imperfect quantum machines can compute fast enough to solve practical problems, that may change.

The scale, fidelity and controllability of analog and digital quantum hardware are improving steadily. We anticipate that, within a few years, well-

controlled quantum systems may be able to perform certain tasks much faster than conventional computers based on CMOS (complementary metal

oxide–semiconductor) technology.

Here we highlight three commercially viable uses for early quantum-computing devices: quantum simulation, quantum-assisted optimization and

quantum sampling. Faster computing speeds in these areas would be commercially advantageous in sectors from artificial intelligence to finance

and health care.

Capitalizing on imminent advances in quantum technologies requires that the discipline broadens its focus and that scientists work more closely with

entrepreneurs. Hardware improvements are needed to make devices reliable and controllable enough to be commercialized. Heuristic quantum

algorithms need to be developed that address practical problems within the current hardware limitations. As researchers working on quantum

computing at Google, we plan to provide access to our quantum processors through cloud services to facilitate the development and benchmarking

of quantum algorithms and applications across industries, delivering real benefit to society.

Commercialize quantum technologies in five years : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583

3 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18



Three priorities

If certain feasible technological improvements are achieved, we believe that emerging quantum processors have a good chance of carrying out the

following classes of computational tasks and could become commercially valuable within a few years.

Quantum simulation. Modelling chemical reactions and materials is one of the most anticipated applications of quantum computing. Instead of

spending years, and hundreds of millions of dollars, making and characterizing a handful of materials, researchers could study millions of candidates

in silico. Whether the aim is stronger polymers for aeroplanes, more-effective catalytic converters for cars, more-efficient materials for solar cells,

better pharmaceuticals or more-breathable fabrics, faster discovery pipelines will bring enormous value.

Computational materials discovery is already a large industry. Quantum computers promise a radical transition: from the qualitative and descriptive

to the quantitative and predictive. Chemical-reaction rates are extremely sensitive to molecular energies and span a range wider than classical

methods can handle. If robust algorithms are developed, it might be possible to simulate important materials without the overhead of full quantum

error correction4. For example, algorithms are already known (such as the 'quantum variational eigensolver' approach) that seem to be immune to

qubit control errors.

A variety of business models could supply quantum simulators. Laboratories might pay a subscription for access. Computing companies could act

as consultants. Some businesses might exchange equity in return for quantum-assisted breakthroughs that lead to innovative material

developments.

Quantum-assisted optimization. A central and difficult computational task in all quantitative disciplines of physical and social sciences, and across

industries, is optimization. Such problems are difficult to solve with conventional computers because algorithms can navigate only slowly through the

mathematical landscape of possible solutions; good solutions may be hidden behind high barriers that are hard to overcome. The most general

classical algorithms use statistical methods (such as thermal energy distributions) to 'jump' over these barriers. We believe that this type of classical

sampling could be enhanced by occasionally invoking quantum phenomena such as tunnelling (whereby quantum information is transmitted through

barriers) to find rare but high-quality solutions.

Commercialize quantum technologies in five years : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583

4 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18



For example, online recommendations and bidding strategies for advertisements use optimization algorithms to respond in the most effective way to

consumers' needs and changing markets. More-powerful protocols, based on a combination of quantum and classical solvers, could improve the

quality of products and services in many industries. Logistics companies need to optimize their scheduling, planning and product distribution daily.

Quantum-enhanced algorithms could improve patient diagnostics for health care. The quality of search or product recommendations for large

information-technology companies such as ours, Microsoft, Amazon and Facebook could be enhanced.

Quantum sampling. Sampling from probability distributions is widely used in statistics and machine learning. In theory, ideal quantum circuits can

sample from a larger set of probability distributions than classical circuits can in the same time. Our calculations show that, for relatively small

circuits involving high-fidelity quantum gates, it will be possible to sample from probability distributions that are inaccessible classically, using a circuit

of just 7 × 7 qubits in layers that are around 25 deep (ref. 5).

In fact, sampling from distributions with such a shallow quantum circuit is likely to constitute the first example of 'quantum supremacy'. This term was

coined by theoretical physicist John Preskill6 to describe the ability of a quantum processor to perform, in a short time, a well-defined mathematical

Erik Lucero

The smaller of these chips, a 6-mm square, holds 6 qubits.

Commercialize quantum technologies in five years : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583

5 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18



task that even the largest classical supercomputers (such as China's Sunway TaihuLight) would be unable to complete within any reasonable time

frame. We predict that, in a few years, an experiment achieving quantum supremacy will be performed.

Among promising applications of quantum sampling are inference and pattern recognition in machine learning. To facilitate experimentation across

academia and industry, we plan to offer access to the quantum hardware through a cloud-computing interface.

Technical hurdles

Several technological challenges must be overcome for quantum computing to be commercialized. Quantum hardware needs to be scaled up to

compete with classical hardware, which has been improving exponentially for decades. Qubits require quantum coherence, which leads to quantum

entanglement, by analogy with how classical circuits require transistors with gain. Combining scaling and coherence is the big challenge of quantum

systems engineering. It is fundamentally difficult because quantum information cannot be copied and subsystems are entangled, leading to design

trade-offs that are global in nature.

We think that superconducting qubits are one of the most promising hardware platforms for quantum computers. Based on standard integrated-

circuit and superconducting technologies, they are relatively easy to construct and control. And there are many possible designs that might suit

different requirements for digital and analog quantum processors. High-fidelity systems of around ten qubits have been demonstrated, showing the

feasibility of the engineering concepts.

New technologies are emerging that could aid scalability, such as superconducting bump bonds — a two-layer architecture for information-

processing units and control circuits. Prototype 'quantum annealers' of about 1,000 qubits are already available commercially7, 8. (These are analog

quantum processors that could find good-quality solutions for certain optimization tasks.)

Several improvements are required for today's imperfect quantum devices to be practical. Shallow quantum circuits need higher gate fidelities and

more stability to limit decoherence. Quantum-annealing hardware needs to be improved with respect to connectivity, control precision and coherence

times, as well as having access to alternative annealing schedules9.

Commercialize quantum technologies in five years : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583

6 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18



Business opportunities

A new technology can improve business in three ways: by increasing revenue, reducing costs or lowering investments in infrastructure. In the digital

era, introducing a new technology has an exponential impact: even a 1% gain in product quality can help a company to achieve overwhelming

growth in terms of user numbers or revenue10. This is the 'superstar effect', which assumes close competition, transparency and an efficient market.

If early quantum-computing devices can offer even a modest increase in computing speed or power, early adopters will reap the rewards. Rival

companies would face high entry barriers to match the same quality of services and products, because few experts can write quantum algorithms,

and businesses need time to tailor new algorithms. The markets that are most open to such disruptions are information-rich and digital, and involve

business challenges that rely on many variables. Such markets include financial services, health care, logistics and data analytics.

Making a business case requires companies to examine demand and supply. Demand can be assessed as follows. First, identify the 'minimal viable

products' — early quantum innovations with just enough core features to enter the market. Estimate whether the innovation solves an existing need

(product–market fit), the time it would take to commercialize the product (speed to market) and the market's response (business traction).

Greg Kendall-Ball/Nature

Radio-frequency and microwave electronics are used at Google to make scalable control hardware.

Commercialize quantum technologies in five years : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583

7 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18



For example, encryption breaking — often portrayed in the media as a 'killer application' for digital quantum computers — does not score highly in

terms of market fit. It will one day be superseded by cryptosystems that are immune to quantum attack. And most private enterprises are

uninterested in breaking encryption systems. By contrast, portfolio optimization and risk management need immediate data feedback and could

benefit from quantum-enhanced models11. More efficient quantum-chemistry calculations would revolutionize the development of pharmaceuticals,

catalytic converters, solar cells and fertilizers.

Quantum-assisted optimization and inference techniques could empower new machine-learning and artificial-intelligence systems. These could

improve the management of renewable power generators, and of remote-sensing and early-warning systems. The techniques would also aid

dynamic pricing for online goods and services, as well as warehouse automation and self-driving cars.

On the supply side, companies will distinguish themselves through the quality of their technology and teams. Pioneering quantum academics and

entrepreneurs will have to work together. This will be challenging because academic incentives are often inconsistent with those of start-up cultures

and industry.

Strategic partnerships can help businesses to stand out. To attract venture capitalists, the winning quantum products should have business models

that require few assets, are low on manufacturing costs and clearly help customers to increase their revenues. Through the cloud, a company could

benefit from using existing data centres when applying classical solvers to simple problems, and invoke quantum processors when it matters.

What now?

The field of quantum computing will soon achieve a historic milestone — quantum supremacy. It is still unknown whether application-related

algorithms will be able to deliver big increases in speed using the sorts of processors that will soon be available. But when quantum hardware

becomes sufficiently powerful, it will become possible to test this and develop new types of algorithms.

Over the next decade, academia, industry and national labs should work together to develop quantum simulation and quantum machine-learning

algorithms. We plan to support such research by offering access to Google's quantum processors through cloud services to others that lack the

necessary capital, expertise or infrastructure.

Nature 543, 171–174 (09 March 2017) doi:10.1038/543171a

Commercialize quantum technologies in five years : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583

8 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18



Article PubMed

Article ChemPort

Article ChemPort

PubMed

Article

Article PubMed ChemPort

Article PubMed

Tweet Follow @NatureNews

References

Feynman, R. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 21, 467–488 (1982).

Show context

1. 

Touzalin, A. et al. Quantum Manifesto: A New Area of Technology (Quantum Information Processing and Communication in Europe, 2016);

available at http://go.nature.com/2im6rjr

Show context

2. 

Fowler, A. G., Mariantoni, M., Martinis, J. M. & Cleland, A. N. Phys. Rev. A 86, 032324 (2012).

Show context

3. 

Wecker, D., Hastings, M. B. & Troyer, M. Phys. Rev. A 92, 042303 (2015).

Show context

4. 

Boixo, S. et al. Preprint at http://arxiv.org/abs/1608.00263 (2016).

Show context

5. 

Preskill, J. in The Theory of the Quantum World (eds Gross, D., Henneaux, M. & Sevrin, A.) 63–80 (World Scientific, 2011).

Show context

6. 

Denchev, V. S. et al. Phys. Rev. X 6, 031015 (2016).

Show context

7. 

Boixo, S. et al. Nature Commun. 7, 10327 (2016).

Show context

8. 

Rams, M. M., Mohseni, M. & Del Campo, A. New J. Phys. 18, 123034 (2016).

Show context

9. 

Commercialize quantum technologies in five years : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583

9 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18



Article PubMed

Brynjolfsson, E. & McAfee, A. The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies (Norton, 2014).

Show context

10. 

Rosenberg, G. et al. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Signal Process. 10, 1053–1060 (2016).

Show context

11. 

Related stories and links

From nature.com

Physicists propose football-pitch-sized quantum computer

01 February 2017

Quantum computers ready to leap out of the lab in 2017

03 January 2017

Inside Microsoft’s quest for a topological quantum computer

21 October 2016

Google moves closer to a universal quantum computer

08 June 2016

Physics: Unite to build a quantum Internet

12 April 2016

The chips are down for Moore’s law

09 February 2016

From elsewhere

Quantum AI research at Google

Author information

Affiliations

Masoud Mohseni is senior research scientist at Google Quantum Artificial Intelligence Laboratory in Venice, California.

Peter Read is managing director at Vitruvian Partners in London.

Commercialize quantum technologies in five years : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583

10 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18



1 comment Subscribe to comments

Hartmut Neven is director of engineering at Google Quantum Artificial Intelligence Laboratory in Venice, California.

Sergio Boixo, Vasil Denchev, Ryan Babbush, Austin Fowler, Vadim Smelyanskiy and John Martinis are all part of Google's Quantum AI

team.

Competing financial interests

Google plans to offer access to its emerging quantum processors via a cloud computing service.

Corresponding authors

Correspondence to: Masoud Mohseni, Peter Read or Hartmut Neven

For the best commenting experience, please login or register as a user and agree to our Community Guidelines. You will be re-directed back to this

page where you will see comments updating in real-time and have the ability to recommend comments to other users.

Comments for this thread are now closed.

Pentcho Valev • 2017-03-07 06:00 PM

It seems perpetual-motion machines of the second kind are entering a commercialization phase as well, but the scientific community never

discusses violations of the second law of thermodynamics, even when the reports are published in prestigious journals:

http://www.azocleantech.com/article.aspx?ArticleID=610 "A graphene battery has been developed that has the potential to convert ambient

heat into electric current. This invention increases the prospect of green, clean batteries powered by ambient heat, and represents a

significant progress in the research of self-powered technology." http://arxiv.org/abs/1203.0161 Self-Charged Graphene Battery Harvests

Electricity from Thermal Energy of the Environment, Zihan Xu et al: "Moreover, the thermal velocity of ions can be maintained by the external

environment, which means it is unlimited. However, little study has been reported on converting the ionic thermal energy into electricity. Here

we present a graphene device with asymmetric electrodes configuration to capture such ionic thermal energy and convert it into electricity.

[...] To exclude the possibility of chemical reaction, we performed control experiments... [...] In conclusion, we could not find any evidences

that support the opinion that the induced voltage came from chemical reaction. The mechanism for electricity generation by graphene in

Commercialize quantum technologies in five years : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583

11 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18



Nature ISSN 0028-0836 EISSN 1476-4687

© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All Rights Reserved.

partner of AGORA, HINARI, OARE, INASP, CrossRef and COUNTER

solution is a pure physical process..." http://scitation.aip.org/content/aip/journal/apl/103/16/10.1063/1.4825269 Electricity generated from

ambient heat across a silicon surface, Guoan Tai, Zihan Xu, and Jinsong Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 103, 163902 (2013): "We report generation of

electricity from the limitless thermal motion of ions across a two-dimensional (2D) silicon (Si) surface at room temperature. [...] ...limitless

ambient heat, which is universally present in the form of kinetic energy from molecular, particle, and ion sources, has not yet been reported to

generate electricity. [...] This study provides insights into the development of self-charging technologies to harvest energy from ambient heat,

and the power output is comparable to several environmental energy harvesting techniques such as ZnO nanogenerator, liquid and gas flow-

induced electricity generation across carbon nanotube thin films and graphene, although this remains a challenge to the second law of

thermodynamics..." https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RVUf7-tTLXo The Super Supercapacitor. Note the "real exciting discovery" ("The

world changed at that point") demonstrated by UCLA scientists at 1:09. Pentcho Valev

See other News & Comment articles from Nature

Commercialize quantum technologies in five years : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583

12 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18


