


















































PN
A

S
PL

U
S

CO
M

PU
TE

R
SC

IE
N

CE
S

SO
CI

A
L

SC
IE

N
CE

S

Content analysis of 150 years of British periodicals
Thomas Lansdall-Welfarea, Saatviga Sudhahara, James Thompsonb, Justin Lewisc, FindMyPast Newspaper Teamd,1,
and Nello Cristianinia,2

aIntelligent Systems Laboratory, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1UB, United Kingdom; bDepartment of History, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TB, United
Kingdom; cSchool of Journalism, Media and Cultural Studies, University of Cardiff, Cardiff CF10 3NB, United Kingdom; and dFindMyPast Newspaper Archive
Limited (www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk), Dundee DD2 1TP, Scotland

Edited by Kenneth W. Wachter, University of California, Berkeley, CA, and approved November 30, 2016 (received for review April 21, 2016)

Previous studies have shown that it is possible to detect macro-
scopic patterns of cultural change over periods of centuries by
analyzing large textual time series, specifically digitized books.
This method promises to empower scholars with a quantitative
and data-driven tool to study culture and society, but its power
has been limited by the use of data from books and simple ana-
lytics based essentially on word counts. This study addresses
these problems by assembling a vast corpus of regional newspa-
pers from the United Kingdom, incorporating very fine-grained
geographical and temporal information that is not available for
books. The corpus spans 150 years and is formed by millions of
articles, representing 14% of all British regional outlets of the
period. Simple content analysis of this corpus allowed us to detect
specific events, like wars, epidemics, coronations, or conclaves,
with high accuracy, whereas the use of more refined techniques
from artificial intelligence enabled us to move beyond counting
words by detecting references to named entities. These tech-
niques allowed us to observe both a systematic underrepresenta-
tion and a steady increase of women in the news during the 20th
century and the change of geographic focus for various concepts.
We also estimate the dates when electricity overtook steam and
trains overtook horses as a means of transportation, both around
the year 1900, along with observing other cultural transitions. We
believe that these data-driven approaches can complement the
traditional method of close reading in detecting trends of conti-
nuity and change in historical corpora.

artificial intelligence | digital humanities | computational history |
data science | Culturomics

The idea of exploiting large textual corpora to detect macro-scopic and long-term cultural trends has been discussed for
many years (1, 2), promising to empower historians and other
humanities scholars with a tool for the study of culture and soci-
ety. Many studies have been published over the past few years
(3–6), some going as far as to propose a quantitative and data-
driven approach to the study of cultural change and continuity,
owing as much to the methods of modern genomics as to those
of the humanities.

A seminal study of 5 million English-language books pub-
lished over the arc of 200 years (1) showed the potential of this
approach, generating a debate about the possible advantages and
drawbacks of this new methodology. The study made various
claims about both the evolution of language and that of culture
(for example, measuring the time required by various technolo-
gies to become established or the duration of celebrity for vari-
ous categories of people as well as studying changes in English
grammar). However, one of the key criticisms was that it was
based almost entirely on counting words, ignoring both seman-
tics and context (7). Additional criticism was that it did not cover
periodicals (8) and that the data sample might have been biased,
representing only those books found in the libraries (9).

A later study (10) discussed the possible benefits of mining
corpora of digitized newspapers and proposed the use of “dis-
tant reading” techniques (11) in this domain, but it was severely
constrained by the tools that it used, which only allowed for the

querying of individual words. It concluded by advocating for the
use of big data methods for newspaper analysis and proposing
specific criteria for the design of such experiments.

Although the “Culturomics” study (1) was based on the idea
of introducing quantitative and measurable aspects to the study
of cultural change, using high-throughput methods for data
acquisition and analysis, additional developments in the field of
Natural Language Processing (NLP) now allow for more sophis-
ticated information to be extracted from text, allowing previous
criticisms to be overcome in many ways (12, 13).

In this study, following on from a series of articles pioneer-
ing the use of high-throughput data for the study of culture
(1, 4–6, 14, 15) and drawing on the debate that followed their
publication (7–9), we assembled a massive dataset of newspa-
pers and periodicals aimed at verifying or contextualizing some
of the findings of the study on books (1) using unique and
more refined methods and incorporating into the interpretation
of results various valuable lessons learned from the subsequent
debate.

We first present n-gram trends as used in the Culturomics
paper before moving beyond simple word counting methods
to incorporate more semantic information about named enti-
ties and their properties. The corpus that we assembled is
formed by 28.6 billion words from 120 regional or local news
outlets contained in 35.9 million articles that were published
in the United Kingdom between 1800 and 1950. This sam-
ple represents approximately 14% of all regional newspapers
published over that period in the United Kingdom and covers

Significance

The use of large datasets has revolutionized the natural sci-
ences and is widely believed to have the potential to do so
with the social and human sciences. Many digitization efforts
are underway, but the high-throughput methods of data pro-
duction have not yet led to a comparable output in analysis.
A notable exception has been the previous statistical analy-
sis of the content of historical books, which started a debate
about the limitations of using big data in this context. This
study moves the debate forward using a large corpus of his-
torical British newspapers and tools from artificial intelligence
to extract macroscopic trends in history and culture, includ-
ing gender bias, geographical focus, technology, and politics,
along with accurate dates for specific events.

Author contributions: T.L.-W., J.T., and N.C. designed research; T.L.-W., S.S., and N.C. per-
formed research; T.L.-W., S.S., J.T., J.L., and N.C. analyzed data; F.N.T. supplied the data
and the description of its generation; and T.L.-W., J.T., J.L., and N.C. wrote the paper.

Conflict of interest statement: F.N.T. is a team within the company FindMyPast. Its main
role has been to provide part of the data and relative text.

This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.

Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.

Data deposition: The data reported in this paper are available online at data.bris.ac.uk/
data/dataset/dobuvuu00mh51q773bo8ybkdz.
1The FindMyPast Newspaper Team: Amy Gregor, Boon Low, Toby Atkin-Wright, Malcolm

Dobson, and Richard Callison.
2To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: nello.cristianini@bristol.ac.uk.

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1606380114 PNAS Early Edition | 1 of 9

http://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk
http://data.bris.ac.uk/data/dataset/dobuvuu00mh51q773bo8ybkdz
http://data.bris.ac.uk/data/dataset/dobuvuu00mh51q773bo8ybkdz
mailto:nello.cristianini@bristol.ac.uk
http://www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1606380114
http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1073/pnas.1606380114&domain=pdf&date_stamp=2017-01-04


newspapers obtained from all of the main geographical regions
in the United Kingdom. We made various efforts to ensure that
the data sample is as representative as possible of United King-
dom local newspapers, covering all main regions, time periods,
and key outlets.

To keep this study focused on the trends that we extract and
not on the engineering techniques that were used, we have only
made use of methods that have already been deployed in other
published studies and can be considered stable. Drawing on the
subject expertise of the multidisciplinary research team, knowl-
edge of the historical, media, and sociological context was used
to inform each stage of the study design: from the careful selec-
tion of newspapers and the selection of keywords to the interro-
gation and interpretation of the results. Where appropriate, the
data queries were sampled and read closely to address potential
noise in the optical character recognition (OCR) text or ensure
that concepts were being accurately tracked.

The study is intentionally wide-ranging, enabling a broad
assessment of the potential of the approach. Given space con-
straints, the discussion of historical context is rendered neces-
sarily concise. Contextual awareness was, however, central to
making sense of the findings. To give an example, analyzing the
term “suffragette”—a word popularized by a specific segment
of the media as a politicized exercise in “catchword” creation—
can only be understood in relation to both the history of media
and the history of the struggle for voting rights of women in
Britain.

Our hope is to concentrate the attention of the reader on the
main important point that we are trying to make: it is possible
today to detect long-term trends and changes in history by means
of big data analysis of the vast corpora that are becoming avail-
able. These findings can include studies about politics, technol-
ogy, the economy, values, gender, and much more. These trends
and changes, which might otherwise go unnoticed, can be dis-
covered by machine, enabling a complementary approach with
closer investigation by traditional scholars.

Results
Differences Between Books and Newspapers. A starting point for
our study was to compare some results for our corpus with those
for the Google books corpus (1), showing the similarities and dif-
ferences between using a corpus of books and one of newspapers
and highlighting that we can find the same trends in our corpus
but also, that an analysis of newspapers may be more sensitive to
certain cultural shifts—notably because of their closer relation-
ship to current events—than books.

Using a similar approach, we computed the use frequency of
1-grams and n-grams over time, where a 1-gram is a string of
characters uninterrupted by a space that includes words (“adven-
turous” and “puppy”), numbers (“1.215”), and typographical
errors (“wrods”), whereas an n-gram is an n-length sequence of
1-grams, such as the phrases “United Kingdom” (a 2-gram) and
“in the past” (a 3-gram). The use frequency for an n-gram was
computed by dividing the number of instances of the n-gram in a
given year by the total number of words in the corpus that year.
We restricted n to three and limited our study to n-grams that
occur at least 10 times within the corpus.

We found that the impact of key events, such as coronations,
conclaves, wars, and epidemics, was much more obvious in our
corpus, with peaks allowing us to identify specific years in which
events occurred. For the books corpus, the impact of key events
was much less clear (Fig. 1), highlighting that regional newspa-
pers are much closer than books to the events covered in both
time and space. Fig. 1 helps to show the differences between
the two types of written medium, with newspapers offering a
closer representation of historical shifts, whereas books are more
reflective in nature and less time-bound (for example, a book’s
narrative might be set in the past).

Fig. 1. Comparison between (A, C, E, and G) our corpus of British period-
icals and (B, D, F, and H) the Google books corpus (1) using n-gram trends
identifying (A and B) major wars, (C and D) coronations, (E and F) conclaves,
and (G and H) epidemics between 1800 and 1950 in the United Kingdom.
Events are clearly identifiable in the periodical corpus, whereas it is more
difficult to distinguish exact years of events in the books corpus.

Open-Ended Measurements. We then looked at more open-ended
questions, which included measurements of more general and
less well-established relations. We divide our analysis into the
following spheres: values and beliefs, United Kingdom politics,
technology, economy, social change, and popular culture. Again,
we selected topics and keywords in a way to avoid ambigui-
ties and performed close reading of some of the articles identi-
fied by our analysis to ensure that the keywords represented the
intended topic.

In values and beliefs, we test the hypothesis put forward by
Gibbs and Cohen (3) of a decline in so-called “Victorian values”
during the period under investigation. We find that mentions of
certain key Victorian values (3) are in overall decline, although
terms like “duty,” “courage,” and “endurance” find new impe-
tus in times of war, whereas other key terms, notably “thrift” and
“patience,” do not exhibit a downward trend, qualifying straight-
forward accounts of the supposed demise of Victorian values
(Fig. 2A and B).

In United Kingdom politics, Gladstone and Disraeli are often
seen as the key political figures of the 19th century; however, our
findings suggest that Gladstone was significantly more newswor-
thy during the 19th century itself than Disraeli (Fig. 2C). This
finding could be partly because of Gladstone’s greater political

2 of 9 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1606380114 Lansdall-Welfare et al.

http://www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1606380114


PN
A

S
PL

U
S

CO
M

PU
TE

R
SC

IE
N

CE
S

SO
CI

A
L

SC
IE

N
CE

S

Fig. 2. Values, beliefs, and United Kingdom politics. n-Gram trends show-
ing (A and B) a decline in Victorian values as put forward by Gibbs and
Cohen (3), (C) that Gladstone was much more newsworthy than Disraeli,
(D) that liberals are more mentioned than conservatives until the 1930s,
and (E and F) that reference to British identity takes off in the 20th
century.

longevity, although it is notable that Gladstone received more
coverage even during Disraeli’s years as Prime Minister and was
a towering figure in press coverage of the period in a way that
Disraeli was not.

Overall, the Conservative and Liberal Parties received broadly
similar levels of coverage during the 19th century, although they
are both eclipsed from the 1920s onward by the Labour Party
(Fig. 2D). This change cannot, of course, be assumed to reflect
levels of political support, but it does suggest that the emergence
and growth of the Labour Party was setting the agenda for the
regional and local press from 1920 to 1950 (notably after the first
Labour Party government in 1924).

Our findings also suggest a very clear timeline in the emer-
gence of “Britishness” as a popular idea, with the term “British”
overtaking the term “English” at the end of the 19th century
(Fig. 2 E and F). Thereafter, we see a significant increase in
the use of the term British in the first half of the 20th cen-
tury, with dramatic increases during both world wars. The term
English declined during the same period (and indeed, suffers
small dips during World War 1 and World War 2)—to such an
extent that the term “Scottish” overtakes it in the late 1940s,
suggesting that British replaced English as a default national
identifier. Although scholarship suggests that the development
of Britishness predates this rise (16), these data suggest that the
dominance of Britishness in the popular imagination is a 20th
century phenomenon.

In technology, we track the spread of innovations in energy,
transportation, and communications. In the first area, we observe
the steady decline of steam and the constant increase of electric-
ity, with a crossing point in 1898 (Fig. 3A). In the area of trans-
portation, we observe how trains overtook horses in popularity
in 1902, well after the dawn of the railway age that began in the
1840s, showing the cultural significance of horsepower through-
out the 19th century (Fig. 3B).

In the area of communications, we examine the rate of adop-
tion of the telegraph, telephone, radio, and television, supporting
previous findings (1) that observed an ever-increasing rate of
uptake of new technologies that culminated with the rapid rise
of television (Fig. 3C).

In economy, we find that discussions of the economy as a dis-
tinct concept and field began in late Victorian times. The decline
in reference to political economy and the growth of reference to
the economy manifest the emergence of a sharper idea of the
economy as a distinct knowable entity with its own features and
rhythms, separable from those of politics (Fig. 3D). It is impor-
tant, however, to note that, on closer reading, reference to the
economy seems to be about the need for savings, which is appar-
ent in 1922 and 1932. It is the secular trend evident comparing
the economy with political economy that is suggestive.

We also find that it is striking that the term panic emerges
as corresponding to volatile downward financial markets with-
out needing to involve concerns about morality or crime, link-
ing clearly when inspected under closer reading to banking
crises with pronounced peaks in 1826, 1847, 1857, and 1866
(Fig. 3E). This conjecture can be further explained and exam-
ined collectively with 19th century press and financial history but
would be difficult to express without this complementary, distant-
reading approach. More speculatively, it is notable that sampling
regional newspapers and thus, mitigating “London-centric” bias,
nonetheless, reveal the centrality of financial markets in the City
of London to discussions of panic.

In social change, we observe sharp temporal boundaries in
phenomena, such as the suffragette movement and the period
of anarchist activity; we observe the peaks of unrest that cor-
respond with well-known periods of strike action in 1912 and
1919, whereas the expression revolt corresponds with tension in

Fig. 3. Technology and economy. n-Gram trends showing (A) the steady
decline of steam and the rise of electricity, (B) the waning popularity of
horses and the increase in trains, (C) the rate of uptake for different com-
munication technologies, (D) “the economy” as a concept beginning in
late Victorian times after a decline in “political economy,” and (E) that the
four largest peaks for “panic” correspond with negative market movements
linked to banking crises in 1826, 1847, 1857, and 1866.

Lansdall-Welfare et al. PNAS Early Edition | 3 of 9



British colonies, notably the Lower Canadian rebellion of 1837–
1838 and the “Indian mutiny” of 1857 (Fig. 4A).

The frequency of suffragette has a clearly delimited time inter-
val (1906–1918) (Fig. 4B), which corresponds with the period from
the popularizing of the term in response to the disruption of pub-
lic meetings to the achievement of suffrage for many, although not
all, adult women in 1918. Despite the many years of political cam-
paigning that preceded it, we see a sharp rise in coverage of the suf-
fragettes (and suffragists) following the dramatic death of Emily
Wilding Davidson, who was trampled to death by the King’s horse
at Ascot. This sharp rise in coverage is, perhaps, an early 20th cen-
tury example of the importance of a “media event” to a political
campaign and its ability to capture the journalistic imagination.

The time interval for anarchism is mostly present in the inter-
val from 1882 to 1920, corresponding to the heyday of concern
over anarchist direct action before the rise of fascism and bol-
shevism, whereas slavery includes the movement for abolitionism
and the American Civil War (Fig. 4C).

Fig. 4. Social change and popular culture. n-Gram trends showing that (A)
“unrest” corresponds with well-known periods of social tension, whereas
“revolt” corresponds with tension in British colonies; (B) the suffragette
movement falls within a delimited time interval; (C) “slavery” includes the
movement for abolitionism and the American Civil War, whereas “anarchist”
corresponds to the heyday of concern over anarchist direct action before
the rise of fascism and bolshevism; (D) the gender gap in mentions of men
and women is closing, with women making advances during the two wars;
(E) the gender gap is also closing when measured using the pronouns he and
she; (F) actors, singers, and dancers begin to increase in the 1890s, rising sig-
nificantly thereafter, whereas references to politicians, by contrast, gradu-
ally decline from the early 20th century; and (G) football is more prominent
than cricket from 1909 on.

As we might expect, the n-gram “men” is mentioned more
often than “women,” and the same is true for the n-gram “he”
compared with “she,” indicating that we are accessing informa-
tion about the actual number of men and women in the news.
It is interesting to note that the relative proportion of men and
women is not very different in today’s news (17). Additional anal-
ysis with more sophisticated methods is reported below, support-
ing this conclusion. We can also see a slow increase in the men-
tions of women and she over the course of 150 years (Fig. 4 D
and E), suggesting a steady increase in the role of women in pub-
lic life over the whole period, with a more dramatic rise in the
consciousness of women as a group in the 20th century during
the two world wars. In both cases, we measured the slope of the
line of best fit for the time series representing the ratio between
the relative frequencies of the n-grams women and men as well
as that for the n-grams she and he, finding both to be positive.

In popular culture, media scholars have documented the
growth in human interest news (and the proportionate decline
in public affairs), with these data suggesting a clear timeline
for the increasing importance of popular culture in news cov-
erage. For example, we see references to “actors,” “singers,”
and “dancers” begin to increase in the 1890s, rising significantly
thereafter, whereas references to “politicians,” by contrast, grad-
ually decline from the early 20th century (Fig. 4F). We see the
same pattern in the increasing coverage of n-grams “football”
and “cricket,” with football more prominent than cricket from as
early as 1909 (Fig. 4G).

Beyond Counting Words. Techniques from NLP allow us to move
beyond simply counting word frequencies and focus instead on
the frequency with which given entities are mentioned in the text.
Named entities include people, locations, and organizations, and
references to them can be formed by sets of n-grams: generally,
multiple references can be used for the same entity. It is possi-
ble to automatically resolve these coreferences, therefore creat-
ing an automated way to generate multiple n-grams related to a
given entity.

This step moves us closer to the level of concepts and seman-
tics and also allows us to bypass many of the risks associated
with the selection of keywords (Materials and Methods). It is fur-
ther possible to automatically link named entities with existing
databases of entities that have recently become available that
offer an authoritative list of people, locations, and organizations.
These open-source lists include Yago (18) and DBpedia (19),
and they allow us to automate the inclusion of external infor-
mation about different entities that is not present in the corpus
itself, such as the gender and occupation of a person or the coor-
dinates of a location. Parsing the text in this way resulted in the
extraction of 263,813,326 mentions to 1,009,848 different entities
in the corpus.

Discovering every time that a person mentioned within the
corpus is also present in DBpedia (19) or another knowledge
base often enables us to map them to an occupation type. This
procedure allows us to automate the study (1) of fame for peo-
ple in different careers over their lifetime (Fig. 5A).

Among other things, we confirm their finding that politicians
and writers are most likely to achieve notoriety within their life-
times, whereas scientists and mathematicians are less likely to
achieve fame; however, we also observe a decline for politicians
and writers in news that was not observed in books, whereas
time seems to be kinder to scientists and mathematicians. This
method has enormous potential for media content analysis,
allowing researchers to do widespread and detailed analysis of
the sources used in news and explore, for example, the predom-
inant political and ideological affiliation of the sources used in
news reporting.

We also extract every single mention of a person in the cor-
pus (regardless of whether they are present in external resources)

4 of 9 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1606380114 Lansdall-Welfare et al.

http://www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1606380114


PN
A

S
PL

U
S

CO
M

PU
TE

R
SC

IE
N

CE
S

SO
CI

A
L

SC
IE

N
CE

S

Fig. 5. People in history. (A) Replicating the study (1) on famous personalities by occupation using all extracted entities associated with a Wikipedia entry,
we found that politicians and writers are most likely to achieve notoriety within their lifetimes, whereas scientists and mathematicians are less likely to
achieve fame but decline less sharply. (B) We computed the probability that a given reference to a person is to a male or a female person. We find that,
although males are more present than females during the entire period under investigation, there is a slow but steady increase of the presence of women
after 1900, although it is difficult to attribute this to a single factor at the time.

and infer gender using the ANNIE plugin of GATE, a standard
tool for NLP (20). This process gave us over 35 million refer-
ences to people with a resolved gender, allowing us to calculate
the overall probability that a person mentioned in the news is
male (or female) and finally, study how this probability changes
over time (Fig. 5B).

This result confirms—with higher sophistication—the results
obtained using the n-grams trends (Fig. 4 E and F), showing
that women are consistently represented less than men during
the entire period under investigation, and it allows us to explore
the nuances and character of various assumptions made about
gender. This more refined approach also shows a slow but steady
increase of the presence of women after 1900. These results can
be read in combination with analogous ones for modern news
(17), showing that gender bias within the media does not seem
to have changed very much, with approximately three times as
many males as females in modern newspapers.

Furthermore, revisiting the concepts that we explored with
n-gram trends, we compiled geographical maps for the United
Kingdom for each of the terms displaying a gradual increase or
decline (rather than a spike of activity) (Fig. 6). We extracted all
locations found in the articles that mention one of the concepts,
disambiguated them again using DBpedia (19), and retrieved
their geographical coordinates.

We observe that the terms British and English were reasonably
widespread in use across most of the United Kingdom in 1854. By
1940, the use of English had dwindled, with British becoming the
default national identifier (Fig. 6A).

During 1885, we can see scattered mentions of the Liberal
Party around the United Kingdom, with a focus on London,
whereas there is very little mention of the yet to be formed Labour
Party. However, by 1924, this situation had changed, when the
Labour Party achieved its first minority government and replaced
the Liberal Party as the party mentioned across the country,
again with a geographical focus around London (Fig. 6B).

The geographical focuses of technological advances over time
were also observed, which we show for the transition from steam
to electricity (Fig. 6C) and from horses to trains (Fig. 6D). For
steam, we can see that mentions during its highest use year
in 1854 are widespread, with concentrations focused around
major ports. However, the adoption of electricity replaces steam
by 1947, with electricity being mentioned particularly in refer-
ence to London, Leeds, and areas of the Southwest (Fig. 6C).
During the earliest peak of attention to horse in 1823, we see
that mentions are mainly diffused across the country without

a distinctive pattern, indicative of their use in rural commu-
nities, and there is only the odd mention of train, which on
closer reading, was revealed to be generally in a different con-
text (referring to animal training or processions). By 1948, the
decline of horse has clearly taken effect, all but disappearing
from that map, whereas train is heavily mentioned, particu-
larly around major cities, displaying a similar pattern to that of
electricity.

Discussion
The key aim of this study was to show an approach to under-
standing continuity and change in history based on the distant
reading of vast news corpora, which is complementary to the tra-
ditional close reading by historians. We showed that changes and
continuities detected in newspaper content can reflect properties
of culture, biases in representation, or actual real-world events.

With this approach, historians can explore the complex rela-
tionship between public discourse and lived experience by detect-
ing trends in statistical signals extracted from large-scale textual
corpora. The method is intended to be used in combination with
traditional approaches, which are needed for both the design of
the study and the interpretation of the findings. Nevertheless, it
provides conjectures and answers that would be very difficult to
formulate by using close reading alone.

In particular, we showed that computational approaches can
establish a meaningful relationship between a given signal in
large-scale textual corpora and verifiable historical moments,
which was shown in the trends for coronations and epidemics dis-
played in Fig. 1, and that newspapers provide increased clarity to
the analysis of these events that may not be possible in other cul-
tural forms, such as books. We further showed that the approach
can reveal or confirm ways in which news media represent par-
ticular people or issues over time, as evidenced by the existence
of a gender bias that is still present in the media today (17), and
that historical trends in public discourse can be made accessible
through the same means.

Importantly, this complementary approach provides a layer of
cultural understanding that can be used to augment established
historical perspectives, evidenced in this study by the temporal
and geographical patterns in the uptake of various technologies
and concepts shown in Fig 6, which can provide benefit to tradi-
tional economic and technical histories of the period.

In this study, special care was devoted to the choice of events
that were used for analysis and the keywords chosen to repre-
sent them, because we should all be aware of the risk of detecting

Lansdall-Welfare et al. PNAS Early Edition | 5 of 9



Fig. 6. Changes in geography over time. Maps of the United Kingdom
showing the changes in geographical focus of locations extracted from arti-
cles containing the terms (A) British and English, (B) Liberal Party and Labour
Party, (C) steam and electricity, and (D) horse and train for the years in which
each concept received its peak attention.

spurious signals in large datasets. As recommended by Nicholson
(10), one should try to choose words that have high sensitiv-
ity and specificity for the concept being investigated and at the
same time, are not too susceptible to semantic shifts and errors
in the OCR process. Each of these steps could, in principle,
be formalized and automated to some extent: for example, the
use of Automatic Query Expansion (21) could likely return a
viable set of words that pertains to a specific concept [this set
approximating the lexical field (22) of that concept]. However,
we feel that it is ultimately the role of the historian to use her
judgment and cultural knowledge in the choice of these key-
words and the subsequent interpretation of the results. In this
way, we focused our analysis on events and keywords that are
not ambiguous: coronations, wars, technological artifacts, etc.,

all of which are events and trends that can be represented by
a small set of specific words and often had clear dates attached
to them.

Various authors have voiced concern that digital humanities
might be just a colonization of the humanities by the sciences,
but doing so is not the purpose of this study. On the contrary, we
feel that the practice of close reading cannot be replaced by algo-
rithmic means. Indeed, our methods can only detect increased
or decreased attention toward a given topic or idea over the
decades, offering a complementary approach to close reading,
but they cannot explain the reasons behind those changes, which
are best understood by other means. We believe, however, that
other criticisms are less warranted: the inability of computational
methods to introduce contextual knowledge, access semantic
information, or work in the presence of OCR noise or the issues
related to bias in the original corpus selection are probably all
issues that can be solved or accounted for over time.

Future work will indeed include denoising of the data, linking
of the data with other corpora or data sources, better disam-
biguation of entities, and more refined information extraction
within a context. Additionally, the evaluation of suitable key-
words could be partially automated by including information
about OCR noise to help guide the analyst, with recent develop-
ments also offering the promise of capturing the extent to which
the meaning of a specific word has changed over time (23). These
directions are part of engineering work already underway.

What cannot be automated is the understanding of the impli-
cations of these findings for people, which will always be the
realm of the humanities and social sciences and will never be that
of machines.

Materials and Methods
Data Source Background. The British Library’s newspaper collections are
among the finest in the world, containing most of the runs of newspapers
published in the United Kingdom since 1800. The scale of the newspaper
publishing industry from the early 19th century onward was enormous, with
many cities and towns publishing several newspapers simultaneously and
other newspapers that aimed for a wider county circulation providing an
unrivalled picture of provincial life spanning the whole of the 19th century
and half of the 20th century (24).

In May of 2010, FindMyPast began a partnership with the British Library
to digitize millions of pages of these historic newspapers and make them
available for the public to search online at www.britishnewspaperarchive.
co.uk.

New pages are being scanned all of the time as part of the 10-year
project, which once finished, will contain over 40 million newspaper pages
from the British Library’s newspaper collection. To date, FindMyPast has
made available over 12 million pages from 535 different newspaper titles
published between 1710 and 1959, adding over 8,000 new pages each day.

The newspaper collection is further supplemented with digitized news-
paper records provided by the Joint Information Systems Committee (JISC)
that cover the same geographic regions and time period. The digitization of
these newspapers was funded by the JISC to provide a representative sample
of United Kingdom newspapers spanning all geographical regions, making
them suitable for a large-scale automated content analysis of Britain dur-
ing the 19th and 20th centuries. The data from the JISC form approximately
20% of the resulting corpus.

In this study, we selected a subset of the entire corpus that had been
scanned at the time, aiming to assemble a corpus for the study of Britain
between 1800 and 1950. To do so, we undertook several significant steps
relating to the selection of news outlets to provide a balanced represen-
tation in terms of geographic region, time period and quality of the texts,
the digitization process and extraction of the associated metadata, and the
extraction of information from the raw text of the corpus.

The corpus is accessible under a subscription model at www.britishnews-
papersarchive.co.uk, whereas enquires about bulk access to raw data
should be directed to FindMyPast. The exact list of articles and newspa-
per outlets from FindMyPast along with secondary data produced dur-
ing this study are openly available, including time series of the million
most frequent n-grams and the 100,000 most frequent named entities
extracted by AIDA (25), which are available at data.bris.ac.uk/data/dataset/
dobuvuu00mh51q773bo8ybkdz (26).

6 of 9 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1606380114 Lansdall-Welfare et al.

http://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk
http://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk
http://www.britishnewspapersarchive.co.uk
http://www.britishnewspapersarchive.co.uk
http://data.bris.ac.uk/data/dataset/dobuvuu00mh51q773bo8ybkdz
http://data.bris.ac.uk/data/dataset/dobuvuu00mh51q773bo8ybkdz
http://www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1606380114


PN
A

S
PL

U
S

CO
M

PU
TE

R
SC

IE
N

CE
S

SO
CI

A
L

SC
IE

N
CE

S

Data Selection. Newspaper issues were selected from those that had been
digitized by FindMyPast from the British Library archives with an eye to form
a representative sample of newspapers. The selection was performed by
committee, and the criteria for inclusion were (i) the completeness of the
runs of issues, (ii) the number of years that an issue covers, (iii) the geo-
graphical region that the issue is from, (iv) the quality of the OCR output
for the issue, and (v) the political bias of issues.

Our principal aim was to cover all geographical regions and time intervals
as fairly as allowed by the available data. Issues were first separated into the
registered geographical region for the publisher, and within each region,
newspaper issues were ranked by a combination of the number of years cov-
ered (favoring issues with continuous coverage of many years), their aver-
age OCR quality, and the total size of data available for the issue. Issues
were then selected from the ranking until the region had good coverage.
Using domain knowledge, consideration was also taken to ensure that the
selection of newspaper issues represents the balance of political opinion in
the regional press at the time.

In total, the corpus includes 120 titles selected to best cover the following
12 geographical regions of the United Kingdom using the above criteria for
inclusion: East, East Midlands, Northern Ireland, London, Northwest, North-
east, Scotland, Southeast, Southwest, Wales, West Midlands, and Yorkshire.

We estimated the number of regional newspapers within the United
Kingdom during the period from 1800 to 1950 using statistics on the num-
ber of newspapers in circulation (27). Specifically, we take the average num-
ber of papers in circulation from newspaper directories for 1847, 1877, and
1907. This calculation gave us an estimate of 835 newspaper titles in exis-
tence through the period. Our corpus contains 120 newspaper titles, giving
us an estimate that the corpus covers approximately 14% of the regional
papers for the United Kingdom during that time.

Data and Associated Metadata.
Digitization process. The original newspapers were provided by the British
Library to the FindMyPast Newspaper Team as either microfilm or the orig-
inal bound newspapers. Original bound newspapers were scanned using
Zeutschel A0 Sheet-Bed Scanners, creating high-quality digital copies of the
newspapers as TIFF images at 400 dots per inch (dpi) in 24-bit color before
being converted to JPEG2000 format images for archiving. Images created
from digitizing the microfilm resulted in grayscale images at 300 dpi.

The raw images created during digitization were digitally cropped,
cleaned, and contrast enhanced before being segmented into classified
areas corresponding to the type of content, such as news articles, advertise-
ments, and obituaries; structural information, such as page numbers, head-
ers, and footers; and title information, such as issue title, date of publica-
tion, and price.

The images were then passed through an OCR process to identify the text
used in each section of the page, whereas the associated metadata for each
issue were passed through a quality assurance check to correct any mistakes
in the structural extraction step.

Data provided via the JISC collection were digitized using a similar work-
flow through an external supplier (28).
Structure extraction. The raw images from the scans of the original bound
newspaper or the microfilm after cropping, cleaning, and contrast correc-
tion were next processed in a step to segment each page into classified
areas. This process was performed by FindMyPast in two different ways.

The majority of the corpus (78%) was manually segmented into differ-
ent classified areas relating to the content of the page, structural informa-
tion, or title information. It was found that this manual process was pro-
hibitively expensive after a certain point within the project, and therefore,
the remaining corpus was processed using an automated method using the
CCS docWorks software (29).
OCR. OCR was performed on the digital images within the CCS docWorks
software (29) by the FindMyPast team. This process outputs the recognized
text in the image along with associated information (such as the location
and layout on the page) and percentage word accuracies for each word
in the standard Metadata Object Description Schema (MODS), Metadata
Encoding and Transmission Standard (METS), and Analyzed Layout and Text
Object (ALTO) formats (30).

The percentage word accuracy for OCR is calculated automatically by the
OCR software and used as a measure of how confident the software is that
the characters making up the words were interpreted correctly. Each individ-
ual character in each word is assigned a character score between zero and
nine (with nine being 100% confidence) for how confidence the software
is that the character has been read correctly. The overall score for the word
was then calculated by taking the average confidence score for the letters
that compose it. More widely, the word accuracy score is averaged over a

set of words to assign a quality score to how well the text in the image has
been recognized at the article level.

Because errors in OCR can be affected by a number of systematic fac-
tors, including but not limited to font, size, and physical condition of the
original paper copy, the error rate varies across titles; therefore, we aimed
to select those titles that had the best possible OCR quality for inclusion
in our corpus so as not to detrimentally affect the analysis by introducing
low-quality texts. Of course, certain typographical considerations must also
be considered when analyzing the data, such as the common use of the
long s, which can often be mistaken for an f. Additional work can cer-
tainly be done to account for these types of mistakes and will improve in
the future.

Overall, in the corpus selected for analysis, the average percentage word
accuracy was estimated to be 77.0%, with an SD of 5.78, taking the average
score assigned to each newspaper outlet per year by CCS docWorks (29)
weighted by volume across all articles in the corpus.
Metadata. The process that was undertaken by the British Library and the
FindMyPast Newspaper Team to annotate the data was again managed
through the process management pipeline based on CCS docWorks (29).
Metadata relative to each outlet were manually entered at the time of the
digitization based on the British Library newspaper catalog. The location
assigned to each outlet was identified based on the location of original pub-
lication. The date was extracted from each newspaper issue by human oper-
ators and then, validated during quality control checks. The page segmen-
tation and headline OCR for material processed early in the project were
manually corrected by operators; later in the project, these steps were per-
formed without human intervention. A human editor was used to run qual-
ity control checks on the structural data extracted by the software, and the
workflow software identified systematic issues that were then manually cor-
rected by operators. This process included verifying that the outlet name is
correct, the date of the issue is correct, and the pages have been segmented
into correctly identified types along with any other quality assurance
steps taken.

Automated Content Analysis. After the digitization process had been com-
pleted, the FindMyPast team provided the Bristol team with a collection
of documents containing the textual content from the newspaper articles
along with associated metadata relating to the title of the article, the
date of publication, the title that published the article, the location for
the publisher, and so forth. Documents were converted from the METS,
MODS, and ALTO formats into JavaScript Object Notation (31) documents
and stored with their associated metadata in a MongoDB NoSQL collection
(https://www.mongodb.com/).

Each document in the database was then subjected to an information
extraction procedure (described below), which aimed to allow us to gener-
ate time series of any n-gram, extract references to entities within the text
and resolve the entities, and link the entities to external databases where
possible to enrich the information contained within each document.

n-Grams. n-Grams were extracted from the main textual content of each
document, beginning with tokenizing the text, counting the frequency of
each n-gram across the entire corpus, and then, filtering the n-grams so as
to only keep those that occur a minimum number of times (in this case, at
least 10 times).
Generation. Raw text data are stored as a string of characters, with no
explicit word information. Tokenization splits the string of characters up
into a string of words, also referred to as tokens, terms, or 1-grams, for
which we can then compute the frequency. Tokenization was performed
using the assumption that contiguous sequences of alphabetic characters
form a single 1-gram in the vocabulary, which is separated by whitespace
characters. Numeric characters that form contiguous sequences are also
considered a 1-gram, whereas special characters, such as punctuation, are
treated in different ways depending on the specific character. For our pur-
poses, the alphabet used is the Unicode Transformation Format 8 (UTF-8)
character set.

The tokenization was implemented using the Word Break rules from
the Unicode Text Segmentation algorithm following the specification
in the Unicode Standard Annex 29 (unicode.org/reports/tr29/). n-Grams
were further processed to remove possessives (trailing “’s” at the end
of words), lowercased, and stemmed using the Porter stemmer algorithm
(32). Tokenization was performed using the Lucene analyzer library avail-
able at https://lucene.apache.org/core/4 0 0/analyzers-common/overview-
summary.html.
Frequency of n-grams. We calculated the frequency of each n-gram (up to
a length of three) in the corpus by first counting how often each n-gram

Lansdall-Welfare et al. PNAS Early Edition | 7 of 9

https://www.mongodb.com/
http://unicode.org/reports/tr29/
https://lucene.apache.org/core/4_0_0/analyzers-common/overview-summary.html
https://lucene.apache.org/core/4_0_0/analyzers-common/overview-summary.html


occurs within each document with a publication date of the same year in
the corpus and then, dividing this number by the total volume of terms
(1-grams) occurring within the documents published in the same year. This
calculation gives a relative importance to each n-gram at the time of its use.
This calculation was computed within the Hadoop map-reduce framework
available at hadoop.apache.org/, allowing us to distribute the computation
and work on the large corpus used in this study.

When estimating the relative frequency of an n-gram for each year,
we also calculated a confidence interval for that estimate using the Yate’s
score interval (33). The resulting confidence bars were not discernible when
plotted, as they were very small because of the very large size of the data
used to calculate the time series. As an example, comparing steam with elec-
tricity, the size of the change between 1800 and 1950 is at least two orders
of magnitude larger than the mean confidence intervals relative to those
time points.

Entities. We used standard text engineering tools to extract named enti-
ties from the text, linking them with external sources of information where
possible. Entities were extracted using AIDA (https://github.com/yago-naga/
aida), a framework for entity detection and disambiguation (25) including
both person and location types. Additionally, we extracted references to
people, including those not necessarily present in any external databases,
using the ANNIE plugin of the General Architecture for Text Engineering
(https://sourceforge.net/projects/gate/) (20).

Although we note that both of these tools do not have 100% accuracy,
in detecting the entity from the text or linking it with the correct infor-
mation from external sources, it is important to also note that we miti-
gate the risk by removing those entities for which high confidence could
not be achieved as explained below. Although performance of the tools
cannot be assessed on the historical corpus (for lack of a “ground truth”),
each tool does, however, achieve high performance on benchmarking tasks,
with AIDA reporting a mean average precision of 89.05% on the Association
for Computational Linguistics’ Special Interest Group on Natural Language
Learning Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL)
2003 dataset (25), and our entity extraction tool based on the ANNIE plugin
for GATE achieved an accuracy of 97.1% on news media from the web (17).
Furthermore, for each of the tools, we developed quality control checks and
filters to ensure that we only keep the predictions for which we have a
high level of confidence, because it should be noted that these tools are not
specifically trained on digitized historical newspapers.

For the entities extracted using AIDA (25), although only more prominent
people or locations are identified (because they must first appear in an exter-
nal database, such as Wikipedia), it was sufficient for our purpose of iden-
tifying different personalities by their specific occupations (e.g., scientists,
writers, politicians, etc.). In doing so, we are able to replicate the Google
books study (1) using all personalities that we extracted from the corpus
rather than limiting ourselves to the top 25. Overall, there were 263,813,326
mentions of 1,009,848 different entities mentioned in Wikipedia.

This study was performed by grouping all personalities by their occu-
pation types in DBpedia (available for download from wiki.dbpedia.org)
(19) as extracted by AIDA before resolving hyponyms to their hyper-
nym occupation type using the WordNet ontology (34) (available at
https://wordnet.princeton.edu/wordnet/download/). Personalities were fil-
tered to remove spuriously extracted entities, where entities were identified
as spurious by first retrieving the birth date for each entity from DBpedia
and then, removing those for which the majority of their mentions occur
before the entity is born. In this way, we reduce the number of personalities
that has been erroneously linked to a specific Wikipedia entry.

For studying gender balance over the course of history within the cor-
pus, we wanted to avoid any systematic effects caused by our gender detec-
tion procedure. A method based on linking entities to DBpedia (which is
based on Wikipedia) would likely suffer from the same gender imbalance
discovered in Wikipedia (35). Therefore, we used instead the ANNIE plugin
of GATE to extract every reference to a person within the corpus and classify
their gender into male, female, or unknown using contextual information
(such as titles, first names, pronouns, etc.). We considered only those refer-
ences for which we could obtain an unambiguous gender, discarding more
ambiguous entities where we received more than one distinct gender label
for the entity. In doing so, we are able to show the number of references
to males and females over the course of 150 years in United Kingdom news-
papers. In total, there were 25,896,979 unambiguous references to males,
10,198,490 unambiguous references to females, and only 309,098 ambigu-
ous references (assigned to both genders by the tool) found within the cor-
pus, showing that we can unambiguously find the gender of an entity for
99.15% of the entities in the historical newspaper corpus.

We additionally compared our findings with those coming from the
Google Books n-gram corpus (1) along with our own results using the inde-
pendent n-gram method. This combined use of large numbers of references
and the comparison with independent sources of information gives us con-
fidence that we can separate the signal from the noise.

Locations were also extracted using AIDA (25), disambiguating each men-
tion of a location with its Wikipedia page. Geographical coordinates were
retrieved from DBpedia for each location or parsed from the live Wikipedia
page when no coordinates were resolved from DBpedia.

Geographical focus maps of different concepts, such as British or train
as displayed in Fig. 6, were generated by visualizing all locations that were
present in any article containing the concept n-gram and that occur a min-
imum of three times in any article containing the concept n-gram in the
same year. This threshold was used to both filter very low-frequency loca-
tions and obtain a more readable map. Location markers were sized accord-
ing to a combination of the natural log of their total mentions in the corpus
(more mentioned locations are given greater weight) and the probability
that, within a given year, a location is mentioned in the same article as the
concept n-gram (the size of the intersection between a concept and a loca-
tion with a year is a measure of how related they are at that time).

Statistical Robustness of Methods. When working in a data-driven high-
throughput way, which is the case in this distant reading project, it is neces-
sary to automate most steps, and this automation does create the prob-
lem that each step might introduce errors: OCR will corrupt some char-
acters, named entity recognition might fail to recognize a location, and
disambiguation steps might link an entity to the wrong entry in external
resources. However, the size of the dataset and careful design can be used
to mitigate this risk.

Our focus is on detecting large statistical patterns, and therefore, we can
tolerate less than perfect performance at each stage of the analysis and still
extract a reliable signal—if we carefully design the analysis. In this way, we
are not different from previous Culturomics studies (1), and as Nicholson (10)
observed, “this is the price one must pay to explore the ‘vast terra incognita’
of 19th century print culture.”

Sanity checks performed at the end of the pipeline show that indeed—
for all of the errors that may be introduced—we can still reliably detect
historical events, such as coronations, wars and epidemics. Among the many
design choices involved in the study, we compare relative frequencies of a
given word (e.g., train vs. horse) or relative changes in the ratio between
male and female entities, ensuring that we are comparing signals that are
affected by the same type of noise. Additional sanity checks, by comparing
time series generated by words, such as he and she or men and women, with
those generated by the overall mention of male and female entities, show
that any noise found in the processing pipeline does not cancel the signal.

On the Selection of Keywords and Other Signals. As pointed out by Nicholson
(10), one of the key design choices in these studies is the selection of key-
words. There are various risks involved in this step: a word might not repre-
sent well the concept under investigation, perhaps because it is ambiguous,
or it might not be semantically stable during the period under study; per-
haps that word might not be robust under OCR noise. Indeed, we might
want to look at several words to represent a concept (as we did for Victo-
rian values) or sometimes, entire lexical fields (22). Our approach has been
to use judgment based on historical knowledge for the assessment of the
relevance and stability of each word, make use of carefully selected lists of
words already used in previous relevant studies, assess keywords by close
reading some of the articles matching them, and use automated means to
go beyond counting words and therefore, bypass the risks associated with
selecting keywords entirely.

There is a second risk involved in the selection of keywords: when min-
ing vast corpora, there is always the risk of finding a spurious signal (for
example, a time series that has accidental resemblance with some historical
trend). The risk is higher when using high-throughput methods because of
the statistical phenomenon of “multiple testing”: even if each keyword has
a very low chance of showing accidental correlations, when we can analyze
tens of thousands of keywords, this risk is multiplied accordingly. The prob-
lem is further increased by the inherent ambiguity of the tasks described in
this study: the lexical field (22) relative to an event or cultural phenomenon
is not well-defined a priori, and therefore, there is significant freedom for
the analyst to—involuntarily—select words that confirm a hypothesis.

These risks can be mitigated by various technical and statistical
approaches. For example, making use of precompiled lists of keywords from
previous studies, such as the Victorian values, is a standard statistical method
to account for multiple testing by reducing the space of possible testing

8 of 9 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1606380114 Lansdall-Welfare et al.

http://hadoop.apache.org/
https://github.com/yago-naga/aida
https://github.com/yago-naga/aida
https://sourceforge.net/projects/gate/
http://wiki.dbpedia.org
https://wordnet.princeton.edu/wordnet/download/
http://www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1606380114


PN
A

S
PL

U
S

CO
M

PU
TE

R
SC

IE
N

CE
S

SO
CI

A
L

SC
IE

N
CE

S

being conducted, whereas it should also be possible to generate a list of key-
words that relate to a specific concept by using techniques from the field of
Automatic Query Expansion (21), therefore approximating its lexical field.
However, ultimately, it will be the job of the analyst to make careful judg-
ments and use the findings with the necessary care. We have made every
effort to select nonambiguous terms and events to avoid the risk of gener-
ating a spurious signal, ensuring that we generate the keywords for analysis
in a way that is independent of their temporal behavior in the corpus.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Ilias Flaounas for his help in the initial
stages of the study and Patrick Fleming and the JISC for making their cor-
pus available. Part of the work was carried out using the computational
facilities of the Advanced Computing Research Center, University of Bris-
tol. This study was made possible by FindMyPast Newspapers Archive Ltd
(www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk), which shared the data. Most Uni-
versity of Bristol members of the team (T.L.-W., S.S., and N.C.) were sup-
ported by European Research Council Advanced Grant ThinkBIG awarded
to N.C.

1. Michel JB, et al. (2011) Quantitative analysis of culture using millions of digitized
books. Science 331(6014):176–182.

2. Reddy R, StClair G (2001) The Million Book Digital Library Project. (Carnegie Mellon
University, Piittsburgh). Available at www.rr.cs.cmu.edu/mbdl.htm. Accessed Decem-
ber 19, 2016.

3. Gibbs FW, Cohen DJ (2011) A conversation with data: Prospecting Victorian words
and ideas. Vic Stud 54(1):69–77.

4. Mauch M, MacCallum RM, Levy M, Leroi AM (2015) The evolution of popular music:
USA 1960–2010. R Soc Open Sci 2 (5):150081.

5. Leetaru K (2011) Culturomics 2.0: Forecasting large-scale human behavior using
global news media tone in time and space. First Monday 16(9).

6. Flaounas I, et al. (2013) Research methods in the age of digital journalism: Massive-
scale automated analysis of news-content—topics, style and gender. Digital Journal-
ism 1(1):102–116.

7. Gooding P (2013) Mass digitization and the garbage dump: The conflicting needs of
quantitative and qualitative methods. Lit Ling Comput 28(3):425–431.

8. Morse-Gagné EE (2011) Culturomics: Statistical traps muddy the data. Science
332(6025):35.

9. Schwartz T (2011) Culturomics: Periodicals gauge culture’s pulse. Science
332(6025):35–36.

10. Nicholson B (2012) Counting culture; or, how to read Victorian newspapers from a
distance. J Vic Cult 17(2):238–246.

11. Moretti F (2013) Distant Reading (Verso Books, London).
12. Borin L, et al. (2013) Mining semantics for culturomics: Towards a knowledge-based

approach. Proceedings of the 2013 International Workshop on Mining Unstructured
Big Data Using Natural Language Processing, eds Liu X, Chen M, Ding Y, Song M
(ACM, New York), pp 3–10.

13. Suchanek FM, Preda N (2014) Semantic culturomics. Proc VLDB Endowment
7(12):1215–1218.

14. Lansdall-Welfare T, Sudhahar S, Veltri GA, Cristianini N (2014) On the coverage of
science in the media: A big data study on the impact of the Fukushima disaster. Pro-
ceedings of the 2014 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), eds Lin J,
Pei J, Lin TY (IEEE, New York), pp 60–66.

15. Flaounas I, et al. (2010) The structure of the the EU mediasphere. PLoS One
5(12):e14243.

16. ColleyL(2005)Britons: Forging the Nation, 1707–1837 (YaleUnivPress,NewHaven,CT).
17. Jia S, Lansdall-Welfare T, Sudhahar S, Carter C, Cristianini N (2016) Women are seen

more than heard in online newspapers. PLoS One 11(2):e0148434.
18. Suchanek FM, Kasneci G, Weikum G (2007) Yago: A core of semantic knowledge. Pro-

ceedings of the 16th International Conference on World Wide Web, eds Williamson C,
Zurko ME, Patel-Schneider P, Shenoy P (ACM, New York), pp 697–706.

19. Lehmann J, et al. (2015) DBpedia–a large-scale, multilingual knowledge base ex-
tracted from wikipedia. Semant Web, eds Williamson C, Zurko ME, Patel-Schneider P,
Shenoy P 6(2):167–195.

20. Cunningham H, Maynard D, Bontcheva K, Tablan V (2002) GATE: A framework and
graphical development environment for robust NLP tools and applications. Proceed-
ings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ed
Isabelle P (ACL, Stroudsburg, PA), pp 168–175.

21. Carpineto C, Romano G (2012) A survey of automatic query expansion in information
retrieval. ACM Comput Surv 44(1):1–50.

22. Öhmann E, Trier J (1931) Der Deutsche Wortschatz im Sinnbezirk des Verstandes
(C. Winter, Heidelberg).

23. Weston J, Ratle F, Mobahi H, Collobert R (2012) Deep learning via semi-supervised
embedding. Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade, eds Montavon G, Orr GB, Mller K-R
(Springer, Berlin), pp 639–655.

24. Findmypast Newspaper Archive Limited (2016) About the British Newspaper Archive.
Available at www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/help/about. Accessed September
26, 2016.

25. Hoffart J, et al. (2011) Robust disambiguation of named entities in text. Proceedings
of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, eds Merlo P,
Barzilay R, Johnson M (Association for Computational Linguistics Stroudsburg, PA),
pp 782–792.

26. Lansdall-Welfare T, et al. (2016) FindMyPast Yearly n-Grams and Entities Dataset.
Available at data.bris.ac.uk/data/dataset/dobuvuu00mh51q773bo8ybkdz. Accessed
December 19, 2016.

27. Walker A (2006) The development of the provincial press in England c. 1780–1914: An
overview. Journal Stud 7(3):373–386.

28. Shaw J (2009) British Library Newspapers Digitisation Report. Available
at www.webarchive.org.uk/wayback/archive/20140614080134/www.jisc.ac.uk/media/
documents/programmes/digitisation/blfinal.pdf. Accessed September 26, 2016.

29. CCS (2016) Content Conversion Specialists - Digitization Services. Available at https://
content-conversion.com/#digitization-services. Accessed September 26, 2016.

30. Impact Centre of Competence in Digitisation (2016) Recommendations on Formats
and Standards Useful in Digitisation. Available at www.digitisation.eu/training/
recommendations-for-digitisation-projects/recommendations-formats-standards-rec-
ommendations/. Accessed September 26, 2016.

31. Bray T (2014) The JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) Data Interchange Format (IETF,
Fremont, CA).

32. Porter MF (1980) An algorithm for suffix stripping. Program 14(3):130–137.
33. Wallis S (2013) Binomial confidence intervals and contingency tests: Mathematical

fundamentals and the evaluation of alternative methods. J Quant Linguist 20(3):
178–208.

34. Miller GA, Beckwith R, Fellbaum C, Gross D, Miller KJ (1990) Introduction to wordnet:
An on-line lexical database. Int J Lexicogr 3(4):235–244.

35. Wagner C, Garcia D, Jadidi M, Strohmaier M (2015) It’s a man’s wikipedia? Assessing
gender inequality in an online encyclopedia. Proceedings of the Ninth International
Conference on Web and Social Media, ICWSM 2015, eds Quercia D, Cha M, Mascolo
C, Sandvig C (AAAI Press, Palo Alto, CA), pp 454–463.

Lansdall-Welfare et al. PNAS Early Edition | 9 of 9

http://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk
https://www.rr.cs.cmu.edu/mbdl.htm
http://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/help/about
http://data.bris.ac.uk/data/dataset/dobuvuu00mh51q773bo8ybkdz
http://www.webarchive.org.uk/wayback/archive/20140614080134/www.jisc.ac.uk/media/documents/programmes/digitisation/blfinal.pdf
http://www.webarchive.org.uk/wayback/archive/20140614080134/www.jisc.ac.uk/media/documents/programmes/digitisation/blfinal.pdf
https://content-conversion.com/#digitization-services
https://content-conversion.com/#digitization-services
http://www.digitisation.eu/training/recommendations-for-digitisation-projects/recommendations-formats-standards-recommendations/
http://www.digitisation.eu/training/recommendations-for-digitisation-projects/recommendations-formats-standards-recommendations/
http://www.digitisation.eu/training/recommendations-for-digitisation-projects/recommendations-formats-standards-recommendations/



