






































Effects of income inequality on economic growth | VOX, CEPRâ•Žs Policy Portal


Columns Video Vox Vox Talks Publications People Debates Events About

VOX  CEPR's Policy Portal
Research-based policy analysis and commentary from leading economists

Create account  | Login  | Subscribe

88 A A

Related

Growth, inequality, and social welfare
David Dollar, Tatjana Kleineberg, Aart Kraay

Why does inequality grow?
Coen Teulings

How to address inequality
Jeffrey Frankel

Human capital and income inequality
Amparo Castelló-Climent, Rafael Doménech

Effects of income inequality on economic growth

Markus Brückner, Daniel Lederman 07 July 2015

The relationship between aggregate output and income inequality is central in macroeconomics. This column

argues that greater income inequality raises the economic growth of poor countries and decreases the growth

of high- and middle-income countries. Human capital accumulation is an important channel through which

income inequality affects growth. 

Aggregate output and income distribution

The relationship between aggregate output and the
distribution of income is an important topic in
macroeconomics (Galor 2011). The role that income
inequality plays in economic growth has also received
quite a bit of attention in policy circles and the press
recently. For instance, the World Bank Group has
included among its key global objective for
development the eradication of extreme poverty and
boosting the incomes of the bottom 40% of developing countries. The IMF has weighed in with a
discussion on the role of income distribution as a cause and consequence of economic growth (see,

Markus Brückner
Professor of Economics,

University of Queensland

Daniel Lederman
Senior Economist, Development

Economics Research Group,

World Bank

Don't Miss

By Topic By Date By Reads By Tag

Cookie Control

This site uses cookies to store

information on your computer.

About this tool

Effects of income inequality on economic growth | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/effects-income-inequality-economic-growth

1 sur 5 14/08/2017 19:18



for example, Ostry et al. 2014).

In a recent paper (Brueckner and Lederman 2015), we provide estimates of the within-country effect
that income inequality has on aggregate output. Our empirical analysis starts from the premise that
the effect of changes in income inequality on GDP per capita may differ between rich and poor
countries. This premise is grounded in economic theory. In a seminal contribution, Galor and Zeira
(1993) proposed a model with credit market imperfections and indivisibilities in investment to show
that inequality affects GDP per capita in the short run as well as in the long run. Galor and Zeira’s
model predicts that the effect of rising inequality on GDP per capita is negative in relatively rich
countries but positive in poor countries. We test this prediction by introducing in the panel model an
interaction term between income inequality and countries' initial (i.e. beginning of sample) GDP per
capita.

How large are the effects?

Our empirical analysis shows that for the average country in the sample during 1970-2010,
increases in income inequality reduce GDP per capita.

Specifically, we find that, on average, a 1 percentage point increase in the Gini coefficient reduces
GDP per capita by around 1.1% over a five-year period; the long-run (cumulative) effect is larger
and amounts to about -4.5%.

To be clear, this finding implies that, on average, increases in the level of income inequality lead to
lower transitional GDP per capita growth. Increases in the level of income inequality have a
negative long-run effect on the level of GDP per capita. We document the robustness of this result
to alternative measures of income inequality, alternative income inequality data sources, splitting the
sample between pre- and post-1990 period (end of the Cold War), and restricting the sample to
countries located in Latin America and the Caribbean or Asia.

While the average effect of income inequality on GDP per capita is negative and significantly
different from zero, it varies with countries' initial income level. In an econometric model that
includes an interaction term between initial GDP per capita and income inequality, the coefficient on
the interaction term is negative and significantly different from zero at the 1% level. Quantitatively,
the size of the coefficient on the interaction term implies that differences in initial income induce a
substantial effect on the impact that changes in income inequality have on GDP per capita. For

Trilemma redux: Evidence
from emerging market
economies

Risk, return, and skill in the
portfolios of the wealthy

Transition to clean
technology

Economics of the populist
backlash

China’s WTO entry benefits
US consumers

Introducing VoxDev

Globalisation and executive
compensation

Economics and policy in the
Age of Trump

Obstfeld, Ostry, Qureshi

Bach, Calvet, Sodini

Acemoglu, Akcigit, Hanley, Kerr

Rodrik

Amiti, Dai, Feenstra, Romalis

Editors

Keller, Olney

Bown

Events

Shadow Banking: Financial
Intermediation beyond Banks
14 - 15 September 2017 /
Helsinki, Finland / SUERF -
The European Money and
Finance Forum and Bank of
Finland

Corporate Finance Theory
Symposium

Cookie Control

This site uses cookies to store

information on your computer.

About this tool

Effects of income inequality on economic growth | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/effects-income-inequality-economic-growth

2 sur 5 14/08/2017 19:18



example, at the 25th percentile of initial income the predicted effect of a 1 percentage point increase
in the Gini coefficient on GDP per capita is 2.3% (with a corresponding standard error of 0.6%); at
the 75th percentile of initial income the effect is -5.3% (the corresponding standard error is 0.8%).

The estimates from the interaction model thus suggest that in poor countries, increases in income
inequality raise GDP per capita while the opposite is the case in high- and middle-income countries.

Effects of inequality on human capital

Additional evidence that our empirical results are in line with Galor and Zeira’s (1993) model comes
from the response of investment and human capital.1 Our panel estimates show that within-country
increases in income inequality significantly increase the investment-to-GDP ratio in poor countries
but decrease it in high- and middle-income countries. Furthermore, within-country increases in
income inequality significantly increase human capital (measured by the average years of schooling
and share of the population with a secondary and tertiary education) in poor countries. On the other
hand, in high- and middle-income countries increases in income inequality reduce human capital.

Identification

Identification of the causal effect of income inequality on aggregate output is complicated by the
endogeneity of the former variable. Income inequality may be affected by countries' GDP per capita
as well as other variables related to deep-rooted differences in their geography and history. We
address this issue by estimating a panel model with country and time fixed effects. We instrument
income inequality with variation in that variable not driven by GDP per capita building on the work of
Brueckner et al. (2015).

Conclusion

Our empirical analysis is motivated by the theoretical work of Galor and Zeira (1993). who
examined the relationship between inequality and aggregate output in the presence of credit market
imperfections and indivisibilities in human capital investment. Galor and Zeira’s model predicts
heterogeneity in the effects of inequality on aggregate output across countries' initial income levels.
Taking this prediction seriously, our econometric model included an interaction between measures
of income inequality and countries' initial level of GDP per capita. Instrumental variables estimates
showed that income inequality has a significant negative effect on aggregate output for the average

15 September - 16 January
2017 / Cambridge / Cambridge
Judge Business School

IMF Eighteenth Jacques
Polak Annual Research
Conference: The Global
Financial Cycle
2 - 3 November 2017 /
Washington DC, USA /
International Monetary Fund

SNB Research Conference:
Monetary Policy Design,
Conduct and Effects
22 - 23 September 2017 /
Zurich, Switzerland / The Swiss
National Bank

Call for Papers: ADBI-World
Economy Workshop on
Globalization and the
Environment
26 - 27 September 2017 /
Tokyo, Japan / Asian
Development Bank Institute

CEPR Policy Research

Discussion Papers Insights

Homeownership of
immigrants in France:
selection effects related to
international migration flows
Gobillon, Solignac

Climate Change and Long-
Run Discount Rates:
Evidence from Real Estate
Giglio, Maggiori, Stroebel,
Weber

The Permanent Effects of
Fiscal Consolidations
Summers, Fatás

Cookie Control

This site uses cookies to store

information on your computer.

About this tool

Effects of income inequality on economic growth | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/effects-income-inequality-economic-growth

3 sur 5 14/08/2017 19:18



country in the sample. However, for poor countries income inequality has a significant positive
effect. We document that this heterogeneity is also present when considering investment – in
particular, investment in human capital – as a channel through which inequality affects aggregate
output. Overall, our empirical results provide support for the hypothesis that income inequality is
beneficial to economic growth in poor countries, but that it is detrimental to economic growth in
advanced economies.

Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed are entirely those of the
authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development/World Bank and its affiliated organisations, or those of the Executive Directors of
the World Bank or the governments they represent.

References

Brueckner, M and D Lederman (2015), "Effects of Income Inequality on Aggregate Output", World
Bank Policy Discussion Paper 7317.

Brueckner, M, E Dabla Norris, M Gradstein (2015), "National Income and Its Distribution", Journal of
Economic Growth 20: 149-175.

Galor, O (2011), “Inequality, Human Capital Formation, and the Process of Development”, Brown
University working papers 2011-7.

Galor, O and J Zeira (1993), “Income Distribution and Macroeconomics”, Review of Economic
Studies 60: 35-52.

Ostry, J D, A Berg, and G D Tsangarides (2014), “Redistribution, Inequality, and Growth”, IMF Staff
Discussion Note No. SDN/14/02, February.

Perotti, R (1996), “Growth, Income Distribution, and democracy: what the Data say?”, Journal of
Economic Growth 1(2): 149—187.

Footnote

1 Ideally, in the cross-country time series context, we would like to use data on the distribution of
wealth rather than income since wealth inequality is the relevant measure in theoretical models with

@VoxEU

RSS Feeds

Weekly Digest

Demographics and the
Secular Stagnation
Hypothesis in Europe
Favero, Galasso

QE and the Bank Lending
Channel in the United
Kingdom
Butt, Churm, McMahon,
Morotz, Schanz

Subscribe

Cookie Control

This site uses cookies to store

information on your computer.

About this tool

Effects of income inequality on economic growth | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/effects-income-inequality-economic-growth

4 sur 5 14/08/2017 19:18



88 A A

credit market imperfections. Unfortunately, data on wealth inequality are not available to generate a
long time-series for a large number of countries. As noted in previous empirical research (e.g.
Perotti 1996), income inequality and wealth inequality are highly positively correlated.

Topics: Global economy Poverty and income inequality

Tags: income inequality, aggregate output, human capital

Related

Growth, inequality, and social welfare
David Dollar, Tatjana Kleineberg, Aart Kraay

Why does inequality grow?
Coen Teulings

How to address inequality
Jeffrey Frankel

Human capital and income inequality
Amparo Castelló-Climent, Rafael Doménech

57,809 reads
Printer-friendly version

Cookie Control

This site uses cookies to store

information on your computer.

About this tool

Effects of income inequality on economic growth | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/effects-income-inequality-economic-growth

5 sur 5 14/08/2017 19:18


