






































Exoskeletons debut at Ford factories


Exoskeletons debut at Ford factories

Charlie Osborne

screen-shot-2018-08-07-at-09-54-41.jpg
Ford

Following successful trials, Ford will now offer employees the use of exoskeletons to reduce the strain of
factory work.

Despite the emergence of Industry 4.0, smart factories, sensors, and data analytics, much of the heavy-duty
operations of today's industrial and manufacturing still rely heavily on human input.

Over time, the physical demand of such work can cause injury, muscle stress, and accidents.

However, Ford hopes that by augmenting our bodies, exoskeletons may be able to reduce some of the strain.

Last year, the US automaker began trials at select factories that revolved around the use of the EskoVest, an
exoskeleton designed by Ekso Bionics.

The company describes itself as a "leading developer of exoskeleton solutions that amplify human potential
by supporting or enhancing strength, endurance, and mobility across medical, industrial and defense
applications," and when it came to Ford, strength, and endurance were the top priorities.

According to Ford, the firm's assembly line workforce lift their arms during overhead tasks roughly one
million times per year -- which, at that rate, results in substantial risk for fatigue and upper-body injuries.

Pursue New Career Heights with 65 Hours of Training in Salesforce, One of Today's Most In-Demand Skills.

In order to combat the problem, Ford tasked Ekso Bionics with developing an exoskeleton to reduce the risk
of work-related medical problems.

The exoskeleton created for the task elevates worker's arms during overhead tasks, and while allowing
wearers to move their arms freely, also provides up to 15 pounds of life assistance and support per arm.

The higher the wearer has to reach, the more support is offered.

The exoskeleton can be adjusted for users between 5 and 6.4 feet tall, and as the device is mechanical, no
battery pack or heavy gear is required, keeping the device lightweight.

TechRepublic: 4 ways wearables can benefit your workforce

Ford piloted the EksoVest in two US plants successfully and now plans to launch the exoskeleton in facilities
worldwide.

As reported by Engadget, the EksoVest will be offered to employees at 15 factories.

See also: Is there a market for this wearable robot for skiers?

While it is only a total of 75 skeletons that are on offer, which will only impact a small part of the assembly
line, this should reduce the physical strain felt by staff working on overhead tasks.

A small project it may be, but it does show that Ford is keen to reduce worker injury -- and long term, this
might only be the beginning for the use of exoskeletons in factories globally.

CNET: Brace yourself: SuitX industrial exoskeletons amplify human strength

"Our goal has always been to keep the work environment safe and productive for the hardworking men and
women we rely on across the globe," said Bruce Hettle, Ford group vice president, Manufacturing, and Labor
Affairs. "Investing in the latest ergonomics research, assembly improvements and lift-assist technologies have
helped us design efficient and safe assembly lines, while maintaining high vehicle quality for our customers."

Previous and related coverage

Exoskeletons debut at Ford factories https://www.zdnet.com/article/ford-to-give-factory-employees-exoskeletons/

1 sur 2 13-08-18 à 18:51



Sarcos forms Exoskeleton Technical Advisory Group
This is the smartest robotics company in the world (and soon to be one of the most important)
Robotic suit now has Amazon Echo integration

Exoskeletons debut at Ford factories https://www.zdnet.com/article/ford-to-give-factory-employees-exoskeletons/

2 sur 2 13-08-18 à 18:51


