






































Intelligent Animation | The UCSB Current


Intelligent Animation

UCSB engineers, Disney Research and Pixar Animation Studios collaborate to incorporate AI into a
computer-based rendering system

By James Badham
Wednesday, July 26, 2017 - 09:15
Santa Barbara, CA

Modern films and TV shows are filled with spectacular computer-generated sequences computed by rendering systems
that simulate the flow of light in a three-dimensional scene and convert the information into a two-dimensional
image. But computing the thousands of light rays (per frame) to achieve accurate color, shadows, reflectivity and
other light-based characteristics is a labor-intensive, time-consuming and expensive undertaking. An alternative is to
render the images using only a few light rays. That saves time and labor but results in inaccuracies that show up as
objectionable “noise” in the final image.

UC Santa Barbara electrical and computer engineering Ph.D. student Steve Bako and his advisor, Pradeep Sen, are
advancing on a solution. Over the past couple of years, the two have worked with researchers at Disney Research
and Pixar Animation Studios to develop a new technology based on artificial intelligence (AI) and deep learning to
eliminate that noise and enable production-quality rendering at much higher speeds. Bako will present the findings at
the SIGGRAPH conference, the premier venue for technical research in computer graphics, to be held July 31-August
3 in Los Angeles.

Bako spent a year working at Pixar. The team tested the software by using millions of examples from the film
“Finding Dory” to train a deep-learning model known as a convolutional neural network. Through this process, the
system learned to transform noisy images into noise-free versions that resemble those computed with significantly
more light rays. Once trained, the system successfully removed the noise on test images from entirely different films,
such as Pixar’s latest release, “Cars 3,” and their upcoming feature “Coco,” even though they had completely
disparate styles and color palettes.

“Noise is a really big problem for production rendering,” said Tony DeRose, head of research at Pixar. “This new

Intelligent Animation | The UCSB Current http://www.news.ucsb.edu/2017/018150/intelligent-animation

1 sur 2 02/08/2017 09:12



technology allows us to automatically remove the noise while preserving the detail in our scenes.”

The work presents a significant step forward over previous state-of-the-art denoising methods, which often left
artifacts or residual noise that required artists to either render more light rays or to tweak the denoising filter to
improve the quality of a specific image. Disney and Pixar plan to incorporate the technology in their production
pipelines to accelerate the movie-making process.

“Other approaches for removing image noise have grown increasingly complex, with diminishing returns,” said Markus
Gross, vice president for research at Disney Research. “By leveraging deep learning, this work presents an important
step forward for removing undesirable artifacts from animated films.”

To facilitate further exploration of this exciting area, the team will make their code and the deep learning model’s
trained weights available to the research community.

Contact Info: 

Pradeep Sen
(805) 893-4265
psen   at   ece.ucsb.edu

James Badham
(805) 893-3648
jbadham@engineering.ucsb.edu

Copyright © 2017 The Regents of the University of California.
All Rights Reserved.
Privacy | Terms of Use | Accessibility | Webmaster

Intelligent Animation | The UCSB Current http://www.news.ucsb.edu/2017/018150/intelligent-animation

2 sur 2 02/08/2017 09:12


