






































Is There a Smarter Path to Artificial Intelligence? Some Experts Hope So


Is There a Smarter Path to Artificial
Intelligence? Some Experts Hope So

Benjamin Grosof is the chief scientist at Kyndi, a Silicon
Valley start-up that is using a decades-old programming
language to develop software that can generate facts,
concepts and inferences from small amounts of
data.CreditJason Henry for The New York Times

For the past five years, the hottest thing in artificial intelligence has
been a branch known as deep learning. The grandly named statistical
technique, put simply, gives computers a way to learn by processing
vast amounts of data. Thanks to deep learning, computers can easily
identify faces and recognize spoken words, making other forms of
humanlike intelligence suddenly seem within reach.

Companies like Google, Facebook and Microsoft have poured money
into deep learning. Start-ups pursuing everything from cancer cures to
back-office automation trumpet their deep learning expertise. And the
technology’s perception and pattern-matching abilities are being
applied to improve progress in fields such as drug discovery and self-
driving cars.

But now some scientists are asking whether deep learning is really so
deep after all.

In recent conversations, online comments and a few lengthy essays, a
growing number of A.I. experts are warning that the infatuation with
deep learning may well breed myopia and overinvestment now — and
disillusionment later.

“There is no real intelligence there,” said Michael I. Jordan, a professor
at the University of California, Berkeley, and the author of an essay
published in April intended to temper the lofty expectations
surrounding A.I. “And I think that trusting these brute force algorithms
too much is a faith misplaced.”

The danger, some experts warn, is that A.I. will run into a technical wall
and eventually face a popular backlash — a familiar pattern in artificial
intelligence since that term was coined in the 1950s. With deep learning
in particular, researchers said, the concerns are being fueled by the
technology’s limits.

Deep learning algorithms train on a batch of related data — like
pictures of human faces — and are then fed more and more data, which
steadily improve the software’s pattern-matching accuracy. Although
the technique has spawned successes, the results are largely confined to

Is There a Smarter Path to Artificial Intelligence? Some Experts Hope So https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/20/technology/deep-learning-artificial...

1 sur 6 27-06-18 à 13:44



fields where those huge data sets are available and the tasks are well
defined, like labeling images or translating speech to text.

Image

Kyndi’s office in San Mateo, Calif. The company’s focus on
the reasoning side of artificial intelligence distinguishes it
from the branch known as deep learning, in which
computers train themselves by processing massive amounts
of data.CreditJason Henry for The New York Times

The technology struggles in the more open terrains of intelligence —
that is, meaning, reasoning and common-sense knowledge. While deep
learning software can instantly identify millions of words, it has no
understanding of a concept like “justice,” “democracy” or “meddling.”

Researchers have shown that deep learning can be easily fooled.
Scramble a relative handful of pixels, and the technology can mistake a
turtle for a rifle or a parking sign for a refrigerator.

In a widely read article published early this year on arXiv.org, a site for
scientific papers, Gary Marcus, a professor at New York University,
posed the question: “Is deep learning approaching a wall?” He wrote,
“As is so often the case, the patterns extracted by deep learning are
more superficial than they initially appear.”

If the reach of deep learning is limited, too much money and too many
fine minds may now be devoted to it, said Oren Etzioni, chief executive
of the Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence. “We run the risk of
missing other important concepts and paths to advancing A.I.,” he said.

Is There a Smarter Path to Artificial Intelligence? Some Experts Hope So https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/20/technology/deep-learning-artificial...

2 sur 6 27-06-18 à 13:44



Amid the debate, some research groups, start-ups and computer
scientists are showing more interest in approaches to artificial
intelligence that address some of deep learning’s weaknesses. For one,
the Allen Institute, a nonprofit lab in Seattle, announced in February
that it would invest $125 million over the next three years largely in
research to teach machines to generate common-sense knowledge — an
initiative called Project Alexandria.

While that program and other efforts vary, their common goal is a
broader and more flexible intelligence than deep learning. And they are
typically far less data hungry. They often use deep learning as one
ingredient among others in their recipe.

“We’re not anti-deep learning,” said Yejin Choi, a researcher at the
Allen Institute and a computer scientist at the University of
Washington. “We’re trying to raise the sights of A.I., not criticize tools.”

Those other, non-deep learning tools are often old techniques
employed in new ways. At Kyndi, a Silicon Valley start-up, computer
scientists are writing code in Prolog, a programming language that
dates to the 1970s. It was designed for the reasoning and knowledge
representation side of A.I., which processes facts and concepts, and
tries to complete tasks that are not always well defined. Deep learning
comes from the statistical side of A.I. known as machine learning.

Benjamin Grosof, an A.I. researcher for three decades, joined Kyndi in
May as its chief scientist. Mr. Grosof said he was impressed by Kyndi’s
work on “new ways of bringing together the two branches of A.I.”

Kyndi has been able to use very little training data to automate the
generation of facts, concepts and inferences, said Ryan Welsh, the
start-up’s chief executive.

The Kyndi system, he said, can train on 10 to 30 scientific documents of
10 to 50 pages each. Once trained, Kyndi’s software can identify
concepts and not just words.

In work for three large government agencies that it declined to disclose,
Kyndi has been asking its system to answer this typical question: Has a
technology been “demonstrated in a laboratory setting”? The Kyndi
program, Mr. Welsh said, can accurately infer the answer, even when
that phrase does not appear in a document.

Image

Is There a Smarter Path to Artificial Intelligence? Some Experts Hope So https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/20/technology/deep-learning-artificial...

3 sur 6 27-06-18 à 13:44



Is There a Smarter Path to Artificial Intelligence? Some Experts Hope So https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/20/technology/deep-learning-artificial...

4 sur 6 27-06-18 à 13:44



Ryan Welsh, the chief executive, said Kyndi’s technology
could read a long scientific document, and infer the
concepts, more than 275 times faster than a human
analyst.CreditJason Henry for The New York Times

And Kyndi’s reading and scoring software is fast. A human analyst, Mr.
Welsh said, might take two hours on average to read a lengthy scientific
document, and perhaps read 1,000 in a year. Kyndi’s technology can
read those 1,000 documents in seven hours, he said.

Kyndi serves as a tireless digital assistant, identifying the documents
and passages that require human judgment. “The goal is increasing the
productivity of the human analysts,” Mr. Welsh said.

Kyndi and others are betting that the time is finally right to take on
some of the more daunting challenges in A.I. That echoes the trajectory
of deep learning, which made little progress for decades before the
recent explosion of digital data and ever-faster computers fueled leaps
in performance of its so-called neural networks. Those networks are
digital layers loosely analogous to biological neurons. The “deep” refers
to many layers.

There are other hopeful signs in the beyond-deep-learning camp.
Vicarious, a start-up developing robots that can quickly switch from
task to task like humans, published promising research in the journal
Science last fall. Its A.I. technology learned from relatively few
examples to mimic human visual intelligence, using data 300 times
more efficiently than deep learning models. The system also broke
through the defenses of captchas, the squiggly letter identification tests
on websites meant to foil software intruders.

Vicarious, whose investors include Elon Musk, Jeff Bezos and Mark
Zuckerberg, is a prominent example of the entrepreneurial pursuit of
new paths in A.I.

“Deep learning has given us a glimpse of the promised land, but we
need to invest in other approaches,” said Dileep George, an A.I. expert
and co-founder of Vicarious, which is based in Union City, Calif.

The Pentagon’s research arm, the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency, has proposed a program to seed university research and
provide a noncommercial network for sharing ideas on technology to
emulate human common-sense reasoning, where deep learning falls
short. If approved, the program, Machine Common Sense, would start
this fall and most likely run for five years, with total funding of about
$60 million.

“This is a high-risk project, and the problem is bigger than any one
company or research group,” said David Gunning, who managed
Darpa’s personal assistant program, which ended a decade ago and
produced the technology that became Apple’s Siri.

Is There a Smarter Path to Artificial Intelligence? Some Experts Hope So https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/20/technology/deep-learning-artificial...

5 sur 6 27-06-18 à 13:44



Follow Steve Lohr on Twitter: @SteveLohr.

A version of this article appears in print on June 21, 2018, on Page B1 of
the New York edition with the headline: Researchers Seek Smarter
Paths to A.I.. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe

Ocasio-Cortez Upsets a Top House Democrat

1. 

How McKinsey Lost Its Way in South Africa

2. 

Who Is Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez?

3. 

Sotomayor Delivers Sharp Dissent in Travel Ban Case

4. 

Is There a Smarter Path to Artificial Intelligence? Some Experts Hope So https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/20/technology/deep-learning-artificial...

6 sur 6 27-06-18 à 13:44


