






































Mimicking the reflexive detection ability of the animal visual system for computer detection of moving objects


Home Technology Computer Sciences August 22, 2017

Mimicking the reflexive detection ability of the animal visual system
for computer detection of moving objects
August 22, 2017

more »

A fast motion detection algorithm breaks new ground in the rapid detection of moving objects in
video sequences. Credit: KAUST

The detection of moving objects is one of the most fundamental and

important mechanisms of the animal visual system, having evolved to quickly

detect both predators and prey. Yet reproducing the ability of animals to

reflexively detect moving objects has remained elusive.

Ganesh Sundaramoorthi and his

KAUST Master's student Dong Lao

have developed a new approach to

this problem using a statistics-

based computational framework

that minimizes the detection time

for a given level of detection

accuracy.

"Studies in human and animal

vision indicate that motion plays a

key role in detecting objects in a

scene as the animal moves,"

explains Sundaramoorthi.

"Researchers have tried to use motion cues to detect objects in video, but so

far the problem is unsolved."

The difficulty in detecting moving objects in video stems from the ambiguities

in computed motion between sequential frames—there are many possible

motions that could create the image sequence—and the essentially infinite

dimensionality of the computational problem. Detection schemes also have to

deal with the apparent motion of pixels in the image, due to movement of the

camera or observer, and distinguish this from object motion. Image noise and

nuisances, such as changes in lighting and deformation of objects, also add

to the difficulties of computing and segmenting motion.

"We address a fundamental problem that may be solved by the animal visual

system—the tradeoff between speed and accuracy," says Sundaramoorthi.

"For instance, an antelope's visual system must be able to quickly detect a

cheetah or it will be eaten and can afford a high level of false detections as

long as they happen quickly. We are the first to address this problem in

computer vision, which is important not only in modeling the animal visual

system, but also in real-world applications, such as robotic control and

Featured Last comments

Phys.org on facebook

S’abonner
1,3 M personnes sont abonnées à
Phys.org. Inscription pour voir qui vos
amis suivent.

Relevant PhysicsForums posts

Forty years on, Voyager still hurtles
through space Aug 27, 2017  5

Face scans, robot baggage handlers
—airports of the future Aug 27, 2017

 0

New way to make steel that is both
stronger and more ductile Aug 25,
2017  5

Kepler satellite discovers variability in
the Seven Sisters Aug 25, 2017  0

Elevated zinc and germanium levels
bolster evidence for habitable
environments on Mars Aug 25, 2017

 1

Holographic see through 5 hours ago

What software do you use in your field of study?

Popular

Nanotechnology Physics Earth Astronomy & Space Technology Chemistry Biology Other Sciences

Top

Home

Medical Xpress

Search

Help

FAQ

About

Contact

Phys.org Account

Sponsored Account

Newsletter

RSS feeds

Feature Stories

Latest news

Week's top

Archive

iPhone iPad Apps

Android App

Amazon Kindle

Mobile version

Connect

Privacy Policy Terms of Use© Phys.org 2003 - 2017, Science X network

Mimicking the reflexive detection ability of the animal visual system for... https://phys.org/news/2017-08-mimicking-reflexive-ability-animal-visual...

1 sur 3 28/08/2017 19:05



Please sign in to add a comment. Registration is free, and takes less than a minute. Read more

Sign in

Click here to reset your password.
Sign in to get notified via email when new comments are made.

Journal reference: arXiv

Provided by: King Abdullah University of Science and

Technology

 feedback to editors

surveillance."

Lao and Sundaramoorthi adapted what is known as the quickest detection

framework in statistics, which converts the problem into a stochastic process

with minimum detection time set according to a statistical detection threshold.

"The problem was technically challenging because the quickest detection

framework is meant for 1D data not for the infinite dimensional time series of

sequential video images," says Sundaramoorthi. "However, we were able to

construct the optimization tools needed to solve the problem with reasonable

speed."

Tests of the mathematical framework using a selection of videos showed that

Lao and Sundaramoorthi's detection scheme consistently beats other state-

of-the-art methods in both speed and accuracy and with further optimizations

could one day achieve real-time object detection.

Explore further: Using a camera to spot and track drones

More information: Lao, D. & Sundaramoorthi, G. Minimum delay moving

object detection.  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition arXiv,

arxiv.org/abs/1605.07369

Aug 27, 2017

New motherboard or not? Aug 26, 2017

Encrypted USB Flash Drives Aug 26, 2017

What is the Software that has this Plotting Style?
Aug 24, 2017

buying a second-hand laptop Aug 24, 2017

More from Computing and Technology

Related Stories Recommended for you

Using a camera to spot and track
drones  August 17, 2017
EPFL researchers have shown that a simple camera can
detect and track flying drones. Plus, the lightweight, energy-
efficient and inexpensive technology could be installed
directly on the drones themselves and enhance safety ...

Software that automatically recognizes
surfaces within complex three-
dimensional images can benefit
petroleum extraction  October 17, 2016
The deep cracking faults that lie within the Earth's crust are

significant geologic surfaces for oil exploration and earthquake prediction. A
team from KAUST developed an algorithm that smoothly detects faults and
other three-dimensional ...

High-frequency chip brings researchers
closer to next generation technology
August 24, 2017

novel, high-frequency electronic chip potentially capable of
transmitting tens of gigabits of data per second—a rate that is
orders of magnitude above the fastest internet speeds

available today—has been developed by ...

Shopping by voice on Amazon or Google
device could cost you  August 24, 2017
In the name of convenience, Amazon and Walmart are pushing
people to shop by just talking to a digital assistant.

Samsung eyes reset with new Galaxy

User comments

3 shares

Mimicking the reflexive detection ability of the animal visual system for... https://phys.org/news/2017-08-mimicking-reflexive-ability-animal-visual...

2 sur 3 28/08/2017 19:05


