






































MIT enlisting hundreds of scientists in effort to make computers think more like people


MIT enlisting hundreds of scientists in
effort to make computers think more
like people

Andy Rosen - Metro Producer

The Massachusetts Institute of Technology is planning a broad initiative

to seek breakthroughs in the field of artificial intelligence, enlisting

hundreds of researchers who will look deeply at the human mind for

lessons on how to build smarter machines.

The university on Thursday will announce the launch of the MIT

Intelligence Quest, a multimillion-dollar plan to coordinate the

individual efforts of MIT’s many experts from all corners of the campus

— with the aim of teaching computers to think more like the way people

do.

MIT president Rafael Reif said more than 200 faculty working in fields

including brain science, computer engineering, and robotics are

planning to participate in the effort.

During a conference call on Wednesday, Reif said that while those

scientists are all “smart and terrific,” they are also like “boats on the

Charles River going in different directions.”

Get Talking Points in your inbox:

An afternoon recap of the day’s most important business news,

delivered weekdays.

Now, he said, “they are going to work together toward a moonshot, and

that is more than they can do now on their own.”

While computers have become highly effective at finding patterns and

learning from them, they can’t do much that we would recognize as

humanlike intelligence. MIT wants to change that. The Intelligence

Quest program — or MIT IQ — will help connect researchers across

disciplines and support projects in which they work together, as well as

seek collaborations with industry.

MIT enlisting hundreds of scientists in effort to make computers think m... https://www.bostonglobe.com/business/2018/02/01/mit-enlisting-hundred...

1 sur 2 02-02-18 à 19:15



Josh Tenenbaum, a professor of cognitive science and computation who

is working to develop computer algorithms based on the workings of the

brain, said he needs the help of his colleagues in other fields.

For instance, scientists have long dreamed of building computers that

can learn and grow in the same way that children do, he said. But that is

difficult without a deep knowledge of both how computers work and

how the minds of children develop.

“This is really about coupling the science of intelligence and the

engineering — that is, the basic science of how intelligence works in the

mind and brain with the quest to engineer more powerful, more

intelligent, more human kinds of intelligence in machines,” he said.

MIT said it plans to raise money through corporate and other

donations, in a model similar to an initiative it announced last year in

collaboration with IBM. The computing giant pledged $240 million to

establish a new lab researching artificial intelligence. While the new

Intelligence Quest is a separate initiative, the idea behind it grew out

MIT’s efforts to find projects for the MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab.

Reif said faculty have asked university leadership to help coordinate

efforts toward major advances.

Andy Rosen can be reached at andrew.rosen@globe.com.

MIT enlisting hundreds of scientists in effort to make computers think m... https://www.bostonglobe.com/business/2018/02/01/mit-enlisting-hundred...

2 sur 2 02-02-18 à 19:15


