






































Mobile health applications put millions of usersâ•Ž privacy and security at risk, researchers find


Mobile health applications put
millions of users’ privacy and security
at risk, researchers find

You are here: Home | Media | Newsroom | Mobile health applications

put millions of users’ privacy and security at risk

80% of the health apps evaluated in a European study

transmitted health-related data to third-party companies,

with only half doing so over secure (HTTPS) connections.

Most of the apps did not meet legal requirements or

standards meant to prevent users’ inappropriate and

uncontrolled data usage and disclosure to third-party

companies.

Photo:  www.forthwithlife.co.uk

In this innovative study, researchers evaluated 20 popular, free mobile

health apps available on Google Play, and looked at how app developers

reacted to the findings.

With 100.000 to 10 million downloads each and a minimum rating of

3.5/5, the chosen apps managed, stored and monitored users’

biomedical data such as health conditions, diseases or medical

agendas. 

In the first part of the study, researchers from the University of Pireus,

Greece and Rovira I Virgili University, Spain analysed the way in which

users’ personal data were handled. Only 20% of the apps stored data on

Mobile health applications put millions of users’ privacy and security at r... http://www.cost.eu/media/newsroom/mobile-health-apps-privacy-risk

1 sur 2 12-02-18 à 19:29



users’ smartphones, and one in two apps requested and managed users’

login passwords without using a secure connection.

The team also stressed that half of the apps shared personal data – both

text data and multimedia such as X-ray images - with third parties.

What is more, over half of the apps transmitted users’ health data

through URL links, thus making data accessible to anyone with access

to those links.

In 20% of the cases, the apps either did not refer users to a privacy

policy, or the policy content was not available in English, the language

of the app. Some apps required access to users’ geolocation,

microphones, camera, contacts list, external storage card or bluetooth,

although the apps’ proper functionality did not depend on it. 

“ We strongly support the use of mobile health apps, but users must

know that apps’ popularity does not ensure privacy and security ”,

said Dr Agusti Solanas of Rovira I Virgili University in Spain, involved

in the study.

After informing app developers about their findings, researchers

noticed some issues had been fixed – for instance, unsafe health data

transfers or the possibility of identifying users because of unsafe data

transfers to third parties. However, other issues, such as app usage data

leaks, had not been addressed at all. 

“ People need to become more aware of the risks they are facing ”, Dr

Constantinos Patsakis of University of Piraeus added.

The study was run by a team of researchers part of COST-funded

European network CRYPTACUS , whose aim is to come up with better

solutions for European citizens’ online privacy. The study was partly

funded by EU-funded project  OPERANDO .

IEEE paper link: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8272037/

Full PDF: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&

arnumber=8272037

CRYPTACUS COST network:  https://www.cryptacus.eu/en/

OPERANDO project:  https://www.operando.eu

Mobile health applications put millions of users’ privacy and security at r... http://www.cost.eu/media/newsroom/mobile-health-apps-privacy-risk

2 sur 2 12-02-18 à 19:29


