






































Multitasking: Why Do We Do It? - IEEE Spectrum


We complain about split attention, but why then do we embrace distraction?

Advertisement

 My attention span has shrunk

alarmingly, and I’m easily distracted. Worse, I seem to

look for and welcome distractions. I should be

focusing my attention on the task at hand, which is

writing this small essay. Instead I keep checking the

Internet with my smartphone. I look around me at

this coffee shop and everyone seems to be staring at

their cellphones. I don’t think we used to be like this,

and I wonder: Has technology done this to us, and if

so, is this bad or good?

I can’t help it.

A recent book by Adam Gazzaley and Larry Rosen,

 (MIT

Press, 2016), examines this phenomenon from the

viewpoints of neuroscience and psychology. The

authors contend that, just as ancient humans foraged

for food, we now forage for information. “We are

information-seeking creatures,” they affirm. I assume

that they do mean to include personal

communications and entertainment in the general

concept of information, as otherwise the sheer

number of emoji-laden texts and 

 consumed daily would militate against their

thesis.

The Distracted Mind: Ancient Brains in a High-Tech

 (https://mitpress.mit.edu/distracted)World

kitten videos

(http://spectrum.ieee.org/podcast/telecom/internet

/douglas-coupland-analyzes-alcatellucent-in-kitten-

clone)

Our behavior is likened by Gazzaley and Rosen to that

of squirrels foraging for food in a patchy environment.

As a squirrel experiences diminishing food in its

present patch, it instinctively decides when to move to

another patch. The squirrel is apparently

subconsciously aware of the marginal value theorem,

which establishes when the rate of diminishment in a

given patch justifies the cost and time of moving to a

new patch with a greater expected return. This

probably was worked out many years ago by a great

squirrel mathematician and then widely circulated in

Multitasking: Why Do We Do It? - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/at-work/innovation/multitasking-why-do-we-do-it

1 sur 3 17/07/2017 21:16



Illustration: Serge Bloch

the squirrel community.

Yet, looking around, it seems we’re not as smart as

squirrels. As we browse in an information patch,

we are led astray by boredom and anxiety. We’re

easily bored, and there is the FOMO effect, the

great fear of missing out. So we constantly

overvalue the perceived return of a new patch, and

jump quickly, in spite of what intelligent

application of the marginal value theorem might

say. For example, most of the time, we remain on a

Web page just a few scant seconds.

Of course, we think to ourselves that we’re good at

this multitasking, but is this really true? Our

ancient brains weren’t shaped by evolution for this

behavior. In spite of the parallel architecture in

our brains, we are effectively thinking with a one-

core processor, and every task requires a switch in

context that is costly in resources and lost time.

And as we get older, these costs become greater.

Experiments show that from 20 years of age on,

it’s all downhill.

Technology, in its development of the Internet, smartphone, and social media, has not had a passive part

to play in this behavior either. As the authors of say, technology “reaches out to us.”

It is alluring, and the behavior it induces has many consequences. Studies have shown that the more

children multitask, the lower their test scores and grades. Multitasking is often a dangerous activity, as

when we are driving and talking or texting or fiddling with GPS controls or.... A proclivity for

multitasking also leaves us less inclined to introspective thinking. Instead of awaiting deep thoughts, we

seek instant gratification.

The Distracted Mind

But I keep coming back to my dilemma. If this is all so bad, why do we do it? Maybe there are benefits

that have not yet been quantified. But if there are not, and this trend continues, what will life be like in

another couple of decades? So many questions, so few answers.

If this essay seems disjointed, please forgive me. I’m kind of old, and this ancient brain is all I have.

This article appears in the July 2017 print issue as “Technological Distraction.”

Advertisement

Multitasking: Why Do We Do It? - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/at-work/innovation/multitasking-why-do-we-do-it

2 sur 3 17/07/2017 21:16



(/the-human-

os/biomedical

/devices/darpa-

wants-brain-

implants-that-record-

from-1-million-

neurons)

(/tech-

talk/computing

/it/notpetya-latest-

ransomware-is-

a-warning-note-from-

the-future)

(/at-work/innovation

/shaping-smarter-

cities) (/geek-life/history

/an-early-door-to-

cyberspace-the-

computer-memory-

terminal)

(/energy/renewables

/smart-transformers-

will-make-the-grid-

cleaner-and-more-

flexible)

(/biomedical/ethics

/vaccination-the-

best-return-on-

investment)

Multitasking: Why Do We Do It? - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/at-work/innovation/multitasking-why-do-we-do-it

3 sur 3 17/07/2017 21:16


