






































Nanoscale logic machines go beyond binary computing


Home Nanotechnology Nanophysics March 14, 2017

Nanoscale logic machines go beyond binary computing
March 14, 2017 by Lisa Zyga feature

Top

Home

Medical Xpress

Search

Help

FAQ

About

Contact

Phys.org Account

Sponsored Account

Newsletter

RSS feeds

Feature Stories

Latest news

Week's top

Archive

iPhone iPad Apps

Blackberry App

Android App & Widget

Amazon Kindle

Mobile version

Connect

Privacy Policy Terms of Use© Phys.org 2003 - 2017, Science X network

This website uses cookies to ensure you get the best experience on our website. More info

Nanotechnology Physics Earth Astronomy & Space Technology Chemistry Biology Other Sciences

Nanoscale logic machines go beyond binary computing https://phys.org/news/2017-03-nanoscale-logic-machines-binary.html

1 sur 7 19-03-17 18:29



operate completely differently than conventional logic devices do. Instead of relying

on the binary switching paradigm like that used by transistors in today's computers,

the new nanoscale logic machines physically simulate the problems and take

advantage of the inherent randomness that governs the behavior of physical

systems at the nanoscale—randomness that is usually considered a drawback.

The team of researchers, Barbara Fresch

et al., from universities in Belgium, Italy,

Australia, Israel, and the US, have

published a paper on the new nanoscale

logic machines in a recent issue of Nano

Letters.

"Our approach shows the possibility of a

new class of tiny analog computers that

can solve computationally difficult

problems by simple statistical algorithms

running in nanoscale solid-state physical

devices," coauthor Francoise Remacle at

the University of Liege told Phys.org.

The new nanologic machines consist of individual phosphorous atoms that are

precisely positioned and embedded in a silicon crystal at a density of about 200

billion atoms per square centimeter. Single electrons randomly move in and out of

the atoms due to quantum tunneling. Since each atom can hold one or two of these

electrons, and each electron can occupy a few different energy levels, each atom

can occupy one of four possible states. Each atom is constantly transitioning

between its four states according to a certain set of probabilities, corresponding to

the random movement of electrons tunneling in and out of the atom and changing

their energy levels.

The researchers recognized that this physical picture can be used to simulate

Phys.org on facebook

Relevant PhysicsForums posts

Egyptian statue recently unearthed is
not Ramses II Mar 16, 2017 

Astronomers observe a dying red giant
star's final act Mar 17, 2017 

LHCb observes an exceptionally large
group of particles Mar 17, 2017 

1.3M people like this. Sign Up to see what your
friends like.

LikeLike

LHCb observes 5 new particles (excited hadrons)
1 hour ago

Nanoscale logic machines go beyond binary computing https://phys.org/news/2017-03-nanoscale-logic-machines-binary.html

2 sur 7 19-03-17 18:29



certain computational problems. As a proof-of-concept, they looked at a relatively

simple example involving the flow of visitors in a maze consisting of four rooms

connected by gates. The task is to find the optimal combination of rates for opening

the gates in order to maximize the time that visitors spend in one particular room.

Solving this type of problem using conventional computing requires a significant

amount of effort, since it typically involves analyzing the dynamics of visitors in the

maze to gather information before attempting to optimize the rates of the gate

openings.

However, using the new logic devices, it's possible to find the solution more directly

because the problem is physically embodied by the atomic "hardware" itself. For

this particular problem, the topology of the maze corresponds to an atom's states,

and the movement of visitors corresponds to the tunneling of the electrons.

Using scanning tunneling spectroscopy, the researchers could measure the

electron tunneling rates, and could also control these rates by controlling the

voltage to the tip of the microscope along with the distance between the tip and the

substrate. So the maze problem becomes a problem of finding the combination of

voltages and tip distances that maximize the time an atom occupies a certain state.

Due to the variability of single-electron dynamics, each atom has slightly different

electron transport properties, which means some atoms have better optimal values

than others. If the atoms were used as switching devices, like transistors, then this

variability would be considered a drawback because it could introduce error. But

here the variability becomes an advantage because it allows billions of logic

devices to be compared against each other to determine which electron transport

properties help keep the atom in a certain state for the longest time.

Utilisez Google AdWords

how could we produce a secondary beam of long
neutral kaon 2 hours ago

What is pure eigenstate? 9 hours ago

Nuclear decay Mar 18, 2017

Problem understanding crosssection

Any thinking in applying evolutionary algorithms to
fusion? Mar 17, 2017

More from High Energy, Nuclear, Particle Physics

Nanoscale logic machines go beyond binary computing https://phys.org/news/2017-03-nanoscale-logic-machines-binary.html

3 sur 7 19-03-17 18:29



The researchers expect that the results will lead to nanoscale logic devices capable

of solving a wide variety of problems of increasing complexity—all by directly

simulating the problems rather than reframing them as binary processes.

"Nanoscale and molecular devices used as hardware for logic have potentially

many advantages, from high packing density and low-power dissipation to the high

number of states that can be used to encode information," Remacle said.

"However, their dynamics is ruled by probabilistic law because of the fundamental

stochastic nature of thermally activated and quantum processes. The most

straightforward application is then to use nanoscale devices for the implementation

of probabilistic algorithms that require significant overhead in conventional

deterministic hardware. For example, the mere sampling a pseudo-random number

from a probability distribution requires hundreds of instructions on a modern

computer while electron tunneling at truly random times is a natural process."

In the future, the researchers plan to design other types of nanologic devices,

whose implementation will require positioning the components with extreme

precision.

"On the theoretical side, we will continue to develop different information

processing paradigms tailored on the physics of nanoscale and molecular systems,

with special attention to potentialities emerging from their quantum nature,"

Remacle said. "This is a fundamental effort for turning into useful technologies the

increased ability to control and manipulate the matter at the nanoscale.

Experimentally, the biggest challenge is to achieve full control of the position of

dopant atoms in the silicon matrix with atomic precision and the design of their

transport characteristics."

Explore further: Proposed method to cause an atom to emit the same light

as another atom

More information: Barbara Fresch et al. "A Probabilistic Finite State Logic

Nanoscale logic machines go beyond binary computing https://phys.org/news/2017-03-nanoscale-logic-machines-binary.html

4 sur 7 19-03-17 18:29



Particle Analytical.

Ad particle.dk

No Big Bang?
Quantum...
phys.org

$100K Graduate
Research Prize -...
Ad bell-labs.com

Journal reference: Nano Letters

 feedback to editors

Machine Realized Experimentally on a Single Dopant Atom." Nano Letters. DOI:

10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b05149

© 2017 Phys.org

Related Stories Recommended for you

Proposed method to cause an atom to
emit the same light as another atom
February 27, 2017

(Phys.org)—A team of researchers at Princeton University
has found a way to cause any atom to mimic the light
emissions of any other atom. In their paper published in the

journal Physical Review Letters, the team reveals ...

Nanotube film may resolve longevity
problem of challenger solar cells  March
17, 2017

Five years ago, the world started to talk about third-
generation solar cells that challenged the traditional silicon
cells with a cheaper and simpler manufacturing process that

used less energy.

2455 shares

Nanoscale logic machines go beyond binary computing https://phys.org/news/2017-03-nanoscale-logic-machines-binary.html

5 sur 7 19-03-17 18:29


