






































New AI can tell if you're male or female from the way you smile


New AI can tell if you're male or female
from the way you smile

New research details the differences between male and female
smiles
The research gave way to AI that can predict a person's sex based
on their smile
The AI is the first of its kind that can make the prediction based
on video footage
Previous AI could make the prediction after looking at a photo of
a smile

By Maggie O'Neill For Dailymail.com

Published: 22:24 GMT, 14 March 2018 | Updated: 19:18 GMT, 15 March 2018

New artificial intelligence can predict your sex based on your smile.

Researchers at England's University of Bradford developed the AI after noticing
marked differences between males' and females' smiles.

They hope to study the ways in which cosmetic procedures affect these differences
as well as how the research applies to transgender people in the future. 

Their study was published in The Visual Computer: International Journal of
Computer Graphics. 

Copy link to paste in your message

New research from the University of Bradford in England gave way to artificial
intelligence that can predict a person's sex based on a video of them smiling.
Researchers mapped out the differences between male and female smiles for the
report

The University of Bradford researchers' new AI platform is a step above already
existing technology that can determine one's sex based on a photograph of their
smile.

The new report said: 'Although automatic gender recognition is already available,
existing methods use static images and compare fixed facial features.

'The new research is the first to use the dynamic movement of the smile to
automatically distinguish between men and women.'

For the study the researchers mapped out 49 facial landmarks, found mostly
around the eyes, down the nose and near the mouth.

'They used these to assess how the face changes as we smile caused by the
underlying muscle movements - including both changes in distances between the
different points and the "flow" of the smile: how much, how far and how fast the

New AI can tell if you're male or female from the way you smile http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-5501469/New-AI-tell-you...

1 sur 42 17-03-18 à 08:47



different points on the face moved as the smile was formed,' the analysis said.

Next the researchers analyzed whether or not there were significant differences
between women and men's smiles.

They concluded that there were, and the scientists learned that women's smiles
are more expansive.

Researcher Professor Hassan Ugail said: 'Anecdotally, women are thought to be
more expressive in how they smile, and our research has borne this out.

'Women definitely have broader smiles, expanding their mouth and lip area far
more than men.'

The team built an algorithm based on their analysis, and it was subsequently
tested using video footage of more than 100 people smiling.

Copy link to paste in your message

The researchers found that men's smiles are less 'expansive' than women's. One of
the scientists said that women expand their lip areas and mouths more than men
do when they smile

'The computer was able to correctly determine gender in 86 percent of cases and
the team believe the accuracy could easily be improved,' the report said.

Professor Ugail confirmed that the researchers think the technology can get
better.

He said: 'We used a fairly simple machine classification for this research as we
were just testing the concept, but more sophisticated AI would improve the
recognition rates.'

The study said the point of the research was to 'enhance machine learning
capabilities' but that the research has raised questions the team members want to
investigate in the future.

Copy link to paste in your message

The researchers want to now study whether or not cosmetic surgery would impact
the new AI's predicitons

'One is how the machine might respond to the smile of a transgender person, and
the other is the impact of plastic surgery on recognition rates,' the study said.

Professor Ugail said: 'Because this system measures the underlying muscle
movement of the face during a smile, we believe these dynamics will remain the
same even if external physical features change, following surgery, for example.

'This kind of facial recognition could become a next-generation biometric, as it's

New AI can tell if you're male or female from the way you smile http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-5501469/New-AI-tell-you...

2 sur 42 17-03-18 à 08:47



not dependent on one feature but on a dynamic that's unique to an individual and
would be very difficult to mimic or alter.'

Elon Musk calls for regulation of AI before 'it's too late'

WHY ARE PEOPLE SO WORRIED ABOUT AI?

It is an issue troubling some of the greatest minds in the world at the moment,
from Bill Gates and Elon Musk.

SpaceX and Tesla CEO Elon Musk described AI as our 'biggest existential threat'
and likened its development as 'summoning the demon.'

He believes super intelligent machines could use humans as pets.

Professor Stephen Hawking said it is a 'near certainty' that a major technological
disaster will threaten humanity in the next 1,000 to 10,000 years.

They could steal jobs 

More than 60 per cent of people fear that robots will lead to there being fewer jobs
in the next ten years, according to a 2016 YouGov survey.

And 27 per cent predict that it will decrease the number of jobs 'a lot' with
previous research suggesting admin and service sector workers will be the hardest
hit.

As well as posing a threat to our jobs, other experts believe AI could 'go rogue' and
become too complex for scientists to understand.

New AI can tell if you're male or female from the way you smile http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-5501469/New-AI-tell-you...

3 sur 42 17-03-18 à 08:47



A quarter of the respondents predicted robots will become part of everyday life in
just 11 to 20 years, with 18 per cent predicting this will happen within the next
decade. 

They could 'go rogue' 

Computer scientist Professor Michael Wooldridge said AI machines could become
so intricate that engineers don't fully understand how they work.

If experts don't understand how AI algorithms function, they won't be able to
predict when they fail.

This means driverless cars or intelligent robots could make unpredictable 'out of
character' decisions during critical moments, which could put people in danger.

For instance, the AI behind a driverless car could choose to swerve into
pedestrians or crash into barriers instead of deciding to drive sensibly.

They could wipe out humanity 

Some people believe AI will wipe out humans completely.

'Eventually, I think human extinction will probably occur, and technology will
likely play a part in this,' DeepMind's Shane Legg said in a recent interview.

He singled out artificial intelligence, or AI, as the 'number 1 risk for this century.'

In August last year, Musk warned that AI poses more of a threat to humanity than
North Korea.

'If you're not concerned about AI safety, you should be. Vastly more risk than
North Korea,' the 46-year-old wrote on Twitter.

'Nobody likes being regulated, but everything (cars, planes, food, drugs, etc) that's
a danger to the public is regulated. AI should be too.'

Musk has consistently advocated for governments and private institutions to
apply regulations on AI technology.

He has argued that controls are necessary in order protect machines from
advancing out of human control

Most watched News videos

 Embed Most Watched Videos
<iframe style="width:1px;min-width:100%;
height:352px"
src="http://www.dailymail.co.uk/api/most-
watched-videos/news/dark" frameborder="0"
scrolling="no"></iframe>

DON'T MISS

New AI can tell if you're male or female from the way you smile http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-5501469/New-AI-tell-you...

4 sur 42 17-03-18 à 08:47


