
















































Science Magazine


NEWS   |   IN DEPTH

1202    16 MARCH 2018 • VOL 359 ISSUE 6381 sciencemag.org  SCIENCE

F
or the moment, microwave photons are 

the keys to many quantum computers: 

Physicists use them to program, read 

out, and otherwise manipulate the ma-

chines’ quantum bits. But microwave 

technology is bulky, and its quantum 

states don’t last very long. Now, several 

groups are exploring a new way to talk to 

a quantum computer: with tiny vibrations, 

normally carriers of pesky heat and noise.

The budding discipline of quantum acous-

tics could shake up embryonic quantum 

computers by miniaturizing technologies 

and producing longer-lasting quantum mem-

ories. “We’re right on the cusp” of controlling 

quantum vibrations, says Andrew Cleland, a 

physicist at the University of Chicago in Il-

linois, whose group presented its latest work 

last week here at the annual March meeting 

of the American Physical Society.

Whereas an ordinary computer flips bits 

that can be set to either zero or one, a quan-

tum computer uses qubits that can be set 

to zero, one, or, bizarrely, zero and one at 

the same time—potentially enabling huge 

boosts in speed. Companies such as Google 

and IBM are racing to demonstrate the su-

periority of quantum computers for certain 

tasks (Science, 2 December 2016, p. 1090), 

and many are betting on qubits made of 

superconducting metal circuits on chips.

To control or read out a superconducting 

qubit, researchers make it interact with a 

microwave resonator—typically a strip of 

metal on the qubit chip or a finger-size cav-

ity surrounding it—which rings with micro-

wave photons the way an organ pipe rings 

with sound. By adjusting the energy of the 

qubit, researchers can shuttle its quantum 

states into the resonator, so that a zero-and-

one state of the qubit can be stored as a state 

of the resonator in which a photon is both 

present and absent. But some physicists 

Vibrations 
used to talk 
to quantum 
circuits
Sound waves could supplant 
microwaves in controlling 
quantum computers

QUANTUM PHYSICS

By Adrian Cho, in Los Angeles, California

know why people die. We don’t know about 

the pathophysiology of the disease. We don’t 

know the point of no return.”

That could be beginning to change. In 

2016, the World Health Organization added 

Lassa fever to its new list of priority patho-

gens of epidemic potential, calling for more 

research. And last week, the recently cre-

ated Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness 

Innovations, known as CEPI, awarded its 

first grant for development of a Lassa fever 

vaccine to Themis Bioscience in Vienna.

Lassa fever was discovered in 1969, 

when two missionary nurses died of a 

mysterious disease in the remote town of 

Lassa in Borno state in northeastern Ni-

geria. When a third nurse fell ill, she was 

evacuated to a hospital in New York City—

along with a thermos full of blood and 

other samples from all three nurses, bound 

for Yale University’s then-new Arbovirus 

Research Unit. There, a team led by Jordi 

Casals-Ariet isolated a novel virus from the 

samples. (He, too, almost died in the pro-

cess, saved only by an infusion of antibody-

rich plasma from the third 

nurse, who recovered.)

The cause is now known 

to be an arenavirus, one 

of a class of rodent-borne 

pathogens. Its natural res-

ervoir is a multimammate 

rat, so-called for its rows 

of mammary glands, that 

is ubiquitous across West 

Africa. Cases peak in the 

dry season, when farmers 

burn the bushes in prepa-

ration for spring plant-

ing and rats scurry into 

houses in search of food. The rodents shed 

the virus in their urine and droppings, and 

people contract it by touching contaminated 

surfaces, inhaling viral particles, or eating 

contaminated food (including the rats). Like 

Ebola, the virus can also be spread through 

contact with bodily fluids from an infected 

person. Such human-to-human transmission 

is thought to be rare for Lassa, unlike Ebola, 

except in hospital settings without proper 

infection control. However, “The real rate of 

human-to-human transmission is unknown,” 

says Augustin Augier, secretary general of 

ALIMA in Paris, which has just launched 

a Lassa fever research program with the 

French medical institution INSERM.

No one knows the true incidence of the 

disease. “Most cases we have found are in 

places where there are hospitals and labs,” 

Günther says. “There is good reason to as-

sume there are cases that are being over-

looked.” And because the rat vector lives 

across a broad swath of the continent, 

the disease might also be endemic, but 

unrecognized, outside of West Africa, 

where it could be responsible for un-

diagnosed fevers.

Initial symptoms are easily mistaken for 

malaria or typhoid fever—body aches, sore 

throat, fever, nausea, diarrhea—before the 

disease progresses to organ failure, shock, 

and sometimes internal hemorrhaging. By 

the time doctors suspect Lassa fever, it’s of-

ten too late to save the patient. There is no 

rapid test; accurately diagnosing the dis-

ease requires a real-time polymerase chain 

reaction technique, but just three labs in 

Nigeria have that capability.

For now, the only treatment is a non-

specific antiviral drug, ribavirin. If it’s ad-

ministered during the first 6 days of the 

illness, it seems to improve a patient’s prog-

nosis, but “no one arrives before day 7,” 

Augier says. Nor is everyone convinced that 

ribavirin works in Lassa fever, as the only 

data come from the 1980s, Augier says.

Several potential drugs are on the horizon, 

in addition to the vaccine. Christian Happi 

at Redeemer’s University in Ede, Nigeria, 

and the Irrua Specialist 

Teaching Hospital is de-

veloping a rapid diagnos-

tic test with colleagues at 

Tulane University in New 

Orleans, Louisiana; the 

Broad Institute in Cam-

bridge, Massachusetts; 

and Zalgen, a company in 

Germantown, Maryland. 

Happi’s group and its 

partners are also sequenc-

ing the virus “around the 

clock,” he says, and trying 

to figure out whether the 

genetic changes they have seen  could have 

made it more transmissible or virulent.

For Happi, who diagnosed Sierra Le-

one’s  first case of Ebola, the new attention 

to Lassa hasn’t come a moment too soon. 

“I used to scream and scream that Lassa 

is important, but no one listened,” he says. 

“I wrote so many grants” that were turned 

down. “Lassa fever is a disease of the poor 

… it is confined to a part of West Africa, 

and it is not viewed as a global threat.”

As research scales up, the government 

and its partners are focusing on training 

health care workers and providing the ba-

sics needed for infection control, as well 

as educating a frightened public about 

safety precautions.

Pomarico, who is leading ALIMA’s emer-

gency response to the outbreak in the two 

hardest hit states of Edo and Ondo, hopes 

cases will subside with the rains and cooler 

weather, as they usually do. “But this year 

is different. We are bracing for worst and 

preparing for the worst.” j

“I used to scream 
and scream that 
Lassa is important, 
but no one listened. 
… Lassa fever is a 
disease of the poor.”
Christian Happi, 

Redeemer’s University

DA_0316NewsInDepth.indd   1202 3/14/18   11:30 AM

Published by AAAS

on M
arch 19, 2018

 
http://science.sciencem

ag.org/
D

ow
nloaded from

 

http://science.sciencemag.org/


16 MARCH 2018 • VOL 359 ISSUE 6381    1203SCIENCE   sciencemag.org

P
H

O
T

O
: 

K
E

V
IN

 S
A

T
Z

IN
G

E
R

, 
C

L
E

L
A

N
D

 L
A

B
, 

U
N

IV
E

R
S

IT
Y

 O
F

 C
H

IC
A

G
O

see advantages to replacing the microwave 

resonator with a mechanical one that rings 

with quantized vibrations, or phonons.

That effort may seem daft, as such vi-

brations constitute heat, which obliterates 

delicate quantum states. But when work-

ing at temperatures near absolute zero, 

a well-designed acoustic resonator could 

ring longer than a microwave one does, en-

abling it to act as a sort of quantum mem-

ory, says Robert Schoelkopf, a physicist at 

Yale University. The vibrations also have 

wavelengths less than a thousandth as 

long as microwaves of the same frequency, 

so the resonators can be far more compact, 

he says.

First, physicists must learn to control 

quantum vibrations. They took a first step 

in 2010, when Cleland, then at the Univer-

sity of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB), si-

phoned every phonon out of an oscillating 

cantilever etched from aluminum nitride, 

leaving it in its least energetic quantum 

ground state. However, that simple quan-

tum state persisted for just 5 nanoseconds, 

too little time to put the device into more 

complex quantum states of motion.

To push further, several groups are ma-

nipulating ripples called surface acoustic 

waves (SAWs), which travel along a mate-

rial’s surface. On top of a microchip, the 

researchers etch two gratings of metal 

stripes just micrometers apart. In the gap 

between the gratings, the researchers trig-

ger a wave by applying a voltage to a comb-

shaped device called a transducer, which 

causes the material to contract. The grat-

ings act as mirrors, reflecting SAWs of par-

ticular wavelengths back and forth so that 

they resonate in the gap. And by connect-

ing the transducer to a superconducting 

qubit, researchers link its quantum state 

to the SAWs.

Using that approach, Cleland and Kevin 

Satzinger, a UCSB graduate student, fash-

ioned a resonator on a lithium niobate chip 

that rang for up to 150 nanoseconds. They 

showed they could create any desired com-

bination of zero and one phonons in the 

resonator, Satzinger told the meeting. “We 

can watch the energy going back and forth” 

between qubit and cavity, he says.

Researchers in Schoelkopf ’s group are 

focusing not on waves trapped on a chip’s 

surface, but on vibrations traveling through 

the chip’s bulk material. They exploit vibra-

tions that can bounce between the upper 

and lower surfaces of the half-millimeter-

thick chip beneath their qubit.

Using that geometry, the research-

ers kept vibrations in their sapphire chip 

ringing for up to 60 microseconds, Yale’s 

Yiwen Chu told the meeting. Moreover, the 

researchers could feed up to seven quanta 

of vibration one by one into the resonator, 

she reported. Making more complex quan-

tum states is “really the next step,” Chu 

says. For example, she says, they might try 

to put the resonator into a Schrödinger cat 

state, in which it would contain a macro-

scopic sound wave, comprising many vi-

brational quanta, and at the same time be 

devoid of vibrations.

Acoustic resonators could offer more flex-

ibility in quantum circuit designs. In some 

circuits, multiple qubits are linked to the 

same microwave resonator, which acts as 

a conduit for the qubit interactions. But 

most microwave cavities can only host pho-

tons of a single frequency. In that case, all 

the qubits must interact with one another 

in an interconnected tangle, says Konrad 

Lehnert, a physicist at JILA, an institute 

run jointly by the University of Colorado in 

Boulder and the National Institute of Stan-

dards and Technology.

In contrast, acoustic resonators can en-

able qubits to interact with vibrations of 

a few different, closely spaced frequencies. 

That should make it possible to tailor the 

interactions among the qubits, so that, for 

example, only nearest neighbors interact—

desirable for modeling certain abstract 

quantum systems, Lehnert says. He and his 

colleagues have taken a step toward such 

control, JILA’s Bradley Moores told the 

meeting, by showing that they could simul-

taneously couple a single qubit to SAWs of 

several frequencies.

Quantum acoustics might also help solve 

a major problem for emerging quantum 

technologies. Microwave cables can shuttle 

information within a quantum computer. To 

move it to other experiments or distant loca-

tions, however, those signals will likely need 

to be converted from microwaves to optical 

photons, which can travel great distances 

in optical fibers. Acoustic waves rippling at 

microwave frequencies have wavelengths 

similar to those of optical photons. So in prin-

ciple, they could serve as a bridge to translate 

between the two, researchers say, although 

nobody yet knows exactly how to do it.

Acoustic resonators might even test the 

bounds of the quantum realm. Quantum 

theory allows tiny things like atoms or pho-

tons to be in two places at once, but nobody 

has ever seen such behavior in a macroscopic 

material object. Some theorists argue that a 

yet-unknown principle, perhaps involving 

gravity, would prevent it from happening 

for large objects. But Chu says it might be 

possible to make her group’s sapphire chip 

simultaneously vibrate in opposite direc-

tions. That would put tens of micrograms 

of material in two slightly different places 

at the same time—and test whether quan-

tum weirdness extends almost to the human 

scale. “You don’t know until you try.” j

Micrometer-size acoustic 

resonators (orange) 

trap vibrations that can 

control quantum bits.

DA_0316NewsInDepth.indd   1203 3/14/18   11:30 AM

Published by AAAS

on M
arch 19, 2018

 
http://science.sciencem

ag.org/
D

ow
nloaded from

 

http://science.sciencemag.org/


Vibrations used to talk to quantum circuits
Adrian Cho

DOI: 10.1126/science.359.6381.1202
 (6381), 1202-1203.359Science 

ARTICLE TOOLS http://science.sciencemag.org/content/359/6381/1202

PERMISSIONS http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions

Terms of ServiceUse of this article is subject to the 

 is a registered trademark of AAAS.Science
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 

(print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement ofScience 

on M
arch 19, 2018

 
http://science.sciencem

ag.org/
D

ow
nloaded from

 

http://science.sciencemag.org/content/359/6381/1202
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
http://www.sciencemag.org/about/terms-service
http://science.sciencemag.org/

