













































RESEARCH NEWS

Contact 
Janis Eitner | Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft, Munich | Communications | Phone +49 89 1205-1333 | presse@zv.fraunhofer.de  
Anne Rommel | Fraunhofer Institute for Telecommunications, Heinrich Hertz Institute HHI | Phone +49 30 31002-353 |  
Einsteinufer 37 | 10587 Berlin | www.hhi.fraunhofer.de | anne.rommel@hhi.fraunhofer.de

February 2017 || Page 1 | 3

CeBIT 2017: Analysis software for neural networks 
Watching computers think
Neural networks are commonly used today to analyze complex data – for 
instance to find clues to illnesses in genetic information. Ultimately, though, 
no one knows how these networks actually work exactly. That is why Fraun-
hofer researchers developed software that enables them to look into these 
black boxes and analyze how they function. The researchers will present their 
software at CeBIT in Hannover from March 20 to 24, 2017 (Hall 6, Booth B 36).

• The software recognizes which parameters a neural network uses to make
    decisions. 
• It is of interest for any area in which data such as text, images and signals
    are automatically processed and evaluated by neural networks.
• For example, the software can analyze complex production data and deduce 
    which parameters are decisive for product quality or possible deviations.

Sorting photos on the computer used to be a tedious job. Today, you simply click on 
face recognition and instantly get a selection of photos of your daughter or son. 
Computers have gotten very good at analyzing large volumes of data and searching for 
certain structures, such as faces in images. This is made possible by neural networks, 
which have developed into an established and sophisticated IT analysis method (see 
box, “How neural networks function”). 

The problem is that it isn’t just researchers who currently don’t know exactly how 
neural networks function step by step, or why they reach one result or another. Neural 
networks are, in a sense, black boxes – computer programs that people feed values 
into and that reliably return results. If you want to teach a neural network, for instance, 
to recognize cats, then you instruct the system by feeding it thousands of cat pictures. 
Just like a small child that slowly learns to distinguish cats from dogs, the neural 
network, too, learns automatically. “In many cases, though, researchers are less 
interested in the result and far more interested in what the neural network actually 
does – how it reaches decisions,” says Dr. Wojciech Samek, head of the Machine 
Learning Group at Fraunhofer Heinrich Hertz Institute HHI in Berlin. So Samek and his 
team, in collaboration with colleagues from TU Berlin, developed a method that makes 
it possible to watch a neural network think. 



RESEARCH NEWS  

February 2017 || Page 2 | 3

Machine learning enables customized cancer treatments 

This is important, for instance, in detecting diseases. We already have the capability 
today to feed patients’ genetic data into computers – or neural networks – which then 
analyze the probability of a patient having a certain genetic disorder. “But it would be 
much more interesting to know precisely which characteristics the program bases its 
decisions on,” says Samek. It could be certain genetic defects the patient has – and 
these, in turn, could be a possible target for a cancer treatment that is tailored to 
individual patients. 

Neural networks in reverse

The researchers’ method allows them to watch the work of the neural networks in 
reverse: they work through the program backwards, starting from the result. “We can 
see exactly where a certain group of neurons made a certain decision, and how 
strongly this decision impacted the result,” says Samek. The researchers have already 
impressively demonstrated – multiple times – that the method works. For instance, they 
compared two programs that are publicly available on the Internet and that are both 
capable of recognizing horses in images. The result was surprising. The first program 
actually recognized the horses’ bodies. The second one, however, focused on the 
copyright symbols on the photos, which pointed to forums for horse lovers, or riding 
and breeding associations, enabling the program to achieve a high success rate even 
though it had never learned what horses look like. 

Applications in big data

“So you can see how important it is to understand exactly how such a network func-
tions,” says Samek. This knowledge is also of particular interest to industry. “It is con- 
ceivable, for instance, that the operating data of a complex production plant could be 
analyzed to deduce which parameters impact product quality or cause it to fluctuate,” he 
says. The invention is also interesting for many other applications that involve the neural 
analysis of large or complex data volumes. “In another experiment, we were able to 
show which parameters a network uses to decide whether a face appears young or old.” 

According to Samek, for a long time banks have even been using neural networks to 
analyze bank customers’ creditworthiness. To do this, large volumes of customer data 
are collected and evaluated by a neural network. “If we knew how the network 
reaches its decision, we could reduce the data volume right from the start by selecting 
the relevant parameters,” he says. This would certainly be in the customers’ interests, 
too. At the CeBIT trade fair in Hannover from March 20 to 24, 2017, Samek’s team of 
researchers will demonstrate how they use their software to analyze the black boxes of 
neural networks – and how these networks can deduce a person’s age or sex from their 
face, or recognize animals.



RESEARCH NEWS 

February 2017 || Page 3 | 3

 
How neural networks function

Neural networks function, as their name suggests, based on the same principle as the 
brain. Just as various areas of nerve cells, the neurons, cooperate in our brain, math-
ematical units work together in the artificial neural network. A photo that, to a 
computer, is initially only an unordered cloud of pixels, is systematically analyzed by 
these groups of artificial neurons. Some neurons recognize edges while others recog-
nize corners. Bit by bit, the image becomes clear to the computer. Ultimately, the 
outcome of this neural computing operation is a probability value – the computer 
calculates, for example, how likely it is that a face actually does correspond to that of 
the person being sought. 

Fraunhofer HHI’s analysis software uses algorithms to visualize complex learning processes 

(schematic diagram). © Fraunhofer HHI | Picture in color and printing quality: www.fraunhofer.de/

en/press

The Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft is the leading organization for applied research in Europe. Its research activities are conducted by 67 Fraunhofer 
Institutes and research units at locations throughout Germany. The Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft employs a staff of 24,000, who work with an annual 
research budget totaling more than 2.1 billion euros. Of this sum, more than 1.8 billion euros is generated through contract research. More than 
70 percent of the Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft’s contract research revenue is derived from contracts with industry and from publicly financed research 
projects. Branches in the Americas and Asia serve to promote international cooperation.


