






































What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum


Machines won’t become intelligent unless they incorporate certain features of
the human brain. Here are three of them

Advertisement

 work and play,

transportation and medicine, entertainment and

sports. Yet for all their power, these machines still

cannot perform simple tasks that a child can do, such

as navigating an unknown room or using a pencil.

Computers have transformed

The solution is finally coming within reach. It will

emerge from the intersection of two major pursuits:

the reverse engineering of the brain and the

burgeoning field of artificial intelligence. Over the

next 20 years, these two pursuits will combine to

usher in a new epoch of intelligent machines.

Why do we need to know how the brain works to build

intelligent machines? Although machine-learning

techniques such as deep neural networks have

recently made impressive gains, they are still a world

away from being intelligent, from being able to

understand and act in the world the way that we do.

The only example of intelligence, of the ability to learn

from the world, to plan and to execute, is the brain.

Therefore, we must understand the principles

underlying human intelligence and use them to guide

us in the development of truly intelligent machines.

,

in Redwood City, Calif., we study the neocortex, the

brain’s largest component and the one most

responsible for intelligence. Our goal is to understand

how it works and to identify the underlying principles

of human cognition. In recent years, we have made

significant strides in our work, and we have identified

several features of biological intelligence that we

believe will need to be incorporated into future

thinking machines.

At my company, Numenta (http://numenta.com/)

To understand these principles, we must start with

some basic biology. The human brain is similar to a

What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the...

1 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36



(/the-human-os/biomedical

/devices/tiny-implantable-microcoils-in-

the-brain-activate-neurons-via-magnetic-

fields)

(/static/special-

report-can-we-

copy-the-brain)

reptile’s brain. Each has a spinal cord, which controls

reflex behaviors; a brain stem, which controls

autonomic behaviors such as breathing and heart

rate; and a midbrain, which controls emotions and

basic behaviors. But humans, indeed all mammals,

have something reptiles don’t: a neocortex.

(http://dev.biologists.org/content/141/1/11)

The neocortex is a deeply folded sheet some 2

millimeters thick that, if laid out flat, would be about

as big as a large dinner napkin. In humans, it takes up

about 75 percent of the brain’s volume. This is the part that makes us smart.

At birth, the neocortex knows almost nothing; it learns through experience. Everything we learn about

the world—driving a car, operating a coffee machine, and the thousands of other things we interact with

every day—is stored in the neocortex. It learns what these objects are, where they are in the world, and

how they behave. The neocortex also generates motor commands, so when you make a meal or write

software it is the neocortex controlling these behaviors. Language, too, is created and understood by the

neocortex.

The neocortex, like all of the brain and nervous system, is made up of cells called 

 Thus, to

understand how the brain works, you need to start with the neuron. Your neocortex has about 30 billion

of them. A typical neuron has a single tail-like 

and several treelike extensions called 

 If you think of the neuron as a kind of signaling system, the axon is the transmitter

and the dendrites are the receivers. Along the branches of the dendrites lie some 5,000 to 10,000

synapses, each of which connects to counterparts on thousands of other neurons. There are thus more

than 

 synaptic connections.

neurons.

(http://www.brainfacts.org/brain-basics/neuroanatomy/articles/2012/the-neuron/)

axon (https://www.sciencedaily.com/terms/axon.htm)

dendrites. (http://www.cerebromente.org.br/n07/fundamentos

/neuron/parts_i.htm)

100 trillion (https://decodethemind.wordpress.com/2010/09/10/more-brain-connections-than-

stars-in-the-universe-no-not-even-close/)

Your experience of the world around you—recognizing a friend’s face, enjoying a piece of music, holding a

bar of soap in your hand—is the result of input from your eyes, ears, and other sensory organs traveling

to your neocortex and causing groups of neurons to fire. When a neuron fires, an electrochemical spike

travels down the neuron’s axon and crosses synapses to other neurons. If a receiving neuron gets enough

input, it might then fire in response and activate other neurons. Of the 30 billion neurons in the

neocortex, 1 or 2 percent are firing at any given instant, which means that many millions of neurons will

be active at any point in time. The set of active neurons changes as you move and interact with the world.

Your perception of the world, what you might consider your conscious experience, is determined by the

constantly changing pattern of active neurons.

The neocortex stores these patterns primarily by forming new synapses. This storage enables you to

recognize faces and places when you see them again, and also recall them from your memory. For

example, when you think of your friend’s face, a pattern of neural firing occurs in the neocortex that is

similar to the one that occurs when you are actually seeing your friend’s face.

Remarkably, the neocortex is both complex and simple at the same time. It is complex because it is

divided into dozens of regions, each responsible for different cognitive functions. Within each region

What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the...

2 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36



Photo: Dan Saelinger

there are multiple layers of neurons, as well as dozens of neuron types, and the neurons are connected in

intricate patterns.

The neocortex is also simple because the details in every region are nearly identical. Through evolution, a

single algorithm developed that can be applied to all the things a neocortex does. The existence of such a

universal algorithm is exciting because if we can figure out what that algorithm is, we can get at the heart

of what it means to be intelligent, and incorporate that knowledge into future machines.

But isn’t that what AI is already doing? Isn’t most of AI built on “

” similar to those in the brain? Not really. While it is true

that today’s AI techniques reference neuroscience, they use an overly simplified neuron model, one that

omits essential features of real neurons, and they are connected in ways that do not reflect the reality of

our brain’s complex architecture. These differences are many, and they matter. They are why AI today

may be good at labeling images or recognizing spoken words but is not able to reason, plan, and act in

creative ways.

neural networks

(http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/)

Our recent advances in understanding how the neocortex works give us insights into how future thinking

machines will work. I am going to describe three aspects of biological intelligence that are essential, but

largely missing from today’s AI. They are learning by rewiring, sparse representations, and embodiment,

which refers to the use of movement to learn about the world.

 Brains exhibit some remarkable learning properties. First, we learn quickly. ALearning by rewiring:

What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the...

3 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36



few glances or a few touches with the fingers are often sufficient to learn something new. Second,

learning is incremental. We can learn something new without retraining the entire brain or forgetting

what we learned before. Third, brains learn continuously. As we move around the world, planning and

acting, we never stop learning. Fast, incremental, and continuous learning are essential ingredients that

enable intelligent systems to adapt to a changing world. The neuron is responsible for learning, and the

complexities of real neurons are what make it a powerful learning machine.

In recent years, neuroscientists have learned some remarkable things about the dendrite. One is that

each of its branches acts as a set of pattern detectors. It turns out that just 15 to 20 active synapses on a

branch are sufficient to recognize a pattern of activity in a large population of neurons. Therefore, a single

neuron can recognize hundreds of distinct patterns. Some of these recognized patterns cause the neuron

to become active, but others change the internal state of the cell and act as a prediction of future activity.

Neuroscientists used to believe that learning occurred solely by modifying the effectiveness of existing

synapses so that when an input arrived at a synapse it would either be more likely or less likely to make

the cell fire. However, we now know that most learning results from growing 

 between cells—by “rewiring” the

brain. Up to 40 percent of the synapses on a neuron are replaced with new ones every day. New synapses

result in new patterns of connections among neurons, and therefore new memories. Because the

branches of a dendrite are mostly independent, when a neuron learns to recognize a new pattern on one

of its dendrites, it doesn’t interfere with what the neuron has already learned on other dendrites.

new synapses

(https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2013/10/131010205325.htm)

This is why we can learn new things without interfering with old memories and why we don’t have to

retrain the brain every time we learn something new. Today’s neural networks don’t have these

properties.

What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the...

4 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36



Neuron Mimicry Explained

Intelligent machines don’t have to model all the complexity of biological neurons, but the capabilities

enabled by dendrites and learning by rewiring are essential. These capabilities will need to be in future AI

systems.

 Brains and computers represent information quite differently. In a

computer’s memory, all combinations of 1s and 0s are potentially valid, so if you change one bit it will

typically result in an entirely different meaning, in much the same way that changing the letter  to  in

the word  results in an unrelated word, . Such a representation is therefore brittle.

Sparse representations:

i a

fire fare

Brains, on the other hand, use what’s called 

, or SDRs. They’re called sparse because relatively few neurons are

fully active at any given time. Which neurons are active changes moment to moment as you move and

think, but the percentage is always small. If we think of each neuron as a bit, then to represent a piece of

information the brain uses thousands of bits (many more than the 8 to 64 used in computers), but only a

sparse distributed representations (http://www.cortical.io

/technology_representations.html)

What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the...

5 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36



small percentage of the bits are 1 at any time; the rest are 0.

Let’s say you want to represent the concept of “cat” using an SDR. You might use 10,000 neurons of

which 100 are active. Each of the active neurons represents some aspect of a cat, such as “pet,” or “furry,”

or “clawed.” If a few neurons die, or a few extra neurons become active, the new SDR will still be a good

representation of “cat” because most of the active neurons are still the same. SDRs are thus not brittle but

inherently robust to errors and noise. When we build silicon versions of the brain, they will be

intrinsically fault tolerant.

There are two properties of SDRs I want to mention. One, the overlap property, makes it easy to see how

two things are similar or different in meaning. Imagine you have one SDR representing “cat” and another

representing “bird.” Both the “cat” and “bird” SDR would have the same active neurons representing

“pet” and “clawed,” but they wouldn’t share the neuron for “furry.” This example is simplified, but the

overlap property is important because it makes it immediately clear to the brain how the two objects are

similar or different. This property confers the power to generalize, a capability lacking in computers.

The second, the union property, allows the brain to represent multiple ideas simultaneously. Imagine I

see an animal moving in the bushes, but I got only a glimpse, so I can’t be sure of what I saw. It might be

a cat, a dog, or a monkey. Because SDRs are sparse, a population of neurons can activate all three SDRs

at the same time and not get confused, because the SDRs will not interfere with one another. The ability

of neurons to constantly form unions of SDRs makes them very good at handling uncertainty.

Such properties of SDRs are fundamental to understanding, thinking, and planning in the brain. We can’t

build intelligent machines without embracing SDRs.

 The neocortex receives input from the sensory organs. Every time we move our eyes,

limbs, or body, the sensory inputs change. This constantly changing input is the primary mechanism the

brain uses to learn about the world. Imagine I present you with an object you have never seen before. For

the sake of discussion, let’s say it’s a stapler. How would you learn about the new object? You might walk

around the stapler, looking at it from different angles. You might pick it up, run your fingers over it, and

rotate it in your hands. You then might push and pull on it to see how it behaves. Through this interactive

process, you learn the shape of the stapler, what it feels like, what it looks like, and how it behaves. You

make a movement, see how the inputs change, make another movement, see how the inputs change

again, and so on. Learning through movement is the brain’s primary means for learning. It will be a

central component of all truly intelligent systems.

Embodiment:

This is not to say that an intelligent machine needs a physical body, only that it can change what it senses

by moving. For example, a virtual AI machine could “move” through the Web by following links and

opening files. It could learn the structure of a virtual world through virtual movements, analogous to

what we do when walking through a building.

This brings us to an important discovery we made at Numenta last year. In the neocortex, sensory input

is processed in a hierarchy of regions. As sensory input passes from one level of the hierarchy to another,

more complex features are extracted, until at some point an object can be recognized. Deep-learning

networks also use hierarchies, but they often require 100 levels of processing to recognize an image,

whereas the neocortex achieves the same result with just four levels. Deep-learning networks also require

millions of training patterns, while the neocortex can learn new objects with just a few movements and

sensations. The brain is doing something fundamentally different than a typical artificial neural network,

but what?

What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the...

6 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36



, the 19th-century

German scientist, was one of the first people to suggest an answer. He observed that, although our eyes

move three to four times a second, our visual perception is stable. He deduced that the brain must take

account of how the eyes are moving; otherwise it would appear as if the world were wildly jumping about.

Similarly, as you touch something, it would be confusing if the brain processed only the tactile input and

didn’t know how your fingers were moving at the same time. This principle of combining movement with

changing sensations is called 

 How and where sensorimotor integration occurs in the brain is mostly a mystery.

Hermann von Helmholtz (https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/hermann-helmholtz/)

sensorimotor integration. (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles

/PMC3154729/)

Our discovery is that sensorimotor integration occurs in every region of the neocortex. It is not a separate

step but an integral part of all sensory processing. Sensorimotor integration is a key part of the

“intelligence algorithm” of the neocortex. We at Numenta have a theory and a model of exactly how

neurons do this, one that maps well onto the complex anatomy seen in every neocortical region.

What are the implications of this discovery for machine intelligence? Consider two types of files you

might find on a computer. One is an image file produced by a camera, and the other is a computer-aided

design file produced by a program such as Autodesk. An image file represents a two-dimensional array of

visual features. A CAD file also represents a set of features, but each feature is assigned a location in

three-dimensional space. A CAD file models complete objects, not how the object appears from one

perspective. With a CAD file, you can predict what an object will look like from any direction and

determine how an object will interact with other 3D objects. You can’t do these with an image file. Our

discovery is that every region of the neocortex learns 3D models of objects much like a CAD program.

Every time your body moves, the neocortex takes the current motor command, converts it into a location

in the object’s reference frame, and then combines the location with the sensory input to learn 3D models

of the world.

In hindsight, this observation makes sense. Intelligent systems need to learn multidimensional models of

the world. Sensorimotor integration doesn’t occur in a few places in the brain; it is a core principle of

brain function, part of the intelligence algorithm. Intelligent machines also must work this way.

 attributes of the neocortex—learning by rewiring, sparse distributed

representations, and sensorimotor integration—will be cornerstones of machine intelligence. Future

thinking machines can ignore many aspects of biology, but not these three. Undoubtedly, there will be

other discoveries about neurobiology that reveal other aspects of cognition that will need to be

incorporated into such machines in the future, but we can get started with what we know today.

These three fundamental

From the earliest days of AI, critics dismissed the idea of trying to emulate human brains, often with the

refrain that “airplanes don’t flap their wings.” In reality, Wilbur and Orville Wright studied birds in

detail. To create lift, they studied bird-wing shapes and tested them in a wind tunnel. For propulsion,

they went with a nonavian solution: propeller and motor. To control flight, they observed that birds twist

their wings to bank and use their tails to maintain altitude during the turn. So that’s what they did, too.

Airplanes still use this method today, although we twist only the tail edge of the wings. In short, the

Wright brothers studied birds and then chose which elements of bird flight were essential for human

flight and which could be ignored. That’s what we’ll do to build thinking machines.

As I consider the future, I worry that we are not aiming high enough. While it is exciting for today’s

computers to classify images and recognize spoken queries, we are not close to building truly intelligent

machines. I believe it is vitally important that we do so. The future success and even survival of humanity

What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the...

7 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36



may depend on it. For example, if we are ever to inhabit other planets, we will need machines to act on

our behalf, travel through space, build structures, mine resources, and independently solve complex

problems in environments where humans cannot survive. Here on Earth, we face challenges related to

disease, climate, and energy. Intelligent machines can help. For example, it should be possible to design

intelligent machines that sense and act at the molecular scale. These machines would think about protein

folding and gene expression in the same way you and I think about computers and staplers. They could

think and act a million times as fast as a human. Such machines could cure diseases and keep our world

habitable.

In the 1940s, the pioneers of the computing age sensed that computing was going to be big and

beneficial, and that it would likely transform human society. But they could not predict exactly how

computers would change our lives. Similarly, we can be confident that truly intelligent machines will

transform our world for the better, even if today we can’t predict exactly how. In 20 years, we will look

back and see this as the time when advances in brain theory and machine learning started the era of true

machine intelligence.

Jeff Hawkins is the cofounder of , a Redwood City, Calif., company that

aims to reverse engineer the neocortex.

Numenta (http://numenta.com/)

Advertisement

SPECIAL REPORT: CAN WE COPY THE BRAIN?
(/static/special-report-can-we-copy-the-brain)

PREVIOUS
The Brain as
Computer: Bad
at Math, Good
at Everything
Else

NEXT
How to Digitize

a Rat Brain
(/video/biomedical

/imaging/how-to-

digitize-a-rat-brain)

What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the...

8 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36



(/computing/hardware/the-brain-as-

computer-bad-at-math-good-at-

everything-else)

(/the-human-

os/biomedical

/bionics/brainy-

startup-neurable-

unveils-the-worlds-

first-braincontrolled-

vr-game)

(/the-human-

os/biomedical

/imaging/ai-makes-

anthrax-bioterror-

detection-easier)

(/the-human-

os/biomedical

/diagnostics/teenage-

whiz-kid-invents-an-

ai-system-to-

diagnose-her-

grandfathers-eye-

disease)

(/aerospace/satellites

/is-there-a-giant-

planet-lurking-

beyond-pluto)

(/biomedical/devices

/smart-contact-

lenses-and-eye-

implants-will-give-

doctors-medical-

insights)

(/computing

/software/the-2017-

top-programming-

languages)

What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the...

9 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36



What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the...

10 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36


