






































Your reaction to pics of Leonardo DiCaprio, animals could unlock your next smartphone


Your reaction to pics of Leonardo
DiCaprio, animals could unlock your
next smartphone

By Cory Nealon

Proposed biometric system measures
brainwaves; creates brain password
that’s ‘cancelable,’ meaning it can be
reset if hacked

BUFFALO, N.Y. — To overcome password fatigue, many smartphones
include facial recognition, fingerprint scans and other biometric
systems.

The trouble with these easy-to-use tools is that once compromised —
yes, they can be hacked — you can’t reset them.

“You can’t grow a new fingerprint or iris if that information is divulged,”
says Wenyao Xu, PhD, assistant professor of computer science and
engineering in the University at Buffalo School of Engineering and
Applied Sciences. “That’s why we’re developing a new type of password
— one that measures your brainwaves in response to a series of pictures.
Like a password, it’s easy to reset; and like a biometric, it’s easy to use.”

The “brain password,” which would require users to wear a headset,
could have implications in banking, law enforcement, airport security
and other areas.

“To the best of our knowledge, this is the first in-depth research study
on a truly cancelable brain biometric system. We refer to this as ‘hard
cancellation,’ meaning the original brain password can be reset without
divulging the user’s identity,” says collaborator Zhanpeng Jin, PhD,
associate professor of computer science and engineering at UB.

Their work is described in a study that will be presented June 11 at
MobiSys 2018, a flagship mobile computing conference hosted in
Germany by the Association for Computing Machinery. For a copy of
the study, please email Cory Nealon at cmnealon@buffalo.edu.

Why celebs and animals?

Xu was motivated to create a cancelable biometric password after
hackers stole the fingerprint files of 5.6 million workers from the U.S.

Your reaction to pics of Leonardo DiCaprio, animals could unlock your n... http://www.buffalo.edu/news/releases/2018/06/004.html

1 sur 3 06-06-18 à 19:37



Office of Personal Management in 2015.

Perhaps the most accessible way to record brain activity is through
electroencephalography, which uses electrodes to measure the brain’s
unique patterns of electrical activity.

For their system, Xu and collaborators reconfigured a virtual reality
headset, reducing the number of electrodes to six. Three record brain
activity, two serve as grounds and the last acts as a reference point.
Typically, these headsets have 32 to 64 electrodes.

The electrodes recording brain activity measure three areas of the
organ: the intraparietal sulcus (controls declarative memory), the
inferior parietal lobule (processes face recognition) and the temporo
parietal junction (reading comprehension).

Researchers chose specific image types to stimulate each brain region.
They used animal pictures for the intraparietal sulcus because one’s
memory of a certain animal can be highly individualized. For example, a
person who suffered a spider bite will have a different reaction than
someone who hasn’t.

For the inferior parietal lobule, researchers relied on recognizable
celebrities such as Leonardo DiCaprio. For the temporo parietal
junction, they used encouraging phrases such as “aspire to inspire.”

How the brain password works

Users are shown the three images in rapid succession — 1.2 seconds to
be exact. The process is repeated three additional times. By the end of
the fourth time, after 4.8 seconds, the brain password is ready.

Researchers recruited 179 adults — 93 men, 86 women — to test the
brain password. Test subjects’ average age was 30.

Researchers collected data from three sessions, including one that
occurred five months after the original test. The goal of the last test was
to see how brain passwords functioned over time.

Overall, brain passwords were more than 95 percent effective. The
performance dipped slightly, by 1 percent, on the last test.

Early adopters and privacy concerns

While wearing a headset may not appeal to common internet users, Xu
says that may change over time, especially if the device is redesigned
into something more like Google Glass.

Plus, he says, companies with deep concerns about cybersecurity may
be early adopters of the technology. As for privacy concerns, Xu says the
system — even if hacked — would not divulge sensitive information.

Your reaction to pics of Leonardo DiCaprio, animals could unlock your n... http://www.buffalo.edu/news/releases/2018/06/004.html

2 sur 3 06-06-18 à 19:37



“These passwords contain information gathered from only three
channels in less than five seconds. Semantic memory attacks need much
more time than that,” says Xu, who plans to continue work on the
system to make it more reliable and appealing to users.

The research was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF)
and NSF’s Center for Identification Technology Research.

Your reaction to pics of Leonardo DiCaprio, animals could unlock your n... http://www.buffalo.edu/news/releases/2018/06/004.html

3 sur 3 06-06-18 à 19:37


