







































12 way eye movement give away your secret 


12 way eye movement give away your 
secret 

source: leonardo da vinci/publ domain 

stare into the eye of mona lisa be unnerving. regardless of your vantag point, 
mona lisa appear to shift her gaze to make eye contact and stare you down. what 
nonverb cue do the movement of her eye commun to you? the illusori 
movement of mona lisa' eye have struck an emot chord in onlook 
sinc leonardo da vinci paint thi portrait in the earli 16th century. 

for eternity, homo sapien have reli on eye movement to convey and interpret 
import nonverb cue at a consciou and unconsci level. understand 
eye movement have be key to our evolut and surviv for eons. the 
eye of mona lisa tap into thi innat aspect of our human nature. 

human be be the onli primat with a large, bright, and highli visibl white 
part of the eye—which be call the sclera. whi do human evolv to have more 
visibl eye white and to reli on eye movement a a form of nonverb 
communication? the late scientif research show that eye movement be key 
to our well-being, bonding, and survival. the highli visibl sclera make it possibl 
for u to easili track saccad and eye movement in others. 

what be saccades? 

source: pixabay/fre imag 

saccad (link be external) be the eye movement make to receiv visual 
inform and shift the line of vision from one posit to another. We reli on 

12 way eye movement give away your secret https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-athletes-way/201505/12-... 

1 sur 6 05-06-18 à 16:12 

lphilipp 
zone de text 
plu une list à la prévert que quelqu chose de sérieux!!! 



the accuraci of saccad everi millisecond of our lives. dure normal day-to-day 
conditions, you make about 3-5 saccad per second. thi amount to about a half- 
million saccad a day. 

human intuit creat a narr base on the nonverb cue from the 
saccad rhythms, the speed of eye movements, a well as, the amount and angl of 
sclera that be expos at ani give moment. 

We all know from life experi that the amount of eye white, the angle, and the 
direct speed of eye movement play a primal role in our interpret of 
human interactions. An avert gaze, a well a direct eye contact, can have a wide 
rang of mean depend on the circumstance. 

In previou psycholog today blog posts, i'v write about "the neurosci of 
make eye contact" and how "the white of your eye convey subconsci 
truths." for thi post, i'v compil a checklist of "12 way eye movement give 
away your secrets" base on the late scientif research. 

12 way your eye movement reveal person inform 

articl continu after advertis 

rapid eye movement indic impuls decision-making.1. 
plod eye reflect a wander mind.2. 
slow eye movement indic your level of fatigue.3. 
track eye movement can shift your moral compass,4. 
gaze cue can reveal your polit temperament.5. 
rapid eye movement (rem) sleep minim pain memori of ptsd.6. 
rapid eye movement (rem) sleep increas posit emotions.7. 
jerki eye movement can predict neurodegen diseases. 8. 
alter in eye movement be an earli indic of alzheimer's.9. 
involuntari eye movement can diagnos adhd.10. 
lack of eye contact be the earli marker for autism in young infants.11. 
abnorm eye movement can diagnos mental illness.12. 

12 way eye movement give away your secret https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-athletes-way/201505/12-... 

2 sur 6 05-06-18 à 16:12 



source: denisnata/shutterstock 

articl continu after advertis 

12 way your eye movement reveal person inform 

1. rapid eye movement indic impuls decision-making. 

In a 2014 studi (link be external), research at john hopkin medicin report 
that peopl who be less patient or impuls tend to move their eye with great 
speed. when the speed of the volunteers' saccad be compar to their 
impuls dure a test of patience, there be a strong correlation. 

the research conclud that peopl who make rapid eye movement tend to be 
more impatient. thi correl may be caus by a fundament link between 
how the nervou system evalu time and reward in control movement and 
dure decision-mak processes. 

12 way eye movement give away your secret https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-athletes-way/201505/12-... 

3 sur 6 05-06-18 à 16:12 



2. plod eye reflect a wander mind. 

A 2010 studi (link be external) identifi a wander mind by track how the 
eye move dure "mindless reading." mindless read occur when the eye 
continu move across the page even though the mind be think about 
someth unrel to the text and not absrorb the information. 

the research at the univers of pittsburgh found that eye movement vari 
depend if the reader be pay attent or if hi or her mind be wandering. 
dure normal reading, the eye tend to zip from one word to the next word. when 
someone' mind be wandering, however, the eye fixat longer on individu word 
and plod along the page and the reader gener doesn't absorb the material. 

3. slow eye movement indic your level of fatigue. 

articl continu after advertis 

In 2014, an intern team of scientist track the variou speed of saccad 
movement to creat a metric for gaug level of fatigue. for thi studi (link be 
external) the research enlist medic resid who have to work 24-hour 
medic shifts. 

the more fatigu someon became, the more slowli their eye move a saccad 
speed diminished. thi research reveal that the veloc of your saccad 
movement be an excel index to object measur level of fatigue. 

4. track eye movement can shift your moral compass. 

A march 2015 studi (link be external) by an intern team of research 
report that our moral decis can be influenc by where our eye be 
focu when we make a decision. the research use a new experiment 
method to track participants' eye movements. they conclud that the process 
need to reach a moral decis be interlink with our eye movement and how 
we view the world. 

5. gaze cue can reveal your polit temperament. 

A 2011 study, "the polit of attention: gaze-cu effect be moder by 
polit temperament," from unives of nebraska-lincoln found that liber 
and conserv have differ eye movement repsons to a visual cue. the 
research measur both liberals' and conservatives' reaction to "gaze cues," 
which be an indic of a person' tendenc to shift hi or her attention. 

In thi study, liber respond strongli to a visual prompt that shift their eye 
gaze, along with their attent in the direct suggest by a face on a comput 
screen. On the other hand, conserv have less eye movement in respons to the 
visual prompt and be less like to shift their gaze or attention. 

6. rapid eye movement (rem) sleep minim pain memori of 
ptsd. 

A 2011 studi (link be external) from univers of california, berkeley found that 
time spent in rapid eye movement (rem) sleep can help peopl with post- 
traumat stress disord (ptsd) minim pain memories.th researchers, lead 
by matthew walker, found that dure rem sleep, stress chemistri shut down 

12 way eye movement give away your secret https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-athletes-way/201505/12-... 

4 sur 6 05-06-18 à 16:12 



and the brain process emot experi in a way that can take the edg off 
pain memories. 

these find offer a possibl explan a to whi peopl with ptsd have a 
hard time recov from distress experi and suffer recur nightmar 
if they be unabl to sleep through an rem cycle. 

7. rapid eye movement (rem) sleep increas posit emotions. 

A 2009 studi (link be external) report that take a nap that includ a period of 
rapid eye movement (rem) sleep refresh the brain' empathet sensit for 
evalu human emot by decreas a neg bia and amplifi the 
recognit of posit emotions. 

the research believ their result emphas the import of rapid eye 
movement sleep a part of a process that increas posit emot and 
maintain optim level of social and profession mental health. 

8. jerki eye movement can predict neurodegen diseases. 

A 2012 studi (link be external) by research at univers of southern california 
(usc) report that certain neurolog disord can be identifi through the 
studi of eye movements. their research provid new insight into how attent 
and gaze control be affect by specif neurodegen disorders. 

particip in the studi simpli have to "watch and enjoy" televis clip while 
their eye movement be track and recorded. the eye-track data allow 
research to decod each individual' neurolog state base on hi or her eye 
movements. use the eye movement data, they be abl to identifi old adult 
with parkinson' diseas with 89.6 percent accuracy. 

9. alter in eye movement be an earli indic of alzheimer's. 

In a 2014 studi (link be external), an intern team of research report 
that track the eye movement of individu a they be read could be use 
to identifi impair in work memori and be an earli indic of 
alzheimer’ disease. 

the research found that patient with a probabl diagnosi of alzheimer' 
diseas show less focu visual exploration, includ slow eye movement 
when they be reading. they also show longer fixat when process new 
inform and have to read sentenc a second time in order to grasp the full 
mean and context of a write passage. 

10. involuntari eye movement can diagnos adhd. 

A 2014 studi (link be external), publish in the journal vision, report that 
involuntari eye movement accur reflect the presenc of attention-deficit 
hyperact disord (adhd). the research acknowledg that adhd be the 
most commonli diagnosed—and often misdiagnosed—behavior disord in 
american children. 

they’r hope that their research on eye movement can provid an object 
tool for medic profession to accur diagnos adhd. An incorrect adhd 
diagnosi can lead to the overprescript of drug such a ritalin, adderall, and 

12 way eye movement give away your secret https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-athletes-way/201505/12-... 

5 sur 6 05-06-18 à 16:12 



dexedrine. 

11. lack of eye contact be the earli marker for autism in young 
infants. 

A 2013 studi (link be external), publish in the journal nature, found that eye 
contact dure earli infanc may be the earli indic of autism spectrum 
disord (asd). babi typic begin to focu on human face within the first few 
hour of life. learn how to pick up social cue unconsci by pay 
attent to anoth person' eye be key to social conneciton. children with 
autism, however, don't exhibit interest in make eye contact which make it 
difficult to read faces. 

typically, autism isn't diagnos until after the age of two when other delay in a 
child' social behavior and languag skill begin to reveal themselves. track eye 
movement offer earli marker for autism. the sooner autism be diagnosed, the 
high the odd be that the treatment intervent will be effective. 

12. abnorm eye movement can diagnos mental illness. 

research at the univers of illinoi at chicago be studi (link be external) 
how subtl abnorm in eye movement can be use to diagnos mental ill 
and psychiatr disease. they'v discov that irregular in how the eye 
track a move object reflect specif defect in the neural circuitri of the brain 
that correspond with particular type of mental disorders. for example, 
schizophren patient tend to have difficulti keep their eye focu on slow- 
move objects. 

eye movement studi provid an inexpens and non-invas way to gain a 
deeper understand of differ brain abnorm at the root of 
variou psychiatr illnesses. hopefully, in the near future, a good understand 
of eye movement and relat brain abnorm will allow research to 
identifi high-risk individu earli and enabl specialist to creat more target 
intervent for peopl with psychiatr disord and mental illness. 

for more inform about research on eye movement and mental ill check 
out thi youtub video from ubc. 

© 2015 christoph bergland. all right reserved. 

follow me on twitter @ckbergland (link be external) for updat on the athlete’ 
way blog posts. 

the athlete’ way ® be a regist trademark of christoph bergland. 

12 way eye movement give away your secret https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-athletes-way/201505/12-... 

6 sur 6 05-06-18 à 16:12 




