





































artifici intellig and music creativity: 
comput beethoven' tenth 

by 

matthew T. hutson 

sc.b. cognit neurosci 
brown university, 2000 

submit TO the program IN write and humanist studi IN 
partial fulfil OF the requir for the degre OF 

master OF scienc IN scienc write 
AT the 

massachusett institut OF technolog 

septemb 2003 

©2003 matthew T. hutson. all right reserved. 

the author herebi grant to mit permiss to reproduc 
and to distribut publicli paper and electron 

copi of thi thesi document in whole or in part. 

signatur of author: ________________ ~~ 

massachuseit institut 
OF technolog 

I J U L 2 4 z003 ] 

librari 

program in write and humanist studi 
june 9, 2003 

certifi by: ______ _ 
alan P. lightman 

adjunct professor, program in write and humanist studi 
thesi supervisor 

accept by: ________________________ _ 

robert kanigel 
professor of scienc write 

director, graduat program in scienc write 

ahchlv '-~,~-. 





abstract 

artifici intellig and music creativity: 
comput beethoven' tenth 

by 

matthew T. hutson 

submit to the program in write and humanist studi 
on june 9,2003 in partial fulfil of 

the requir for the degre of master of scienc in 
scienc write 

I explor creativ and ask whether comput be capabl now, or in the future, of 
produc creativ works. I focu on creativ in music composition, and within thi 
field I focu on the work of david cope at UC santa cruz. He have develop a program, 
experi in music intellig (emi) that can take the work of a give compos 
and produc new work in that style. 

I look at variou definit of creativ and method peopl have use to studi 
creati viti over the years. then I go to some compos and see what they think of emi' s 
music. I take a look at the algorithm under emi' hood, and look at other algorithm 
peopl have use to compos music. I review other field where algorithm have be 
appli to creativity, and see if ani of these algorithm resembl how human actual 
think. then I test the definit of creativ a unconsci calcul and talk to the 
chess AI expert behind deep blue and other chess software. 

finally, I discu the import of embodi cognit and what it mean to understand 
something. I conclud that comput cannot be creativ becaus they don't understand 
the mean in what they do. 

thesi supervisor: alan P. lightman 
title: adjunct professor of write and humanist studi 





biograph note 

matthew hutson receiv hi sc.b. in cognit neurosci from brown univers in 
2000. He spent two year a lab coordin in mit' learn and memori 
laboratory, conduct behavior and fmri neuroimag studi on human volunteers. 
In 2003 he receiv hi m.s. in scienc write from mit. 





7 

"if there hadn't be a crowd around i'm sure he would have punch me. He be about 

six foot six so he would have do a real good job. weigh about 100 pound more than 

I do too ... " 

thi be david cope, the design of a comput program that compos music, 

describ one german musicologist' reaction to hi program' veri human output. 

cope say that among the neg reaction drawn by emi, hi program, thi incid at 

a musicologist confer in germani be mere the first instanc of sever threat of 

physic violence. 

"he stuck hi finger in my face and push me. and say music be dead. and I 

kill it. He consid that my program be the death of music, becaus music be 

magic in hi mind. and I be the one explain the magic. I be explain how the 

sword didn't realli go through the lady. It be all an illusion, and he didn't want to hear 

that." 

cope have sinc stop play the game, a practic where he would play piec 

compos by emi along with piec compos by actual composers, like bach and 

chopin, and then ask peopl to guess which be which. the problem be that the game be 

too hard. No formal studi have take place, but most nonmusician be right about 

50% of the time, and most musician score onli margin better. 

emi offend two strong sensibl in us: that express music be the result of 

emot intent, and that creativ be too mysteri to simulate. what do it mean if a 

computer, with no emot at all, and simpli a list of rule to direct it, gener 

beauti music that surpris u and move us? Is the human soul no different, 

fundamentally, than a calculator? Is emot an illusion? Is there an algorithm for 

creativity? 

I don't read music or play ani tradit instruments, but I sometim wonder if 

a comput could match my contribut to the music world: I dj. the particular 

type of music I usual play be subset of electron music: hous music and jungl (aka 

drum'n'base.) hous and jungl dr usual use two turntabl with a sound mixer in 

between. I adjust the speed of the turntabl so that the record match tempo, and use the 

mixer' cross-fad to switch from one record to the next, thu produc one continu 



beat that travel throughout a "set." toward the end of one record, I switch to the next 

one. In a sense, I stitch the song togeth into one cohes story. 

8 

some see littl room for creativ in dj'ing-aft all, i'm just play other 

people' records-but there be a few area for expression. there' record selection, and 

there' how you order them. pick chapter from your favorit book and mesh 

them togeth into a complet novel be not a trivial task. there be also mani way to 

mix them. I can simpli slide the cross-fad slowli from one side to the other; I can flick 

the input switches, rapidli cut from one record to the other; I can fiddl with bass, 

midrange, and trebl knob to overlap differ layer of the records; or I can do a 

complex mixtur of the above, pick particular element in differ record and 

play them off each other. If someon ask me to program my decis and 

movement into a computer, I would be at a loss. If someon told me hi comput could 

exactli replic my style, I would rais an eyebrow. 

In explor these issu we'll first look at variou definit of creativ and 

method peopl have use to studi it over the years. then we'll go to some compos 

and see what they think of emi' music. we'll take a look under emi' hood and see 

how she works, and look at other algorithm peopl have use to compos music. we'll 

look at other field where algorithm have be appli to creativity, and see if ani of 

these algorithm resembl how human actual think. final we'll compar creativ 

to calcul and see if they can shed ani light on each other. 

A few preliminari idea about creativ 

the literatur on creativ be rich and varied, cover everi possibl domain. I don't 

have the room here to give a full histori on the studi of creativ and will onli brush 

upon a few topics. 

peopl have approach definit of creativ from mani perspectives. 

creativ be close link to inspiration, which come from the greek word for breath, 

a in the breath of god. As beethoven onc said, "when I compos that passage, I be 

consciou of be inspir by god almighty. Do you think I can consid your puni 

littl fiddl when He speak to me?" the notion of divin inspir still reign popular 



today, sometim implicitly, but we'v now tackl the topic with the like of 

psycholog and neuroscience. 

without implic spiritu influence, one can still ask: do creativ thought 

differ somehow from ration thought? over the year peopl have debat the 

relationship between creativ and the more gener concept of intelligence. In the 

9 

1950' s the psychologist j.p. guilford describ creativ a a subset of intelligence. hi 

structur of intellig model of human intellectu capac list 120 factors, 

includ one directli relev to creativity: diverg production, or what we now call 

think outsid the box. guilford devis sever creativ tests, mani still in use 

today. hi most famou diverg product test be sometim call brick uses; the 

task be to list a mani unusu us for a brick a possible. more generally, he theoriz 

that creativ depend upon four skills: the abil to produc mani idea (fluency), the 

abil to alter one' strategi or to consid differ idea simultan (flexibility), 

the abil to produc novel idea (originality), and the abil to recogn import 

problems. 

By all accounts, a creativ act or idea requir two qualities: novelti and quality. 

At a minimum, it must be differ from what have come before, and it must be worth 

something. (of course, these "simple" requir realli be not so simple, but we need 

to start somewhere.) 

what have becom more appar over the year be the illus of the appar 

spontan in that "eureka!" moment. A lot of work happen behind the scene befor 

an idea present itself to consciousness. mani theorist have broken down creativ 

from an event into a process, describ a multistag development. the first to outlin 

such a process be the british psychologist graham wallas, who, in hi 1926 book, the 

art of thought, name four phase of creativity. thi theori becom the framework for 

mani subsequ model of creativity. popular version have be publish by 

mathematician and creativ pundit henri poincar and jacqu hadamard. 

the first stage be preparation. you must usual have a good understand of 

the background materi befor offer someth new to a domain. engin must 

know their math and physic and must know the requir of a solut befor they 

can tackl a problem productively. musician must have some knowledg of note and 



10 

harmonies, an instrument, a compos technique. the probabl of pick up a pen or 

a guitar without prior train and gener someth both new and worthwhil be 

quit slim. 

the second stage, incubation, be the one most often overlooked. onc you have 

becom familiar with a domain, or a problem and previou attempt at solutions, the 

creativ process continu beneath the surfac even when consciou thought travel 

elsewhere. when an idea emerg in the third stage of the creativ process, the moment 

of illumination, it appear to come from nowhere, but your mind have in fact be work 

on the problem continu up until that moment. anecdot of discoveri appear 

in a dream or upon awaken illustr thi phenomenon; even when one sleeps, the 

solut process continues, often in an associ and nonrat way. the work 

lead up to illumin may not be visible, but it' there. 

By some accounts, the creativ process end there, but verif of the creation 

must not be ignored. you might sit and gener thousand of haiku or dozen of 

inventions, but without separ the good idea from the bad, the mass product a a 

whole might not qualifi a creative. finally, creativ idea rare emerg in their final 

form. thoma edison onc said, "geniu be one percent inspir and 99 percent 

perspiration." some model of creativ thu contain a fifth stage, elaboration, where 

good idea be explor and implemented. onc a good idea have be produc and 

recognized, it must usual be develop or edited. the detail of a new invention, the 

harmon compon of a music theme, the exact arrang of step in a 

mathemat proof. seed of idea must be nurtur into full oaks. 

A big assumpt about creativ be that it flourish in freedom. break down the walls, 

get outsid the box, and creativ idea will emerge. A few year ago three scientist 

publish a report in scienc (one of the world' top two scienc journals, along with 

nature) that defi thi assumption. base upon work by psychologists, the research 

show that appli rule to one particular creativ task make peopl have good ideas. 

In fact, they show that comput use these rule could have idea rat high 

creativ than human not use the rules. 



11 

dr. jacob goldenberg, dr. david mazursky, and dr. sorin solomon of hebrew 

univers in jerusalem analyz award-win advertis and found that 75% of 

them adher to one of six "creativ templates:" pictori analogy, extrem situation, 

consequences, competition, interactive, and dimension alternative. they then use a 

comput program with the popular replac version of the pictori analog 

templat to come up with advertis idea for differ products. compar to the idea 

invent by a group of nonadvertis who didn't have ani constraints, the computer' 

idea be consist rat superior by a panel of judges. i'll give you a coupl of 

examples. To advertis the on-tim perform of an airline, the comput suggest a 

cuckoo in the shape of a jumbo jet pop out of a cuckoo clock. the human suggest 

a famili run to an airplan while one of the parent screams, "let' run, I know thi 

airline' plane be alway right on time." To advertis the world cup tenni 

tournament in jerusalem, the comput suggest the imag of a mosque' dome with a 

tenni ball texture. the human suggest the imag of a tenni poster on one of 

jerusalem' ancient walls. It must be said, however, that anoth group of human give 

the same templat a the comput do the best. 

you may not be particularli surpris to learn of the import of structur 

think (algorithms) in creativity. anyon who' ever have writer' or inventor' block 

know just how paralyz a perfectli blank piec of paper can be. I think thi be whi I 

like dj'ing; sever restrict by the suppli of record in my crates, I never have to 

begin from scratch. In the same way, I alway enjoy make collages, and creativ 

nonfict appeal to me more than write novels, a i'm forc to work with what have 

actual happened. 

margaret boden of the univers of sussex have do a lot of research in 

comput model of creativ and be best know for her 1991 book, the creativ 

mind: myth and mechanisms. she have describ three gener type of creativity. first, 

there be combin creativity, which involv use particular strategi to combin 

exist idea in a give conceptu space. such be the work of analog and metaphors. 

then there be exploratori creativity, which involv modifi the strategi use for C- 

creativity. final there be transform creativity, in which the conceptu space 

itself be chang by alter or drop one of it bound constraints. 



12 

how might these form of creativ look to a dj? juxtapos interest 

record within a genr might constitut c-creativity. cross genr (from techno to 

rock, say) might constitut e-creativity. (for those of you more vers in the subgenr 

of club music, imagin pull off a crosscut from tech-step jungl to french hard house.) 

invent scratching, which hip-hop dj' more frequent do would, I suppose, count a 

T -creativity. transform the turntabl from a tool for play prerecord song off 

record into an instrument in it own right for creat new songs, a practic now call 

"turntablism," in my mind repres boden' third categori of creativity. (you could, 

however, go further by, say, bang on the turntabl with drumsticks.) 

classifi creativity, a boden does, break down the process into stages, a 

walla and other have, and measur creativ output, a guilford claim to do, do not 

fulli answer our question of whether creativ be essenti the same a normal thought. 

look at how peopl describ their subject experi of the creativ process 

suggest a distinct difference. alan lightman recent publish an essay in new 

scientist on thi topic. lightman, a cal-tech-trained-physicist-cum-novelist, perhap 

best know for hi delight imagin novel einstein' dreams, have experienc 

creativ moment in both fields, and call it "one of the deepest and most beauti of 

human experiences." the feel of creativ inspir "isn't an essenti part of life, 

but it' like have kids, or have sex," he tell me. "if you haven't experienc it, you 

can't imagin what it' like." In the article, lightman describ star at a set of 

equat for month (preparation) befor wake from sleep (incubation) one morn to 

see the problem in an new light (illumination.) sit down to hi equations, he feel 

weightless, egoless, a sensat he relat to plan over the water in a sailboat. after 

nine hour of work he regain hi sens of self to find that hi problem have be 

transform into a solution. regard thi experi a univers in creativ work, 

lightman cite an unpublish einstein essay describ the discoveri of one of the 

implic of relativity: einstein call it the "happiest thought of my life." 

the subject side of inspir may be universal, but be it required? Is it 

possibl to enter the creativ state and produc creativ work without feel ani 

different? 



13 

meet emmi 

the first time I heard of david cope' experi in intellig music (emi, or, more 

affectionately, emmy) be in 1999. the cognit scientist dougla hofstadter, author 

of godel, escher, bach, come to my univers to give a lectur on the emi phenomenon. 

when hofstadt first learn of emi, he visit cope and soon go on a lectur tour 

present emi and hi interpret of it. emi do not just compos music; it can 

compos music in the style of ani give artist. feed it the score of beethoven' first 

nine symphonies, and it spit out hi tenth. (one might argu that compos in an 

exist style be not creative, but that would mean that beethoven' symphoni 2-9 

weren't creative.) hofstadt be an amateur compos and a passion fan of chopin, 

and the fact that emi could produc chopin-lik piec disturb him. dure the 

lectur he offer three sourc of pessimism, which he late reprint in virtual music, a 

2001 book by cope: 

"1. chopin (for example) be a lot shallow than I have ever thought. 

2. music be a lot shallow than I have ever thought. 

3. the human soul/mind be a lot shallow than I have ever thought." 

face with these options, one can perhap empath with the german musicologist' 

anger at david cope. 

but gener music with an algorithm be realli noth new. An algorithm be 

just a seri of rules, usual follow in sequenti steps; the algorithm for get 

dress might be: put on pants, put on shirt, put on socks, etc. algorithm music be 

much old than computers. In the 17th century, giovanni andrea bontempi design a 

wheel with number on it assign to notes, and an accompani set of rule for use 

the wheel to compose. the method appear in hi 1660 work, new method of 

compos four voices, by mean of which one thoroughli ignor of the art of music 

can begin to compose. In 1787, mozart devis a game call musikalisch wurfelspiel 

that involv arrang precompos section of music into a minuet by roll dice. 

mozart and other great compos adher to a set of rule restrict tonal music give 



14 

in 1725 by johann joseph fux in hi the studi of counterpoint. exampl rule: "from 

one perfect conson to anoth perfect conson one must proceed in contrari 

obliqu emotion." (A conson be a combin of note that sound nice together; it 

opposit be dissonance. motion refer to the rel motion between overlap 

melodi or voices; obliqu mean that one voic go up or down while the other 

remain steady, and contrari mean they move in opposit directions.) 

ani kind of constraint or formal place upon composit defin an 

algorithm process. the haiku be an algorithm; you'r requir to write the poem in three 

line of five, seven, and five syllables, respectively, and the theme must refer at least 

indirectli to a season. mani constraint remain invisible, such a the veri idea of 12-note 

tonal music. constraint also result from the method of notation, and from how certain 

instrument can be played. (A chord for a solo piano piec can't contain three wide 

space notes, a human usual have onli two hands.) cope argu that all compos 

be algorithm and that it would be insult to argu otherwise, becaus they'v spent 

year learn the techniqu and process of their school and those musician who 

come befor them. 

play the game 

I set up an appoint to interview cope at UC santa cruz, where he teaches. but first, 

I visit some compos at mit. the first person I talk to be peter child, an award- 

win composer, music professor at mit, and former chair of the department. I bring a 

CD with music compos by em!. 

As child and I sit in hi offic and listen to the cd, he bow hi head slightli and 

close hi eyes. meanwhil I look around the room. there' a macintosh with a flat- 

panel display on hi desk, and a music keyboard nearbi face a window, which look 

out onto the alleyway between mit buildings. On the wall hang three poster for the 

santa Fe chamber music festival, each with a larg flower on it. child be bald except for 

a crown of hair around the back and sides, and sideburns. He wear corduroys, a sweater, 

and thin-rim glasses. He speak with a british accent. 



15 

On the cd, cope have put three set of four track each. In each set, there be two 

human composit and two emi composit in the style of the human composers. 

the first set have rel obscur composers, the second have bach, and the third have 

chopin. cope print the correct track identif in the back of one of hi books. As 

we sit and listen, child occasion laugh (the kind of laugh that consist onli of a short 

burst of air exhal through the nose.) 

We stop the CD after listen to each track. child have no troubl with the first 

track, by cesar cui. "if that be write by a comput I would be amaz and 

impressed." He struggl with the second one, an emi composition. "that piec be not 

veri good. one of the thing that to my mind make it rather dull and repetit be it' so 

harmon static. but at the same time there be sort of flash of inspiration, or rather 

invention. you know, unexpect harmon twists. and of cours the chang of meter 

and tempo that happens, which seem like a human touch." In the end, he call it human. 

"i'm probabl go to say that they'r all human," he laughs. 

child struggl with the bachs. refer to a virtual bach: "there' a fluiditi to 

the voic lead that' veri good. In other word the contrapunt qualiti of the part 

write be good, the harmon structur of the phrase be extrem well done, the 

modul be well done. there' a use of suspensions, which work realli well. I mean it 

just realli work well." He make these comment even after i'v told him that 

accord to the key in cope' book, thi track be a fake. then he reflect for a moment. 

"thi be track eight? let me see that book." 

next I visit john harbison, anoth member of mit' music faculty, an 

intern know composer, and winner of a pulitz prize for hi cantata the flight 

into egypt. He invit me to hi home in cambridge. As I approach through the small 

but elabor garden in hi fenc yard, I converg with hi wife, rosemary, who have just 

pull into the driveway. she invit me in. harbison be up the spiral staircas meet 

with someon in hi office, so rosemari and I drink earl grey tea in their rustic kitchen 

and talk about their small dogs, rudi and scotty. their kitchen sink be a handsom 

industrial-s stone tub pull from a decrepit building. final harbison come down 

with hi guest, we exchang greet and head upstairs. 



16 

harbison be a tall man, with gray brown hair and a mustache. He wear glass 

and a seriou look. hi offic be large, with age brick in the walls, an old wooden floor, 

wooden beams, persian rugs, and two skylights. he' get a comput on hi clutter 

desk, plu a piano, a hi-fi, and rack and rack of tapes, cd's, records, scores, and books. 

after listen to the first two comput piec (track two and three out of the 

four), harbison say "the second and third piec could be by real compos not work 

veri well ... In the second one the tempo chang be kind of awkward ... the third piec 

sound like kind of a mahler idiom but without much control over section progress." 

He make qualif to hi account of those two tracks, though. "there be pretti 

reput compos who would use the same kind of not terribl expert doubl and 

part lead I heard in two ... the third piec realli sound like it be in a ramble, just 

kind of wander around, [but] good compos do that sometimes." 

Of the four bach tracks, he struggl with the last two, one a bach and one a fake. 

the bach sound right, except for one chord near the end that "bothers" him. In the fake, 

"there' noth wrong with the harmoni or phrase structure. there' someth fishi 

about it but it' not imposs ... the actual technic workmanship be quit accurate." 

In the end, he ask which be which without make a final call. "i'v heard attempt at 

choral harmonization, give the comput a sort of technic vocabulary, and they 

weren't nearli that close to a bach syntax." He say that sever year ago he heard 

someth that just sound like a bad student. "thi seem to be get more help 

somehow." 

harbison get the chopin right without a problem. one of the fake "had a 

bunch of fragment in it that be veri authentic, but the syntax be screw up. there 

be some littl chunk that actual sound like they might have come out of a chopin 

piece, but then they didn't string togeth veri well." 

I ask child and harbison what kind of clue they look for to pick out the emi 

compositions. child sum it up best. He explain that he' not just look for a "qualiti 

of competence" but also a "human quality." He would attribut a human qualiti to an 

invent that cannot easili be summar by rules. An exampl would be "if you 

hear a segment in one phrase that connect neatli with a segment in anoth phrase, but 

in which the melodi let' say be be transfer to a differ regist or to a differ 



17 

voic in a clever way and then brought back." In describ creativity, word like 

"invention" and "cleverness" come up a lot. In some sens thi do not help u at all, a 

they can be consid mere synonym for creativity. child push a littl further into 

what he mean by cleverness; the sort of clever he means, the kind that separ 

human from machines, "involv sort of a coordin of featur that be 

straightforward in term of what we hear but quit complex in term of how they work." 

thi statement could mean mani things. I will interpret it thi way: A clever music 

invent will involv a complic coordin of multipl element on mani levels, 

and yet in the end it will sound natural, it will still "flow." 

under the hood 

the gener principl guid emi' composit be "recombinance." emi start out 

with a databas of sourc work (all the etud of a give composer, say), which it 

disintegr and stitch back togeth into new works. sever factor guid 

reassembl of the music scrap on sever levels. 

emi us voice-hooking. If it place scrap B after scrap A, it make sure that B 

begin with the note that follow A in a' origin context. the domin voic of the 

piece, usual the soprano melody, take precedence, and if the bass and other voic can 

match too, so much the better. In thi way the fragment hook togeth naturally. 

anoth strategi us grammar. In language, rule of grammar dictat how word 

may be organ meaning into sentences. cope have appli the method of natur 

languag process in emi use the speac system, which he develop in 1985. just 

a word may be identifi a noun or verb or articles, notes/chord can be identifi a 

statements, preparations, extensions, antecedents, and consequents, base upon their 

tension. (tension in thi case be a well-defin qualiti base upon the overton seri 

and rel placement of the note/chord.) just a one must place noun and verb in a 

particular order, one should obey certain rule in order speac objects. for example, 

you cannot end a sentenc whenev you want; it would sound off to say, "I place a rock 

on top of." similarly, cope tell me, "if a compos thought he end a piec on a C 



[consequent] but it actual end on an A [antecedent], I think we'd consid it to be a 

realli strang composit and not to be aesthet pleas to us." 

18 

cope' use of music grammar extend beyond the organ of music 

"words" into music "sentences." In language, organ appli on sever size 

scales. sentenc can act a introductions, developments, or conclus in a paragraph. 

A paragraph can act a an introduct or conclus in a paper. (rememb those five- 

paragraph essay they taught you in high school?) emi group note into cluster 

accord to their label a a prepar or extens or whatever, and then give each 

note cluster a label and organ them into larg clusters. (the tension of a group of 

note be calcul a the averag tension of it individu notes.) emi label and 

organ these larg clusters, and so on, all the way up the size scale. 

anoth particularli import aspect of music style that emi tri to captur be 

the use of what cope call signatures. these be group of four to ten contigu note 

that appear in at least two work of a give composer, and often appear sever time in a 

singl piece. the exact instanc of a signatur may not match exactly, but they be 

audibl recogniz a similar. for example, cope describ a particular mozart 

signatur a "an upward-lead scale passag follow by a downward leap which 

ultim resolv by stepwis motion." thi signatur occur mani time in mani 

form throughout mozart' work. cope' softwar includ a pattern matcher that be just 

flexibl enough to recogn a signatur in differ forms, but not so flexibl that it find 

fals examples. To hone the pattern matcher' specificity, it have particular "controllers," 

or variabl that cope can modifi for differ artist or compositions. emi then 

construct variat of the signatur it find and integr them into the new piec it 

composes. To those who be familiar with work in a give style, these signatur creat 

a strong sens of recognition. cope have implement a number of other strategi a 

well. 

other algorithm 

mani other road have be take on the way to program algorithm music. one 

of the simplest methods, call stochast processing, us random or chaotic 



19 

mathemat functions. In one form, a number be enter into a function and the result be 

enter into the equat again, ad infinitum. (for example, xnext = ax(l-x). for certain 
valu of a and start valu of x, x will jump around unpredictably.) long sequenc 

of x-valu produc from iter mathemat function have most familiarli be 

plot onto a graph and color-coded, gener the psychedel fractal poster cover 

mani acr of colleg student dorm room wall space, but they can also be assign note 

and play sequentially. i'v heard some of thi stuff, and it' interesting. there' 

enough repetit on variou level that it sound cohesive, and enough varieti that it 

doesn't sound pure mechanical. I suspect that beyond these surface-level semblances, 

the output verg sharpli away from ani music-theoret rules. other type of 

mathemat or geometr patterns, or even natur phenomena, have be translat into 

music scores, with their result all over the map. but no one have yet found the like of 

mozart in pi. 

anoth broad approach be knowledge-bas system (kbs), also call rule-bas 

systems. the programm us her knowledg of music composit to program rule 

that guid the behavior of the program. In 1980 the ibm comput scientist kemal 

ebcioglu design a system name choral that us 270 rule to compos the 

harmon of choral in the style of bach. for example: "if the melodi skips, and if 

the note within the scope of thi skip have not alreadi be sounded, then they must 

eventu be sound befor the end of the melody." In 1989 william schottstaedt 

design a program base upon the rule for counterpoint set out in 1725 by fux, whom I 

mention earlier. schottstaedt assign point valu to each rule, depend on how 

import they are, and hi program tri to collect the few point by break the 

few rules. If the program collect too mani point while composing, it will back up 

and follow a differ path. one problem with knowledge-bas system be that an expert 

have to program all of the rules, plu all of the except to all of the rules. 

the use of grammars, such a cope' speac system, have also be popular. one 

weak be that the use of hierarch structur contrast the strong improvis 

element of human works. 

genet algorithm (ga's) have also be use extensively. similar to 

evolution, mani solut to a problem be gener randomly. then their qualiti be 



20 

rat either interact by a user or accord to a program set of standards. the 

most "fit" solut combin or be tweak slightly, while the weaker one be dismiss 

or tweak heavily, and thi next "generation" be then rated, and so on. unfortunately, 

ga' be hit-or-miss, so if the search space be larg (such a the field of all possibl 

music works), they will usual do a lot of missing. evolution, whether real or virtual, 

be a slow process. 

In 1998 georg papadopoulo and geraint wiggin of the univers of 

edinburgh design a system for gener solo jazz melodi use ga' s. for their 

system, a "chromosome" be a small chunk of music. the chang use to "mutate" and 

"cross" the chromosom includ permute, swap, and transpose. the "fit function" 

use to judg the qualiti of the output us sever object rule similar to those 

describ by fux and schottstaedt. they cull these rule from statist analysi of 

jazz solos, book and articl describ the mental process of improvisation, and 

"some intuit ideas." they judge, however, that the program "lack intention," and 

"shed littl or no light on the work of the composit mind." In general, they 

claim that ga' s do not develop large-scal music structure. 

then there be learn systems. A compos do not work in a vacuum, and 

most musician will say that listen close to music be a prerequisit for compos 

well. emi can also be consid a learn system, a it extract rule and pattern from 

other works. the most popular varieti of learn system be artifici neural network 

(ann's), which can take a give set of exampl and gener from them, present 

similar output. neural net playa special role in ai, and I will come back to them later. 

the way cope explain emi to me, it doesn't fit neatli into ani of these strategies. cope 

and I be sit in hi offic in santa cruz on a raini monday afternoon in december. 

book and box clutter hi oddli dark office. On hi desk sit a macintosh-emi' 

primari embodiment-and by the door be the special midi-control player piano that 

produc much of the work on cope' cd's. cope be tall, slender, have a close crop 

beard, and eager, deep set eyes. he' a young 62. In speaking, he occasion descend 

into hushed, dramat tones. 



21 

one of it tool be call an "associ net," which cope say be a hybrid 

between a neural net and a rule-bas system. It us "induct association," which be 

"the abil to associ thing that do not immedi seem associatable." He say thi 

be how human compos and how we work creatively. cope compar it to how he lay 

awak at night compar dissimilar idea out of boredom and insomnia. "that' how I 

creat emi, that' how I do a lot of my work, by shove things, in particular field of 

studi that I have no busi be in or look at, togeth to see what happens." 

usual noth happens, but onc in a while he strike gold. I ask him if the 

associ net be the best strategi for AI music composition, perhap an obviou 

question. "yeah, or I wouldn't be do it. I don't want to sound arrog and say mine 

be good than they are, but for me, yes, without question." 

other creativ activ subject to algorithm 

music be not the onli field in which peopl have tackl creativ with algorithms. In the 

1980' psychologist herbert simon and collabor from carnegi mellon univers 

begin gener a seri of program for scientif discovery, name after scientist who 

have make signific scientif discoveries: bacon, black, glauber, stahl, and 

dalton. given a set of data on chemic or physic properties, and a set of heurist 

(rule of thumb or gener guidelines) for find pattern in the data, the program look 

to establish principl in the style of boyle' law or kepler' law. for example, 

glauber "discovered" that everi salt come from a reaction between an alkali and an 

acid. one of the more success program be dendral, which would predict 

properti of a molecul by look at a record of the fragment into which it could be 

broken. thi be a classic knowledge-bas or rule-bas system-it depend complet 

on a set of chemic law give to it by the programmers- but it successor, meta- 

dendral, could actual find new strategi for search through the data. here be a 

jump from boden' combin creativ to explor creativity. meta- 

dendral contribut to discoveri that be not previous know by it users, and 

be even give someth harold cohen would never have give it: a bylin in a 



publish scientif paper. for the most part, however, these program have have more 

use in histori of scienc than current cutting-edg research 

22 

In the late 1970' s, comput scientist doug lenat develop a program he name 

am, autom mathematician. lenat fed the program 115 rule of set theori and 243 

heurist for combining, selecting, and expand upon the rules. AM rediscov lot 

of know materi (such a prime number a an "interesting" set of numbers.) lenat 

then develop eurisko, a version of AM with metaheuristics, or heurist for 

transform it own heuristics. eurisko discov a design for a comput chip that 

won a patent, but the program have few applic becaus it domain be so specific. 

kim binsted, a comput scientist at soni in tokyo, develop a program she 

name jape (joke analysi and product engine) for write puns. base upon 

reaction from 120 children, judg success includ "what do you call a breakfast 

food murderer? A cereal killer," and failur includ "what do you get when you cross a 

person and a thing? A person thing." (when binst retold the latter pun at a confer 

with co-panelist marvin minsky, dougla hofstadter, and steve martin, martin 

immedi quipped, "I think mani of u have date those people.") 

humor be surprisingli rule-based. In a recent issu of the magazin maxim, the 

"how to" section includ a lesson on how to "crack wise," in consult with the 

comic relic rodney dangerfield. here' an example, offer by dangerfield: "I go to 

see my doctor, dr. vinni boombatz. I told him, 'doc, I broke my arm in two places.' 

He told me to keep out of those places." here' the algorithm that' offered: "familiar 

situat + funny-sound monik + misdirect that flip audienc expect = 
hilarity." make sense. 

By far the most well know applic of AI to the visual art be a program 

design by harold cohen. cohen studi paint in london and in 1968 join the 

visual art depart of the slade school of fine arts. hi work be display 

internationally, and he have regular exhibit in london and new york. In 1971 he 

come to the artifici intellig laboratori at stanford for two years, and then begin 

work at UC san diego on hi program, aaron. origin it syntax and vocabulari 

be slim. It produc interest but abstract collect of line and objects. As cohen 

extend the algorithms, he instruct aaron on how to draw tree and human figures. 



23 

aaron go through a phase of jungl scenes, then acrobat balanc on balls, and 

now more express portraits. It current incorpor three spatial dimens into it 

model of humans, and color the pictur itself. aaron' work have be put on 

display around the world, indud at the tate modern in london. sever year ago 

cohen go on tour with cope, discuss their respect programs. cohen argues, 

however, that aaron be not creative, and he sign hi own name at the bottom of 

aaron' works. 

accord to cohen, there be at least four criterion for creativity. first, you must 

have knowledge. you cannot creat if you have noth to work with. second, a creativ 

perform must display emergence; someth unexpect must come from the 

performance. the process must be complex enough so that you be surpris by what 

you produce. third, to be creative, you must have awar of what have emerged. 

emerg of a new idea or properti mean noth if you have no awar of it. (he 

note that awar do not alway mean consciou awareness; an artist will sometim 

intern observ without be consciou of them.) finally, and most 

importantly, you must be abl to chang your behavior base upon what you learn. you 

must have a "capac for continu self-modification." these four criterion can be 

compar to the five stage of creativ suggest by wall a and others. the collect 

of knowledg form an essenti element of preparation. emerg design the 

transit from incub to illumination. awar suggest the combin of 

illumin and verification. and continu self-modul requir some amount of 

elaboration. 

aaron have no problem with the first of cohen' criteria; cohen have alreadi 

fill it with knowledg about drawing, coloring, paint mixing, and the structur of the 

human body. aaron can also display emergence; cohen cannot predict what aaron 

will do with the mani rule he have give the program. aaron, however, make no note 

of the new thing that emerge. (technically, it could, but onli if cohen program it to 

look for these emerg properties, which would make them not so surprising. He call 

thi a catch-22.) and without awar for emerg properties, aaron have no hope 

of chang it behavior base upon experience. when aaron gain a new capabl 

or step up a level in it performance, thi be alway due to a program intervent 



24 

by cohen. (moreover, aaron do not store it work in memori after paint them, 

and cannot even rememb a paint onc it be finished.) 

In the end, aaron cannot reflect on it past work or develop it skill on it 

own. cohen write that, "a the author of a program capabl of gener a quarter- 

million original, museum qualiti imag everi year into perpetuity, I will award myself 

an A for effort, but no cigar. I don't regard aaron a be creative; and I won't, until I 

see the program do thing it couldn't have do a a direct result of what I have put into 

it. " 

neural network 

none of the system we'v look at realli seem to provid a satisfi model for 

human creativity. sure, we use rule sometimes, but usual onli a a guidelin to 

narrow our search space. much of human creativ seem to come from the fuzzi 

realm constrain within the rules. for example, dangerfield' algorithm for crack 

wise requir think of a goofi name, but it say noth about how to do so, or about 

how to misdirect the audience' expectations. similarly, the creativ templat for 

gener advertis be fairli success when use by the computer, but they 

be even more success when flesh out by fuzzi human thinking. 

human learn from exampl and mistakes, not just by extract abstract rule 

from them. and when idea come to u in dreams, they emerg from a sea of seemingli 

random activity. surprisingly, mani of these aspect of human thought be reproduc in 

one area of ai: artifici neural network (ann's.) 

ann's, a they be describ in cognit science, comput science, and 

engineering, be not meant to reproduc exactli the messi network of neuron insid the 

human head. also label "connectionist models," artifici neural network deriv their 

name from the real thing becaus they share sever characteristics, includ parallel 

processing, distribut memory, and emerg behavior, a well a the superfici 

architectur of "neurons" network together. 

the brain function a a collect of individu neurons, each neuron act a a 

comput devic receiv input from hundr or thousand of other neuron and 



25 

then send output to hundr or thousand of neurons. sever factor affect the 

natur and strength of the messag travel between individu neurons. over time, the 

physic structur and chemic behavior of these neuron can evol ve, base upon their 

interact with other neurons. learn and memori take their effect through the 

perman modif of neuron and the architectur of network of neurons. No 

singl neuron hold execut control over the others; rather overal behavior emerg 

from the collect pattern of their individu interactions. 

ann' share thi fundament design. abstractly, ann' hold mani individu 

units, or nodes, which take input(s) and send output(s). connect link these nodes, 

and each connect hold a certain "weight," usual a number between -1 and 1, 

depend on how strongli one node affect anoth and whether the effect be excitatori 

or inhibitory. wherea modern comput act through a seri of serial process one 

after the other (use set of rule with logic function like and and OR and not, or 

IF and then), mani neuron can fire at the same time, and inform also travel 

through mani connect in a neural net simultaneously. 

the rel simplic of the individu node and connect impli that 

memori be distribut amongst the entir network; becaus each node or link basic 

hold a singl number, they must cooper to hold more complex piec of information. 

(actually, real neuron be quit complex, and inter-neur synapt connect involv 

mani subtl factors, but a singl neuron be not complex enough to store, say, the concept 

of a car.) neural network "learn" through the gradual modif of the weight 

control these connections. input to the network may consist of a set of valu give 

to a set of nodes, each share a piec of the input. the node modifi and output these 

messages, and onc the piec of inform pa through the network, output neuron 

spit out individu outputs, and these individu output will collect encod an 

output associ with the network' origin input. thu the memori insid the network 

direct thi output depend subtli upon each of the individu node and connect 

weights. thi contrast the idea of a "grandma cell" model of mental representation, 

where a singl neuron may discret encod the concept of one' grandmother. 

distribut memori lead to emergence: in a complex system (such a a neural 

net), one can understand the behavior of each element complet yet have no idea what 



26 

the behavior of the overal system will be. with no singl element hold execut 

control over all the others, "intelligent" behavior emerg from the system, usual in an 

unpredict manner. the behavior of these associ engin resembl the human 

creativ process. 

anoth aspect of neural net must be stressed; they can find pattern where even 

the programm see none. In mani AI systems, you have to extract pattern and rule 

and explicitli program them into the machine. for some situat thi procedur be not 

practical. If you want a program that can recogn pictur of familiar faces, you 

wouldn't want to have to describ the face use rules. that' not how we think. A 

collect of subtl and correl featur combin and the recognit emerges: that' 

mom! thi be how neural net work. you can simpli feed name and face into the 

machine, and it will find the pattern for itself. 

although ann' can show sophisticated, human-lik behavior, they do not 

approach the complex of the brain. while a typic ann may have sever or sever 

dozen simpl nodes, the brain have about 100 billion complex neurons. while each 

artifici node may have simpl connect to sever other nodes, each real neuron 

connect to ten thousand other via intric synapses. mani peopl call the human brain 

the most complic know object in the universe. We will never be abl to replic 

everi atom of it use one and zero insid a computer. 

surf the web look for creativ applic of neural lets, I come across the 

websit for imagin engines, a one-man busi oper by an engin name 

stephen thaler. thaler have design and patent the creativ engin neural network 

paradigm. he' purportedli design the system to resembl human consciousness; there 

be a stream-of-thought network produc idea that get filter by a critic network. He 

give a lot of credit to what he call the "virtual input effect" for gener new 

respons and not simpli one it have learned. it trick be that "noise" (random fluctuat 

in connect weights) be add to the system, the equival of intern imageri in 

human with their eye closed. thi variat can produc new solut that be not 

simpli combin of previous view examples. too littl nois in a car design 

process and you get bore cars, too much and you get "picasso cars." onc variat 

be produced, the filter layer tune to hi exampl of good and bad design select the 



27 

most promis variations. thaler' also use it for music composition. He enter 

sever 10-note chunk from popular songs, and it give him 11,000 new themes. He go 

and get them all copyrighted. "that make me technic the most prolif songwrit of 

all time." (almost. cope estim that emi' spit out about 15,000 complet work 

over the last 20 years.) 

thaler have have some success with industri applications. By offer a creativ 

engin an assort of ultrahard materials, it suggest new molecul that have not 

be tri before. but one be natur skeptic about thaler' more grandios claim 

about hi engine' potential. In an edit of nanomagazin from 2002, thaler says, 

"after show the net human-origin literatur and randomli tickl the net' 

synapses, it produc new and meaning literature." On hi websit he list thing that 

the CM can do now, such a "gener characters, plots, and themes,' and thing it will 

"inevitably" do in the future, such a "autonom gener full script and plays." 

human creativ 

the music emi compos sound human, but do it compos the way a human 

composes? cope argu that it does. consid signatures, the speac system, and 

recombinancy. I can imagin a signatur stick in someone' head and emerg 

occasion in variou forms. the speac grammar system, however, seem a bit 

formal for a human to use. In compos a piece, do musician realli calcul the 

tension of chords, label them statement or antecedents, and structur them into a 

hierarchy? "I think you do it intuitively," cope tell me. without know ani explicit 

music syntax or have music training, peopl can agre on a label. Or if you playa 

melodi and leav off the last note, anyon will know that you didn't end with a 

consequent. what about recombinancy? peopl don't chop up other works, their own or 

anyon else's, and rearrang them, do they? As hofstadt write me in an email, "to be 

sure, I think emi have produc some remark piec of music (a well a some 

incred piti ones), but I don't think that it constitut in ani sens a model of human 

creativity. In other words, I don't believ that david cope be right in claim that human 



composit take place in somewhat the way that emi put piec togeth -- i.e., by 

'recombination' of old material. that seem to me to be veri wrong." 

28 

sit in cope offic in santa cruz, 1 relay hofstadter' argument about recombination. 

cope' response? 

"I disagre completely. doug and 1 disagre on a lot of things. 1 mean 1 love 

doug, he' the brightest man 1 know in the world, but there' a number of thing we 

don't agre on." In chapter four of cope' book-in-progress, he look at about 50 music 

phrase from classic music histori and show that they be not original, "how they 

be piecem or recombin from other piec of music." cope also write a piec 

of softwar call sorcerer, a sort of invers of emi. with emi you suppli a databas of 

music and it give you a new piece. you give sorcer a databas and a target piece, and 

it will point out the sourc in the databas of anyth the target piec have take from it. 

"it' amaz what it' found. some of the most impress supposedli origin 

piec of music can be easili proven to be part of variou piec that compos heard, 

and in some case explicity. when the right of spring hit the stage in pari the first time 

it brought a riot it be so differ and unusual. It start with a high bassoon part, which 

for mani year be consid to be incred original. [here cope sing it for me.] it' 

a lithuanian folk song. when it be point out to stravinski that not onli be it a 

lithuanian folk song, but it be one of the song in the book that hi teacher nikolay 

rimsky-korsakov give him, stravinski say 'ok ok ok, but it' the onli one.'" after 

more exploration, it be discov that onli a few measur late stravinski have 

repeat anoth folksong from the same songbook. 

"doug be veri romant when it come to classic music, and he like to think of 

these compos a be original. 1 like to think of them a be good, but 1 don't think 

of them a be origin at all. they belong to thi vast context, and in fact to me if 

music have a meaning, it' in allus to other pieces." 

I ask peter child and john harbison to give me some insight into their own 

composit processes. child say that he usual start with some specif germin 

idea. It could be a "music figur or gestur or motif." It could be a harmony, a rhythm. 



29 

"nine time out of ten it' someth specific, it' all of those thing together, a concret 

section of music that strike me a be suggest or pregnant with possibility." the 

idea might be improvis or imagin or even a product of analyt cogitation. 

"subsequ to the idea be a concept of how the idea be place or liter com-posed." 

I ask him if invent requir break rules, and how he justifi break a rule. 

"compos don't think of themselv a break rules. they think of themselv a 

invent rules. I bet that' true of almost all compos .... when we'r realli write 

at our peak and realli tri to do someth origin and fresh and except then I 

would say all concern for rule go complet into the background, and we have to kind 

of jump in the deep end and look for way to make the connect ... the norm for me at 

the time of compos be that the idea come spontan and in that sens I don't 

know where they come from." 

child and harbison both point out the import of improvisation. harbison 

tell me, "improvis be the test of certain kind of ideas. I think it play a veri veri 

import role." later: "I get materi and tri to find out where they will go. I tri to 

recogn what they might be." 

becaus human compos have difficulti understand how and whi they get their 

ideas, it' tough to say whether emi actual resembl the human composit 

process. So I decid to visit jeann bamberger, a professor of music theori and music 

cognit at mit and author of the recent book develop music intuitions. 

bamberg be familiar with emi: "I think there probabl be compos who compos 

veri much like david cope' program. but they aren't usual the compos who one be 

move by or astound by or impress with." 

In the 80' s, bamberg develop music logo, a simpl program languag 

student could use to write composit procedures. they would analyz vivaldi and 

tri to encod the melod and rhythmic structur in set of logo procedures. one student 

claim that he have develop "vivaldi' intuit toolkit." bamberg describ some 

of the procedur that vivaldi use and demonstr them on a piano. she play a note 

and then a "fill-down," play all of the note in a certain region under that note. she 



30 

then repeat thi pattern high and then low on the keyboard. I ask her if vivaldi be 

easi to analyze. 

"yes, becaus it' full of these templates. however, there too if you compar 

some of vivaldi' contemporari with him you discov if you listen care and know 

what you'r listen for that vivaldi be do much more than what I just described. the 

way in which he juxtapos these pattern areas, the kind of thing that be go on in 

the juxtaposit be where all the geniu come from. and lesser compos don't have 

it. " 

In the librari I come across a volum titl understand music with ai. the 

introduct consist of a 1990 interview between marvin minsky, the father of modem 

ai, and otto laske, the father of a field he call cognit musicology. A comput 

scientist and composer, lask now life outsid boston, so I contact him and set up an 

interview. the starbuck where we meet be too crowd so he drive me to hi home in 

medford. while there, I notic two frame draw on the wall of hi studio that 

resembl aaron' earli work. the pictur be sign "harold cohen 1980." though 

he have never program an algorithm composit system, lask us algorithm 

for hi own work. He doesn't see the comput move beyond the role of a sidekick, 

though. 

"what I find intellectu most attractive, most fascin be the way that a 

compos work on the basi of reflect upon previous do work. In other words, 

there' a metalevel to composit where we do not just compos by go on from bar to 

bar or minut to minut or second to second but reflect about what we have done, 

either just do or do some time ago, all of that be fold into the process a it 

continues." despit the import of self-awar lask reiter cohen' critic 

of algorithm creativity. "we don't have good way of comput simul 

reflection. and reflection, and thu history, of a process be a veri veri crucial part of ani 

expert composing." 

I suppos to a certain extent we could simul reflect computationally. If a 

comput store previou "experiences" (compositions) in it memori we can program it 

to sort through thi inform and draw out new patterns, which be essenti what emi 

does, but thi type of reflect be superficial. the comput cannot extract ani pattern 



31 

we have not program it to look for. human have the flexibl of pick up new 

way to see the world a we progress through life. not onli do we think about our 

experiences, we also think about how we think about our experiences. (we also think 

about how we think about how we think about ... etc. i'v heard conscious defin a 

a feedback loop.) I take laske' "reflection" to mean at least a second-ord analysis, in 

which one' pattern-search techniqu be themselv analyz a the compos 

progress though hi work. perhap thi be boden' "transform creativity," in 

which a conceptu space be not simpli explor but be actual transform by alter 

it defin borders. one can argu what count a transformation, a conceptu space, a 

border, etc. but it sound like lask be say that T -creativ requir reflection, and thi 

set it outsid the capabl of an algorithm. 

compos aren't alone, I find, in their blind to the intricaci of the creativ 

process. In hi new scientist article, lightman recount that dure hi breakthrough he 

be abl to rethink the problem, but he' not sure exactli how. "like a timid forest 

animal, [creativity] quickli dart behind a tree when you stare at it." 

calcul 

despit child' emphasi on spontan in the composit process, he say that when 

he reflect back on hi composit decis he can alway justifi them. "when the 

piec be do we might go back and say 'oh ye I see now that what I be realli do 

here was, you know I be connect that A flat in measur 33 on the right hand with thi 

A flat in measur 56 on the left hand, through a pattern of intervals, you know, everi 

other measure." evidently, in the heat of the moment, compos don't think they'r 

follow rules, but they may look back and find that they have. 

child' comments, togeth with cope' earli comments, rais the question: Is 

creativ just anoth form of calculation, one that happen beneath the surface? I 

rememb a metaphor about a chain where the end be visible, but the connect link 

be submerg under water. I tell cope about how child often recogn logic of 

inspir afterwards. but, I argue, if you can find a logic explan for someth 



that previous be consid inspiration, I think in most people' mind it would 

reduc the amount of creativ in that achievement. 

32 

In fact, cope tell me that when he tri to teach certain aspect of music theori to 

hi students, nearli all of them get "veri angry." "we'r demystifi someth that 

they'v alway want to stay a mysteri and someth they thought couldn't be that 

simpl and straightforward. and it take a while to convinc them that in the end they'll 

be reward by thi knowledge, that they'll actual get more out of the music by have 

that add information." He note the rariti of someon not scar to understand the 

ration natur of creativ composition. "peopl want to get the muse to excit them and 

to write thi thing intuit down but they don't want to know that there be some 

logic rational behind it. peter child appar do and that' great for him. that' 

good. I respect him for that." 

for all of the magic one may feel in the creativ process, it product sometim 

inspir a feel one may call paradoxical. lightman write that in hi most creativ 

moment he experi "a stun surpris join with a feel of right and 

inevitability." hi comment suggest that the particular solut to a problem may be 

unexpected, but that in retrospect it should have be expected. though novel, it fit 

tightli into an exist framework of rule or values. 

I ask child if, onc he find the logic sourc for an inspiration, he think he 

could write a rule for it and put it into a computer. 

He first note the multipl structur that need to be balanc in music: rhythm, 

phrasing, harmony, counterpoint. each be complex on it own, and their interact 

make the problem exponenti harder. "that complex of interrelationship among 

differ kind of structur be what I think is, A, veri hard to articul in word and 

therefore, B, would be veri hard to program, and I would ventur to say probabl 

imposs to program." but the problem be not simpli one of calculation. "the human 

cognit capacity, at least when it take the form of music genius, be capabl of 

produc these immens complex structur that be both engag intellectu and 

satisfi in other way too, in some human way." 

harbison feel similarly. suppos a comput be compos a bach fugu and it 

come to a point where it must decid between mani harmon and melod choices. 



33 

"the onli good one to be found be to be found essenti experientially, that is, 

weigh by some veri experienc ear." can you simul experi with statistics? 

"the choic base on statist be almost alway a bad one." So when you'r compos 

and you come to a juncture, know which way to go be base on feel and intuition? 

Is it ever possibl to explain intuit afterward use logic? "you do have certain 

procedur which appear logical. but often that logic be there just to reduc the 

possibl from the infinit disciplin you can manag ... within that small group of 

possibilities, then your ear be tri to work out which be the best one." 

chess 

Is what we call creativ just the complex of an enorm complex system? 

child suggest the need for a "human" qualiti on top of sophist calculation, but that 

suggest doesn't explain much. the issu of creativ and calcul take an 

interest turn in chess. In 1996, the world champion garri kasparov defeat ibm' 

deep blue, six game to two. the next year, deep blue beat kasparov 3.5-2.5. In 2002 

the world champion (but rat number two), vladimir kramnik, tie the new best 

comput program, deep fritz, four game to four. In februari of thi year, kasparov 

play today' strong program, deep junior, and split the six games. 

one might question whether chess realli count a a creativ activity. the 

pattern of movement be logic constructed. strategi can be defended. but then 

mayb the same go for music. music notat can be translat into numbers, so 

composit be realli just organ pattern of numbers. 

I ask one of the design of deep blue, ibm' murray campbell, for hi 

opinion. 

"there be no doubt in my mind that chess be an art, although it do of cours 

requir a certain level of expertis to appreciate. some chess game have move that be 

describ a 'brilliant' or 'beautiful'. there be a number of factor which may 

contribut to a move be brilliant. for example, a brilliant move should be unexpected. 

peopl tend to think alike, and a move that violat these preconcept be excit in 

some sense." 



34 

My interest in music composit remind him that "composition" also exist in 

chess, in two flavors: mate problem and endgam studies. In each, you be give a 

chessboard with piec specif arrang and told to checkmat or draw in N moves. 

chess composit frequent appear next to crossword puzzl in the daili paper. 

"for a problem to be consid good, it must have a uniqu solut that be in 

some way interest or beautiful. there be competit where the compos enter 

their problems, and prize be award by judg base on how pleas the problem 

be ... endgam studi can be remark beautiful, and the 'ah hah' when you figur it 

out be a wonder feeling." 

appar a good problem must satisfi both one' intellect and one' emotions. 

"what make a studi beautiful? that be hard to say exactly. sometim it be a pleas 

geometr pattern, sometim an amus move sequence, and sometim the final 

posit in the studi complet violat our preconcept of what be possibl in chess." 

He then say someth that bring to mind cohen' criterion for creativity: awar of 

the emerg property. "comput can and have compos some chess problems, but 

have veri limit abil to judg their beauti a far a I know." It sound like he' 

say that, while we may consid a chess problem compos by a comput beautiful, 

our judgment of beauti be appar differ from whatev factor the comput us 

to evalu the problem a "good." 

I contact mathia feist, design of deep fritz. he' the guy you see sit 

across from kramnik in news photo of their match. He told me that he and hi team 

interview a lot of grandmast in develop their program. they would frequent 

ask the player how they might evalu particular complex situations. "of course, if 

there' a posit with just calculation, they can explain. but these be the posit 

comput excel at; we don't need to ask there. often the best player know what to do 

but can't at all or can't easili explain their reason whi to do it. thi be where knowledge, 

intuition, creativity, and even mood come into play ... If chess be onli about 

calculation, the contest between human and comput would have be decid long 

ago." the fact that the best comput and the best human be about equal do not 

mean that they use similar methods. i'd consid thi close competit a histor 

artifact, mere the cross point in a wider chart of comput chess abil zoom up 



past human chess ability. it' mere a coincid that at the present moment the 

ration of comput close match the irration of humans. 

35 

It appear undeni that human use intuit in chess. In the case of chess, 

however, intuit may not necessarili mean creativity. intuit may be more similar to 

estimation, a in "mi intuit tell me that thi jar have more marbl in it than that jar." 

you can't calcul all of the possibl combin of moves, just a you can't count all 

the marbl in the jar from look at it, so you estimate. pattern recognit be part of 

intuit too; player can compar posit to posit they'v see before. To me, 

these method don't necessarili qualifi a creativity. quantit estim can be 

accomplish with simpl equat (a natur phenomenon like tide be predict by 

numer models,) and pattern recognit be simpli the object comparison of current 

circumst with those see before, a task achiev by the simplest artifici neural 

network. 

monti newborn, a comput scienc professor at mcgill university, be 

chairman of the acm comput chess committe from 1981-1997 and organ the 

first kasparov vs. deep blue match. I email him and told him I be struggl to 

differenti intuit from (subconscious) calculation. 

"matt, I can sympath with you. from all that I have gathered, intuit be 

one of the greatli overus word to justifi whi comput couldn't reach the level of the 

world' best chess players. intuition, a you say and in my opinion too, be noth more 

than unconsci calculation. when select a move in chess, the subconsci thought 

constitut a major part of the calculation." 

He say that in chess mani move be call creativ simpli becaus they be 

unexpected. thus, he suggest "brilliant" a a replac word for "creative." "in my 

opinion, the good chess player be good becaus they calcul good a a result of 

practic and a certain amount in 'natur talent.' their neural system be somehow good 

adapt to carri out calculations. their move look creativ becaus they see more 

than the rest of us." 

I get the same reaction from jonathan schaeffer, the design of a veri 

competit chess program and the world champion checker program. 



36 

"creativ be a qualiti that we ascrib to some form of intellig behavior, but 

be someth that we perceive, rather than can quantifi ... most of chess/check 

creativ is, in my opinion, just the result of a player with a non-standard evalu 

function. becaus it be different, it get differ results. and if they happen to be good, 

then they be (called] creative. If they happen to be bad, then they be [called] a weak 

player :)" 

the expert appear to be split, two to two, on whether chess involv creativity. I 

play chess veri infrequently, but I think chess in fact go beyond calculation. the rule 

construct play and defin success may be "hard," but your opponent' mind be 

"soft." In a game you must consid your opponent' psychology, and your opponents' 

psycholog cannot be calculated, so there be no complet object base by which to 

guid your strategy. even when you playa computer, you cannot calcul the 

psycholog of the human who design the program. thi make chess a veri human 

game. 

the more I consid estimation, the more I realiz it fuzzi on anoth 

level. In estimation, we be reach into the dark beyond logic. In reaching, we 

must design our own tools, our own extensions. design the implement for blindli 

explor thi complex terrain requir ingenu and invention. most frequently, I think, 

it involv analogy. analog to game one have see before, and analog to real life. In 

forg our own heurist for chess, or ani other complex cognit task, we draw upon 

our own experi and our own knowledg of the world. there be no discret chess 

modul in your brain, and integr the game of chess into the rest of your life requir 

make new connections. 

the mean of mean 

all of these descript of comput don't seem to get to the heart of the mysteri of 

creativity. I have a subject sens that creativ be special, but prove thi 

mathemat isn't quit satisfying. mayb it' just a special kind of algorithm, but I 

feel like there' someth else, anoth dimens to consider. thi feel lead me to the 

notion that for someon to be creative, he must understand the mean of what he 



creates. By this, I mean he must be abl to make an analogy, or a connection, between 

the creat thing and anoth thing outsid it domain. (for example, you could never 

learn chines by read an unillustr chines dictionary. everi definit of a 

chines word just us more chines words. To get a grounding, to begin to piec 

togeth meanings, you would need to start make connect between the word and 

someth outsid the domain of the dictionary, such a a picture.) thi process give 

you two differ view of the thing, and in a sens allow you to lift it from it context 

and look at if from all angl in your head. It becom three-dimensional. 

37 

So aaron can make nice paint of people, but aaron just see them a 

line and colors; aaron do not see that these pictur repres anyth other than 

what they are. In that sense, aaron do not understand the mean in the paintings, 

so I don't consid it creative. emi can compos music, but onli by manipul 

pattern of note use statistics. the melodi do not appeal to emi' emot (a it have 

none.) when I ask cope what be lack in emi' simul of human composing, 

he said, "well, there' one humong difference. My program doesn't have eye and 

ears. It still doesn't know that it' not do cookbooks. It still doesn't know that it' not 

make spaghetti when it' compos a new composition." 

but how much of real life must the comput understand? must a thing have 

emot to be creative? In the interview with otto laske, marvin minski reports: "A 

machin that be realli compet to listen to nineteenth centuri classic chamber music 

might well need some knowledge-understand of human social affairs-about 

aggress and conciliation, sorrow and joy, and family, friendship and 

strangership ... and clearly, an import aspect of 'understanding' music experi be 

the listener' experi of apprehensions, gratifications, suspense, tensions, anxieties, 

and reliefs- feel veri suggest of pain and joys, insecur and reassurances, 

dread and reveries, and so forth." 

In godel, escher, bach, hofstadt prospect that "a 'program' which could 

produc music a [chopin or bach] do would have to wander around the world on it 

own, fight it way through the maze of life and feel everi moment of it. It would 

have to understand the joy and loneli of a chilli night wind, the long for a 

cherish hand, the inaccess of a distant town, the heartbreak and regener after 



38 

a human death. It would have to have know resign and world-weariness, grief and 

despair, determin and victory, pieti and awe. In it would have have to commingl 

such opposit a hope and fear, anguish and jubilation, seren and suspense. part and 

parcel of it would have to be a sens of grace, humor, rhythm, a sens of the 

unexpected-and of cours an exquisit awar of the magic of fresh creation. 

therein, and therein only, lie the sourc of mean in music." 

cope doesn't take understand thi far. He say that he love the work of mani 

compos from mani differ cultur and time periods. even if he want to 

understand a compos a well a hofstadt suggest be necessary, it would take a 

lifetime. "what' come to me be a bunch of translat of black dot on white paper. 

you mean to understand the way those black dot go togeth I get to understand what 

they have for dinner on sunday? I mean, god [laughs] I don't think so." I relay minsky' 

opinion. "minski be state exactli what doug states, thi veri romantic view, that 

somehow incorpor in that fugu of bach' be all hi religion and hi whatever. and 

what I think, truthfully, be that that have noth to do with those black dots. We can never 

figur out what bach' relationship with god or with hi religion or with hi two wife or 

hi 18 kid and so forth was. We haven't a prayer." 

A musician name bernard greenberg have dedic hi career to the studi of 

bach-hi life, hi times, hi work. greenberg write in a cope volum that "the uniqu 

psychodynam of the jesu drama, particularli it characterist notion of glorious, 

redempt suffer and the man/god, have everyth to do with the emot rhetor 

and concomit effect of the flat and sharp and canon of bach." greenberg be perhap 

emi' top human competitor (and critic) when it come to ape bach works, and he 

feel that to understand bach' music fulli one must also understand bach' theology. 

this, you might say, give greenberg an unfair advantag over the computer. I write to 

greenberg and suggest that while feel of tension and releas come across in bach' 

music, i'm skeptic that the more complex messages, like the stori of jesus, be retained. 

He replies: 

"the world view of tradit christolog permeat bach' output. We can 

'understand' to differ level of understanding. We can understand 'wow, listen to that 

cool mediant ninth!' or understand what canva bach be tri to paint with ... 



39 

"the use of music to illustr and paint emot and stori be a old a record 

history. music be not a kind of unicod equival where da-de-dum----dum-de-dum-de- 

dummm ... mean 'I have undercook ham for dinner on thursday.' dr. .. 'thi riff mean 

"billy.'" 

"but who among the race of human do not feel sad from barber' 

'adagio,' exalt from handel' 'hallelujah' chorus, and so on? the abil to map 

human emotions, creat progress of human emotions, and direct screenplay of 

human emot be the mark of a great composer." 

for what it' worth, greenberg be inde impress by emi. In that cope 

volume, he write that emi "i the best attempt at credibl automat art I have yet seen." 

the biograph detail may not be necessari to understand the mean of music, but I 

would suggest that physic experi in the world be required. In the past 20 year a 

paradigm have emerg in cognit scienc call "embodi cognition." the idea be that 

all of our thoughts, even our most abstract concepts, be ultim grounded, through 

metaphors, in our physic interact with the world: forces, movement, spatial 

positions. In a book call philosophi in the flesh, linguist georg lakoff and 

philosoph mark johnson list mani of these "conceptu metaphors" that show up a 

languag metaphors: to understand someth be to grasp it or see it; when two thing be 

similar they be close to each other; caus act a forces; to chang state be to move from 

one locat to another; difficulti be burdens, or they caus resistance. these 

metaphor have becom transpar to u becaus that be actual how we understand the 

world. I think that describ such an emot and intellectu art a music 

composit use refer to tension and releas be more than the employ of 

languag metaphors. the physic feel of tension and releas we all experi 

while listen to music be undeniable. 

I ask bamberg if some of these basic physic mean come through in 

music. she walk over to the piano. "well thi have mean [she play a high chord] in 

relat to [she play a low chord]. but what kind of mean be that? well, you can 

make analogies, and say it' like stand on a cliff and then jump down. Or it' like 

throw a ball up and catch it, or all the thing that have to do with tension and 



resolution. close your hand tight and relax it. I think the whole bodi thing be the 

closest to [referenti meaning.]" 

40 

In hi classic book, emot and mean in music, music theorist leonard 

meyer argu for the necess of physic in music meaning. "it be not enough, for 

example, for the listen to know that in western music of the past three hundr year a 

particular sound term, the domin seventh chord, creat an expect that anoth 

particular sound term, the tonic chord, will be forthcoming. the expect must have 

the statu of an instincti ve mental and motor response, a felt urgency, befor it mean 

can be truli comprehended." 

It seem to me that embodi cognit should lead to particular univers in 

music. while we each may have differ music and cultur and biograph 

influences, we all have pretti much the same body, and we exist with the same physic 

laws. thi theori has, in fact, be tested. music theorist steve larson of the univers 

of oregon, build off the work of johnson, describ three "music forces," or 

metaphor from physic that we instinct appli to music. there be gravity: "the 

rise melod line climb higher." and magnetism: "the music be drawn to thi stabl 

note." and inertia: "the accompaniment figure, onc set in motion, . .. " larson then 

list certain pattern of note that obey these law and predict that the pattern should 

appear frequent in tonal works. He do an extens literatur search on hidden tonal 

pattern and find thi to be the case, support the idea that music mean reli on 

physic metaphor. 

thi conclus have two implications. one be that becaus music mean be 

inde base upon physic experience, comput compos suffer a fundament 

disadvantage. they can never understand music in the way a human does. the other be 

that we may be abl to simul understand in a power new way by integr 

mathemat approxim of these music forc into composit algorithms. 

these will alway remain approximations, though. the music forc and pattern 

describ by larson onli scratch the surfac of human experience. We may find more 

sophist way to model our experience, but our physic interact with the world 

be too rich and complex for u ever to complet describ them to a computer. 



41 

the algorithm self 

In the end, perhap the algorithm be just an extens of the self. lask claim thi view. 

almost all of laske' music be write on the basi of score synthes on the computer. 

"the algorithm be just a pencil. it' just a tool. that' what peopl don't understand." He 

say comput act a "alter-egos" that "can put me in new situat that I myself could 

not alway envision. the challeng of comput for me be not so much in what they 

produc but in the interact they make possibl between me and some music 

grammar that they embodied. So my interest in AI be alway not make music 

product ani quicker, or ani better, but to challeng the compos to reflect on hi own 

process. thi interact be what I cherish and even cherish today ... [comput are] 

intellectu stimul for me, they be for occas that help me pose music problem 

in a way that I wouldn't ordinarili have thought of." 

even though the comput stand apart from the programmer, it still manifest her 

own thinking. and algorithm should not seem so foreign to human think in the first 

place. lask tell me that peopl "don't consid the histori in which a person absorb 

comput a a manifest of their own person thinking." He say he' produc 

90% of hi music use algorithms. I ask him to clarifi whether he mean comput or 

mental algorithms. He say both, but he start write algorithm piec in the 60's, 

even befor he use computers. "but the two thing realli can't be separ becaus I 

have absorb the program and so now my think be like them, but it' my thinking." 

I mention that peopl realli don't like see the man behind the curtain, realiz 

that much of creativ be algorithmic. lask concurs. "they don't realiz that the man 

behind the curtain be still a mystery. that you have just take away one layer, one 

curtain, but then there be ten other behind the curtain." He feel that no matter how 

much of creativ we explain, there will alway be more that we cannot understand. 

lask also say that explain some piec of creativ with an algorithm do 

not squash creativity; it mere let u build upon thi algorithm and push creativ into 

new realms. 

"I think creativ and calcul or comput be intertwin historically. 

what at one point be intuitive, not understood, not procedur then becom 



42 

technique, and then we be at a differ level. So the distinct between creativ and 

techniqu be rel to what we know, so it' histor changeable. it' not that we 

don't need insight anymor becaus we have technique. the level at which we now work 

requir insight that befor we couldn't even think of. that' the histor process. So I 

think in that sens AI and music be open to the future." 

cope express similar sentiments. "A lot of case where peopl becom 

defens ... [are] base on a veri fals premis ... that machin be somehow separ 

from us, which be absurd. the machin be in a sens us. I make a statement in my book 

where I say that most peopl think that somehow not be abl in 1000 year to creat a 

comput program that would somehow fool u make human somehow superior. It 

make human incred inferior, that we'r not smart enough to do that. It seem to me 

that we be the one make the programs, it' not the program make us, for heaven 

sakes. 

"it' exactli like [my] argument for deep blue. and it' precis whi I be so 

happi [when deep blue beat kasparov], and whi my wife be so confus until I 

explain it to her. It be a great day for human beings, not a sad day. We make the 

programs. they be us, we be them." 

the futur of music 

cope have design an algorithm compos environ that let compos 

collabor with the comput call algorithm integr compos environ 

(alice.) while write a piece, you can ask alic to fill in a section or extend a 

theme, from one note to the whole thing, base upon what' write so far. He have also 

includ a version of thi softwar on CD with hi books. cope write in one of hi 

book that he will work with alic for the rest of hi life. alic in fact carri out one 

of the origin task he assign em!. He begin to write emi back in 1982 not to ape the 

style of famou compos but to solv hi own case of composer' block. cope hasn't 

use alic in a year becaus of some technic bugs, but he hope to get back to it 

eventually. I ask him if there' a split between compos who use algorithm aid and 

those who don't. 



43 

"do I see a split? yes. Do I see that changing? ye ... we'v alreadi get some 

algorithm tool in finale." final be the standard comput applic for music 

notation. He launch it on hi computer, then show me a menu titl composer' 

assistant. "these be all algorithm thing that be in the best, most know commerci 

applic for music. it' just a start ... I know that peopl be start to look at them, 

and it' just edg along, and the next edit of thi program, which have almost 

nowher els to go, [will extend these options] until they start ask 'do you want to see 

what thi program would do with the next measure, the next two measures, the next four 

measures?' there' just no question it' go to happen." 

how will these tool chang music? cope say that compos will shift attent 

to differ music elements. 

"architect don't pound nails. they don't lay concret in the foundat and they 

don't put tile on roofs. they design houses, and I think compos will design pieces. 

and they won't be put in a posit where they have to put all the dot on the quarter 

note and all those things. they'll be more architect-like. and I like that, that vision." 

final exam 

the ultim test for ani comput tri to replac a human be the ture test. In 1950 

the british mathematician alan ture describ a test where a human judg have a 

convers with a comput and a human, through type communication, and would 

decid which be the human. ture thought that the key to judg intellig be 

conversation, but the same idea can be appli to other field of activity. cope' game, 

in fact, be a type of ture test. comput may get good and good at play these 

games, so that a program can pa the ture test after a five-minut conversation, or a 

ten minut conversation, but eventually, I believe, we will catch on. after listen to 

enough of emi' music, a musician will probabl be abl to tell it apart from human 

composition. will comput ever be abl to play thi game indefinitely, without losing? 

what happen if they do? Do we congratul them and invit them to join the human 

race? 



44 

currently, comput simul human behavior use shortcuts. they may 

appear human on the outsid (write jokes, fugues, or poems) but they work differ 

under the hood. the facad be props, not back up by real understanding. they use 

pattern of arrang of word and note and lines. but they find these pattern use 

statist and cannot explain whi they be there. there be three main reason for this. 

first, comput work with differ hardwar than the human brain. mushi brain full 

of neuron and flat silicon wafer pack with transistor will never behav the same and 

can never run the same software. second, we human don't understand ourselv well 

enough to translat our softwar to anoth piec of hardware. third, comput be 

disembodied, and understand requir live physic in the world. the mean in 

music elud computers. perhap robot will someday approxim embodi cognition, 

but they would, again, be work with veri differ hardware. 

when I be with cope in hi office, I suggest that perhap a comput will 

never win the unconstrain ture test. He replied: 

"i'm sad if you'r right and we can't ever build a machin that could fool us. 

that sadden me a great deal, and it mean that mayb someday human be will reach 

a dead end where we can't go ani further. our mind just aren't big enough to go there. 

and I just, I just don't believ that and that' whi I keep working, becaus [and here, 

cope' voic descend into that dramatic, hush tone] I believ we can do anyth we 

set our mind to." 

cope be what those in the AI literatur call a hard AI proponent, someon who 

believ we can simul human intellig completely. he' in good company, join 

by such AI innov a marvin minski and ray kurzweil. kurzweil, author of the 

age of intellig machin and the age of spiritu machines, argu that moore' law 

dictat the surpass of human capabl by comput around the year 2030. I, 

however, be a soft AI proponent. I think particular qualiti of human intellig result 

directli from the particular physic structur of our brain and bodies. We live in an 

analog (continuous, infinit detailed) reality, but comput use digit inform 

make up of finit number of one and zeroes. imagin build a sphere out of lego. 

from a distance, it will look round, but up-clos the effect disappear and the chunki 



edg make a difference. I suspect that the analog-digit divid be a fundament 

problem we cannot avoid. 

45 

when i'm mix records, all of my life experi come to bear. At a party, I 

usual don't plan my set beforehand; I don't know more than one or two record ahead 

of time what i'm go to play. the atmosphere, the reaction from the crowd, and my 

own mood play parts. each record have a differ effect, and it' not alway clear what 

that effect will be in a give situation. the mix process be also mostli improvised. 

know my record well enough to have some idea of how they will fit together, but 

frequent i'll put togeth two record i'v never mix before. then the crossfad 

and cut and flip of switch come down to rapid decisions. I have no calculu for 

the process; thi stage be where emerg realli come into play. i'v also plan out 

set in my apartment, prepar to record them for mix cd's. here the decision-mak 

more close resembl classic composition. it' more methodical, take differ 

music factor into account. how do thi basslin overlap with that melody? Do the 

drum here work well with the choru there? I don't have to read the crowd, but I still 

have to read the records, and I have to read my own emot and my own motivations. 

thi be tell a story. and there' room for clever on sever more scales. On my 

first mix cd, mostli hous and trance, I end the set with a surprise: michael jackson' 

"beat it." somehow it fit in musically. it' not that you couldn't program a comput to 

think of this. it' that a comput could never even understand how cool "beat it" is. 



46 



quot interviews: 

peter child 
person interview, cambridge, ma, 12/19/03 

john harbison 
person interview, cambridge, ma, 12/23/03 

david cope; 
person interview, santa cruz, ca, 12/30102 
email correspond 11118/02 - 5/4103 

otto lask 
person interview, medford, ma, 1/18/03 
email correspond 12122/02 - 1130103 

jeann bamberg 
person interview, cambridge, ma, 1/21/03 

jim anderson 
email correspond 2/12/03 

murray campbel 
email correspond 1129103 - 2/9/03 

harold cohen 
email correspond 5/6/03 

mathia feist 
email correspond 1/31/03 - 2/6/03 

bernard greenberg 
email correspond 3/1103 - 5/4/03 

dougla hofstadt 
email correspond 10/18/02 - 2/16/03 

monti newborn 
email correspond 1/28/03 

jonathan schaeffer 
email correspond 1127/03 - 1130103 

stephen thaler 
email correspond 11121/02 - 1130103 

47 



book and articl quoted: 

mira balaban, kemal ebcioglu, and otto laske; understand music with AI 

jeann bamberger; develop music intuit 

margaret boden; the creativ mind 

david cope; virtual music 

jacob goldenberg, david mazursky, sorin solomon; "creativ sparks;" scienc 
285(5433): 1495-1496. 

dougla hofstadter; godel, escher, bach 

georg lakoff and mark johnson; philosophi in the flesh 

steve larson; "music forc and melod patterns;" theori and practic 1997-1998, 
volum 22-23: 55-71 

alan lightman; "the art of science;" new scientist 21128 decemb 2002: 68-71. 

leonard B. meyer; emot and mean in music 

c- "; c; 
""..._.' ~~.' l~ 

48 


00000001 
00000002 
00000003 
00000004 
00000005 
00000006 
00000007 
00000008 
00000009 
00000010 
00000011 
00000012 
00000013 
00000014 
00000015 
00000016 
00000017 
00000018 
00000019 
00000020 
00000021 
00000022 
00000023 
00000024 
00000025 
00000026 
00000027 
00000028 
00000029 
00000030 
00000031 
00000032 
00000033 
00000034 
00000035 
00000036 
00000037 
00000038 
00000039 
00000040 
00000041 
00000042 
00000043 
00000044 
00000045 
00000046 
00000047 
00000048 

