




















































biliscreen: smartphone-bas scleral jaundic monitor for liver and pancreat disord 


20 

biliscreen: smartphone-bas scleral jaundic monitor for liver 
and pancreat disord 

alexmariakakis,megana. banks, laurenphillipi, lei yu, jame taylor, and shwe- 
tak N. patel, univers of washington 

pancreat cancer have one of the bad surviv rate amongst all form of cancer becaus it symptom manifest late into 
the progress of the disease. one of those symptom be jaundice, the yellow discolor of the skin and sclera due to the 
buildup of bilirubin in the blood. jaundic be onli recogniz to the nake eye in sever stages, but a ubiquit test use 
comput vision and machin learn can detect milder form of jaundice. We propos biliscreen, a smartphon app that 
captur pictur of the eye and produc an estim of a person’ bilirubin level, even at level normal undetect by the 
human eye. We test two low-cost accessori that reduc the effect of extern lighting: (1) a 3d-print box that control the 
eyes’ exposur to light and (2) paper glass with color squar for calibration. In a 70-person clinic study, we found that 
biliscreen with the box achiev a pearson correl coeffici of 0.89 and a mean error of -0.09 ± 2.76 mg/dl in predict 
a person’ bilirubin level. As a screen tool, biliscreen identifi case of concern with a sensit of 89.7% and a specif 
of 96.8% with the box accessory. 

cc concepts: • human-cent computing→ smartphones; • appli computing→ consum health; 

addit key word and phrases: health sensing; smartphones; jaundice; bilirubin; imag process 

acm refer format: 
alex mariakakis, megan A. banks, lauren phillipi, lei yu, jame taylor, and shwetak N. patel. 2017. biliscreen: smartphone- 
base scleral jaundic monitor for liver and pancreat disorders. proc. acm interact. mob. wearabl ubiquit technol. 
1, 2, articl 20 (may 2017), 26 pages. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3090085 

1 introduct 
among all form of cancer, pancreat cancer have one of the bad surviv rate [2]. mani attribut thi statist 
to the fact that the symptom associ with pancreat cancer often go unnot until the cancer be in a late 
stage; 80-85% of patient present themselv with tumor so advanc that they cannot be remov complet 
through surgeri [5, 34]. one of the earli symptom to appear be jaundice, a yellow discolor of the skin 
and eyes. In the case of pancreat cancer, jaundic occur becaus a cancer growth obstruct the common bile 
duct, caus a buildup of bilirubin in the blood [11]. be abl to detect the veri first sign of jaundic when 
level of bilirubin be minim elev could enabl an entir new screen program for at-risk individuals. 
jaundic also manifest a a symptom for a varieti of other conditions, such a hepat and gilbert’ syndrome, 
but we be primarili motiv by the link between jaundic and pancreat cancer for the purpos of thi paper. 

thi work be support by the nation scienc foundat graduat research fellowship program and the coulter foundation. author’ 
addresses: A. mariakaki and M. A. bank and S. N. patel, comput scienc and engin department, univers of washington; L. 
phillipi and L. yu, univers of washington medic center; J. taylor, depart of pediatrics, univers of washington. 
permiss to make digit or hard copi of all or part of thi work for person or classroom use be grant without fee provid that 
copi be not make or distribut for profit or commerci advantag and that copi bear thi notic and the full citat on the first 
page. copyright for compon of thi work own by other than acm must be honored. abstract with credit be permitted. To copi 
otherwise, or republish, to post on server or to redistribut to lists, requir prior specif permiss and/or a fee. request permiss from 
permissions@acm.org. 
© 2017 associ for comput machinery. 
2474-9567/2017/5-art20 $15.00 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3090085 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3090085 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3090085 


20:2 • mariakaki et al. 

the clinic gold standard for measur bilirubin be through a blood draw call a total serum bilirubin (tsb). 
tsb be invasive, requir access to a healthcar professional, and be inconveni if do routin for screening. 
medic devic manufactur have investig non-contact altern to a tsb for bilirubin. one such devic 
be the transcutan bilirubinomet (tcb). A tcb shine a wavelength of light that be specif reflect 
by bilirubin onto the skin and measur the intens that be reflect back to the device. the comput 
underli tcb be design for newborns; their result simpli do not translat correctli for adults. part of 
the reason for thi be that normal concentr of bilirubin be much low in adult compar to newborn 
(<1.3 mg/dl vs. <15.0 mg/dl [4]). As it so happens, the sclera be more sensit than the skin to chang 
in bilirubin becaus their elastin have a high affin for bilirubin [22]. thi present an opportun for early, 
non-invas screen that have be previous unexplored. our contribut to thi space be biliscreen, a system 
that estim the extent of jaundic in a person’ eye through pictur take from the smartphon and produc 
an estim of their bilirubin level. 
To be effective, biliscreen should be sensit enough to measur the rang of bilirubin level exhibit by 

adults. ruiz et al. [31] found that jaundic be not appar to the train nake eye until roughli 3.0 mg/dl; 
however, bilirubin level great than 1.3 mg/dl warrant clinic concern. there exist a detect gap between 1.3 
and 3.0 mg/dl that be miss by clinician unless a tsb be requested, which be rare do without due cause. We 
hypothes that diagnosi can be make much earli and lead to good outcom with a system that be precis 
enough to distinguish between bilirubin level within and outsid of those bounds. 
oftentimes, the trend of a person’ bilirubin level over time be far more inform than just a singl point 

measurement. If a person’ bilirubin exce normal level for one measur but then return to normal 
levels, it could be attribut to normal variation. if, however, a person’ bilirubin show an upward trend after it 
exce normal levels, it be more like that a patholog issu be worsen their condition, such a a cancer 
obstruct around the common bile duct. trend be not onli import for diagnosis, but also for determin 
the effect of treatment. one cours of action for those affect by pancreat cancer be the insert of a 
stent in the common bile duct. the stent open the duct so that compound like bilirubin can be broken down 
again; a person’ bilirubin level should decreas thereafter. If their bilirubin continu to rise, then there be either 
issu with the stent or the treatment be ineffective. trend in bilirubin level be difficult to captur becaus 
repeat blood draw can be uncomfort and inconveni for mani people, especi those in an outpati 
setting. biliscreen take advantag of the ubiqu of smartphones, dramat reduc the effort requir to 
perform these measurements. 
biliscreen us the smartphone’ built-in camera to collect pictur of a person’ eyes. the sclera, or white 

part of the eyes, be extract from the imag use comput vision. featur describ the color of the sclera 
be then produc and analyz by a regress model to return a bilirubin estimate. sinc differ light 
condit can chang the color of the same scene, we evalu two accessori that account for the ambient 
light conditions. the first accessori be a head-worn box (fig. 1, top-left), similar to a head-mount VR display, 
that simultan block out ambient light and provid control intern light through the camera’ 
flash. the second accessori be a pair of paper glass print with color squar that facilit calibr 
(fig. 1, bottom-left). the latter accessori be reminisc of a previou project call bilicam [10] by some of the 
co-author of thi work, which us a color-calibr card to account for ambient light condit in pictur 
of newborn that be process to detect neonat jaundice. beyond their intent of assess bilirubin level by 
detect jaundic through the smartphon camera, the two project be quit different. bilicam be intend for 
newborns, who exhibit a far wider rang of normal bilirubin level than adults. becaus the sclera do not have 
a predefin shape, biliscreen also requir an addit step of segmentation. although biliscreen have tighter 
precis requirements, it benefit from the fact that the typic sclera be race-agnostic; the same cannot be say 
for skin, which vari across differ ethnicities. 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



biliscreen: smartphone-bas scleral jaundic monitor for liver and pancreat disord • 20:3 

fig. 1. biliscreen be a system that measur a person’ bilirubin level use the smartphone’ camera. We examin two 
method for color normalization: (top-left) a box similar to a head-mount VR display that control the amount of light 
that reach the eyes, and (bottom-left) paper glass that provid color squar for calibration. 

We evalu biliscreen in a 70-person preliminari studi includ individu with normal, borderline, and 
elev bilirubin levels. We found that biliscreen with the box accessory, which lead to good result than the 
glasses, estim an individual’ bilirubin level with a pearson correl coeffici of 0.89 and a mean error of 
-0.09 ± 2.76 mg/dl when compar to a tsb. biliscreen with the glass accessori lead to a pearson correl 
coeffici of 0.78 and a mean error of 0.15 ± 3.55 mg/dl. 

our contribut come in four parts: 
(1) An implement of the biliscreen system for conveni bilirubin test with two differ method 

for color calibration, 
(2) A novel sclera segment algorithm that be robust for individu with jaundice, 
(3) model that relat the color of the sclera to a measur of bilirubin in the blood, and 
(4) An evalu of biliscreen on 70 participants. 

2 relat work 
the biliscreen algorithm have two fundament components: automat segment of the sclera and model 
that map sclera color to bilirubin level. We summar the literatur relat to both compon below. We then 
provid a brief overview of other smartphon app dedic to diagnos condit through the eye. 

2.1 sclera imag 
To our knowledge, biliscreen be the first applic that automat segment the sclera for medic purposes. 
there is, however, a bodi of literatur that have propos variou method of segment the sclera for biometr 
verif and gaze estimation. for biometrics, individu be recogn through the uniqu of the blood 
vessel pattern in their sclera. for gaze estimation, research have reli on the fact that the expos area of 
sclera chang a a person make signific chang in gaze. 

the most common method for sclera segment reli strictli on color information, note that the sclera 
be normal white. zhou et al. [38] use dynam threshold in the rgb and hsv color space to creat binari 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



20:4 • mariakaki et al. 

mask that correspond to non-skin- and sclera-color pixels, respectively. after take the intersect of those 
masks, the iri and pupil be remov by use a visibl glint within the iri a a seed for an iter method 
that move radial until it reach the iris-sclera border. marcon et al. [23] train a linear discrimin analysi 
classifi on pixel color valu to distinguish between sclera and non-sclera pixels. morpholog oper and 
watersh flood be appli to form fuller candid region for the sclera, after which a classifi train on 
shape inform be use to select the region that most resembl the sclera. da et al. [8] propos a method 
that involv fuzzi k-mean cluster on the pixel color and locat to form three clusters: the skin, iris, and 
sclera. these strictli color-bas method reli on the assumpt that the sclera be bright and white, which be 
not the case for peopl with jaundice. As the sclera becom more yellow, it color can be confus with the 
color of lighter skin tones, make it difficult to train a global classifier. even if the person’ skin tone be know 
beforehand, there be the chanc that it color be too similar to the person’ sclera for it to be remov without 
spatial information. 

In a differ paper, da et al. [9] demonstr a method of sclera segment that us activ contour-bas 
segmentation. In activ contour-bas segmentation, a snake (i.e., deform spline) be initi roughli around 
an object of interest. An energi function be defin base on the presenc of lines, edges, and corner in the 
image, and the posit of the snake be iter adjust until that energi function be minimized. for sclera 
segmentation, da et al. initi snake to the left and right of the automat detect pupil. thi techniqu 
be suitabl for biliscreen in that do not depend on the color of the sclera, but the initi of the snake can 
be difficult when the geometri of the eye be not complet constrained. the locat of the sclera rel to the 
pupil depend on both the geometri of the eye and the user’ gaze direction. for instance, depend on the 
narrow of the eye and how far the user look up, the sclera may or may not appear directli under the iris. If 
the initi snake be too far out from the sclera, they may stop short at glare spot or wrinkl near the eyelid 
a they constrict. more onu could be place on the person whose pictur be be take to adjust themselv 
until their pose satisfi specif constraints, but such a procedur could lead to frustration. instead of reli 
on the locat of the pupil, eye detect algorithm [20, 35] could be use to standard a region of interest 
around the eye; however, such techniqu fail when nearbi facial featur be obstructed, a be the case with the 
biliscreen accessories. 
one more approach that have be explor for sclera segment be the use of dedic hardware. cri- 

halmeanu and ross [7] util near-infrar (nir) light to make sclera segment straightforward. they 
observ that the skin have high nir reflect than the sclera sinc the skin have less water, which make the 
separ between the sclera from pale skin more appar in nir than in rgb. the use of dedic hardwar 
in biliscreen beyond the our box or glass accessori be undesir for cost and access purposes. 
overall, these issu motiv the need for a more autom solution. the sclera segment approach 

we propos for biliscreen us two iter of the grabcut method [30]. the first iter learn the color 
characterist of the skin and remov the skin to isol the eye. the second iter isol the sclera by 
assum that they be the brightest region within the eye (not necessarili white). 

2.2 jaundic assess 
the standard for measur bilirubin in the blood be through a blood draw call a total serum bilirubin (tsb). 
the more conveni altern use in neonat clinic be a transcutan bilirubinomet (tcb). beyond 
these two methods, there be sever research who have investig bilirubin measur via the digit 
photographi of area suscept to jaundice: the skin and eyes. 

leartveravat [18] propos a complet manual system for assess jaundic in a newborn’ skin. photograph 
of the skin with a color calibr card be captur use a digit camera. onc the photo be upload to imag 
edit softwar (e.g., adob photoshop), the imag be color-calibr and convert to the cymk color space. A 
technician then manual select a pixel repres of the newborn’ skin, subtract it yellow compon 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



biliscreen: smartphone-bas scleral jaundic monitor for liver and pancreat disord • 20:5 

from it magenta component, and input that valu into a linear regress to get a bilirubin estimate. the 
bilicam system by de greef et al. [10] also analyz pictur of a newborn’ skin with a color calibr card to 
estim their bilirubin level. It differ from the work of leartveravat in that bilicam entail more complic 
model that account for skin tone. 

leung et al. [19] compar the perform that a system could achiev by analyz both the skin and the sclera 
for newborns. similar to de greef et al. and leartveravat, the author manual select region correspond to 
the skin, sclera, and a color calibr card for their analyses. with a fairli modest linear regress model, the 
author achiev far good pearson and spearman correl use the sclera (0.75 and 0.72) than use the skin 
(0.56 and 0.54). 

To the best of our knowledge, biliscreen be the first non-invas system to quantifi an adult’ bilirubin 
level. biliscreen analyz the sclera because, a leung et al. confirmed, the sclera be more sensit to chang 
in bilirubin than the skin. thi be import becaus high precis be need for adults. bilirubin level in 
healthi newborn may peak a high a 15.0 mg/dl [4], wherea bilirubin level for healthi adult be normal 
less than 1.3 mg/dl. biliscreen be also complet automated, from the segment of the glass and sclera to 
the featur extract and machin learning. finally, biliscreen benefit from the fact that healthi sclera color 
be independ of ethnicity, so less train data should be need in the long-term. 

2.3 ocular diagnost applic 
pamplona et al. have develop sever inexpens attach for smartphon to diagnos condit of the 
eye. much like an eye chart, the hardwar present stimulu to the user. rather than convers with a clinician, 
the user interact with their smartphon depend on what they see; thi be an iter procedur that go 
on until a result be reached. In netra [27], refract error be identifi by ask the user to align pattern 
project through a microlen display and pinhole. In catra [28], cataract be local by scan the eye 
with a beam of collim light and ask the user for feedback about the spread of the beam. eyemitra [17], 
be a wearabl camera, vari slightli from the other two projects. It be meant for mobil retin imaging, so 
it do not perform diagnosi on it own. the user be place within the loop of the system by be ask to 
focu on focal point show in the other eye, which in turn focu the camera on the opposit side. other have 
develop hardwar attach for ocular diagnost a well. d-eye1 be a smartphon adapt for perform 
fundoscopy. bastawr et al. [3] and giardini et al. [12] propos a number of attach for diagnos visual 
acuiti and glaucoma. finally, abdolvahabi et al. [1] discu the possibl for digit photographi to catch the 
earli onset of rare eye cancer in newborns; they found that if the common “red-eye” effect in the pupil be 
replac with a milki white color, it could indic tumor in the back of the eye. 

3 data collect 
We collect imag use the biliscreen app with both the box and glass accessori to train biliscreen’ 
model and evalu their efficacy. volunt with normal bilirubin level be recruit from the univers of 
washington. volunt with vari bilirubin level (rang from normal to elevated) be recruit from the 
univers of washington medic center. below, we elabor on the divers of the particip pool. We then 
describ our data collect procedure, includ the design of the biliscreen accessori and our procedur for 
ground truth measurements. all facet of our studi be approv by the univers of washington’ institut 
review board. 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



20:6 • mariakaki et al. 

tabl 1. particip demograph (N = 70) 

bilirubin classif - N (mean ± std) 
normal (<1.3 mg/dl) 31 (0.6 ± 0.2 mg/dl) 
borderlin (1.3-3.0 mg/dl) 14 (2.1 ± 0.5 mg/dl) 
elev (>3.0 mg/dl) 25 (9.7 ± 5.9 mg/dl) 

3.1 enrol 
our studi includ 70 volunteers. from the university, 18 be male and 13 be female. from the medic center, 
13 be male and 26 be female. tabl 1 show the distribut of the total serum bilirubin test split across the 
two differ populations. note that the precis of the tsb be 0.1 mg/dl. 

threshold classifi the concern warrant by a singl bilirubin measur can vari between clinics. for 
the purpos of biliscreen, three class be defined: normal (<1.3 mg/dl), borderlin (1.3-3.0 mg/dl), and elev 
(>3.0 mg/dl). the 1.3 mg/dl threshold be use by the univers of washington medic center a their upper 
limit for a normal tsb measurement, while the 3.0 mg/dl threshold be base on the find of ruiz et al. [31] 
concern when jaundic be most appar to clinicians. accord to these thresholds, 31 particip have a 
normal bilirubin level, 14 have a borderlin bilirubin level, and 25 have an elev bilirubin level. unsurprisingly, 
most of the univers popul have a normal bilirubin level. the lack of variat within that popul be 
expected. although the clinic upper threshold for normal bilirubin level be 1.3 mg/dl, valu near 0.6 mg/dl be 
the norm. the medic center popul provid a much wider spread of bilirubin levels, rang from normal 
to elevated. 

3.2 data collect procedur 
the data collect procedur for the biliscreen app be the same for both populations, but the method of 
recruit and collect of ground truth measur be different. the particip from the univers 
be volunt recruit from email on public mail lists. after a research staff member collect data with 
the biliscreen app (describ in the next section), they be ask to undergo a tsb within 24 hours. bilirubin 
can chang over long period of time but remain stabl within a day bar ani seriou conditions. 

the particip from the medic center be inpati suffer from liver disease. A research staff member 
select candid particip on two criteria. the first criterion be a record tsb blood test within 24 hours. 
again, thi be to ensur that the patient’ record bilirubin level match close with their level at the time 
of data collection. the second criterion reli on the model for end-stag liver diseas (meld) [36], a score 
system for assess the sever of chronic liver disease. the meld score be a summari metric that combin 
three measur of a patient’ liver condit - tsb, serum creatinine, and the intern normal ratio 
for prothrombin time (inr) - with a high score indic a high three-month mortal rate. there be no 
guarante that a patient with a high meld score have an elev bilirubin level sinc tsb be onli one compon 
of the meld score; however, a high meld usual includ an elev tsb. the origin recruit criterion 
be a minimum meld score of 14. thi threshold be late lower to 6 in order to recruit more patient 
with borderlin level (1.3-3.0 mg/dl) of bilirubin. If a patient satisfi the two recruit criteria, they be 
approach by a research staff member and told about the study. patient be enrol in the studi if and onli 
if they understood the studi and give consent. 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



biliscreen: smartphone-bas scleral jaundic monitor for liver and pancreat disord • 20:7 

fig. 2. (top) A 3D render of the biliscreen box. the smartphone’ flash lie in the horizont center of the box. the flash 
be cover with a neutral densiti filter and a diffus to make the light more comfortable. (bottom) A render of the 
biliscreen glasses. 

3.3 biliscreen accessori 
physics-bas model for color inform typic consid an object’ visibl color to be the combin 
of two components: a bodi reflect component, which describ the object’ color, and a surfac reflect 
component, which describ the incid illumin [15]. when use digit photography, color inform 
that get store in imag file be also impact by the camera sensor’ respons to differ wavelengths. for our 
study, we examin the efficaci of two differ accessori to isol the sclera’ bodi reflect compon in 
differ way (fig. 2). 
the first accessori be a 3d-print box reminisc of a googl cardboard headset2. there be no electr 

connect between the phone and the box; the phone be simpli slid into the box via a rectangular channel along 
the back. the channel at the back of the box also fix the placement of the phone rel to the participant’ face 
by center the phone’ camera and keep it at a fix distance. the box block out ambient light while 
allow the phone’ flash to provid the onli illumin onto the eyes. from pilot studies, some particip 
found the flash to be overwhelmingli bright. A neutral densiti filter and a diffus be place in front of the 
flash use a filter holder to soften the light slightly. the box use in our studi be 3d-printed, but it could be 
make with an even cheaper materi like cardboard (provid that it be sturdi enough to support the weight of 
the phone). By use the flash a the onli illumin sourc on the sclera, the surfac reflect compon be 
kept constant for all images. thi leaf the bodi reflect compon and the camera sensor’ respons a the 
onli two compon that affect the sclera’ appearance. for the sake of thi study, all imag be captur 
use the same device, hold the camera sensor’ respons constant and leav the bodi reflect compon 
a the onli variabl left. 

the second accessori (fig. 2, bottom) be a custom pair of paper glasses, reminisc of the 3D glass found at 
movi theaters. the glass have no len insid their frames. along the rim of the glass be variou color 

1https://www.d-eyecare.com/ 
2https://vr.google.com/cardboard/ 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 

https://www.d-eyecare.com/ 


20:8 • mariakaki et al. 

regions. the corner near the templ and the nose have small black squar surround by the glasses’ white 
background. these squar act a fiducials, similar to those see in QR codes. the rest of the region along the 
rim be the follow color (in no particular order): cyan, magenta, yellow, 17% gray, 33% gray, 50% gray, 67% 
gray, 83% gray, and black. the use of the color squar be inspir by color calibr target card like the 
macbeth colorcheck [29]. rather than keep the surfac reflect compon and the camera sensor’ 
respons constant, the color squar allow for all imag to be normal to the same references. the color 
along the rim of the glass be know a priori. thi mean that their bodi reflect compon be know and 
ani deviat between their appear and their true color be due to the surfac reflect compon and the 
camera sensor’ response. section 4.3 explain the calibr procedur that be use to defin a calibr matrix 
that best simul the effect of the latter two color inform components, which can late be appli to the 
sclera themselv to reveal their true bodi reflect components. 

from a usabl perspective, the glass be more conveni for the user and cheaper to manufacture. however, 
the color along the rim of the glass must alway be consistent, both across time and differ pairs. If the 
color be to fade over time, the color would becom a chang refer that could lead to inaccur 
results. although the box be bulkier, it requir be far looser. the box’ main purpos be to block out 
ambient lighting; control over the precis placement of the smartphon be conveni for aspect of the automat 
segmentation, but the box’ dimens do not requir a strict precis a the glasses’ colors. 

from a technic perspective, the color calibr procedur for the glass can incur it own inaccuracies. In 
biliscreen’ current state, though, the algorithm for the box accessori do not account for the camera sensor’ 
response. If user be to use a phone with a camera differ from that of the iphon se, we can make no 
guarante that color will appear the same between the two. section 6.1 discu way for address thi 
limitation. even though the color calibr procedur for the glass may introduc noise, it allow for ani 
devic to be use without issue. the calibr procedur captur the effect of both the surfac reflect 
compon and the camera sensor’ response. 

3.4 biliscreen applic 
all data be collect by a research staff member through a custom app on an iphon se. the imag collect 
by the app be at a resolut of 1920×1080. the research staff member ensur that particip compli with 
the procedur and note ani difficulti that particip have with the app and it accessories. 
the biliscreen app develop for our studi be design to collect data for both accessori in a similar 

manner. befor the use of either accessory, the smartphone’ flash be turn on. when use the box, the flash 
be necessari sinc it be the onli way to make the eye visibl within it. keep the flash constantli on rather 
than burst it at the time of the pictur be a consider for particip comfort sinc the stark chang in 
light can be unpleasant. when use the glasses, the flash be left on in case there be insuffici light in 
the room or the glass creat a shadow on the participant’ face. 

after the flash be turn on, the research staff member place the smartphon in the biliscreen box. A hole 
in the back of the box provid access to the screen for start and stop data collection. the app prompt 
the particip to look in four differ direct - up, left, right, and straight ahead - one at a time while take 
a pictur after each. have the particip look in differ direct expos differ part of the sclera, 
some of which may have exhibit more jaundic than others. the particip be not ask to look downward 
sinc do so cover their eye with their eyelids. onc the pictur be take insid the box, the research 
staff member remov the smartphon and held it approxim 0.5 m away from the participant’ face to take 
pictur with the glasses. thi distanc be roughli how far away we would expect particip to hold their 
smartphon if they be take a selfie. the particip look at each direct for two trial per accessory, 
yield 2 biliscreen accessori × 2 trial per accessori × 4 gaze direct per trial = 16 imag per participant. 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



biliscreen: smartphone-bas scleral jaundic monitor for liver and pancreat disord • 20:9 

4 biliscreen algorithm 

fig. 3. the algorithm pipelin for both biliscreen accessories. imag from both the box and the glass go through the same 
sclera segmentation, featur extraction, and machin learn step (with their own respect model and small paramet 
changes). imag gather with the glass must go through the extra step of glass segment and color calibration. 

fig. 3 outlin the high-level algorithm pipelin that transform a biliscreen imag to a bilirubin estimate. We 
will provid further detail in thi section on each of these steps, start with the segment of variou region 
of interest, the transform of those region into featur vectors, and final the machin learn itself. 

4.1 sclera segment 
the first step to segment the sclera from biliscreen imag be to defin region of interest where the sclera 
should be located. one way to logic identifi these region would be to use haar feature-bas cascad 
classifi [20, 35] that be use in mani applic that requir eye detection. however, off-the-shelf eye 
detector sometim fail becaus featur around the eye (e.g., eyebrows) be obstruct by the biliscreen 
box and glasses. To maintain consist across images, region of interest be defin through other method 
depend on the biliscreen accessori in use. within the biliscreen box, the region of interest be defin a 
rectangular bound box locat on the left and right half side of the box use predetermin pixel offset 
within the image. thi be possibl becaus the placement of the camera within the box be alway the same. the 
offset be defin such that the region of interest would cover variou face placement and inter-pupillari 
distances. for the biliscreen glasses, the region of interest be more precis defin a the region surround 
by the color squar (refer to section 4.2 for how those squar be identified). 
our approach to sclera segment reli on an algorithm call grabcut [30], a techniqu for separ 

a foreground object from it background; the term “foreground” and “background” do not necessarili refer 
to the perceiv foreground and background of the image, but rather a region of interest versu everyth 
els in the image. grabcut treat the pixel of an imag a node in a graph. the node be connect by edg 
that be weight accord to the pixels’ spatial and chromat similarity. node in the graph be assign 
one of four labels: definit foreground, definit background, possibl foreground, and possibl background. 
after initialization, graph cut [6, 13] be appli to re-assign node label such that the energi of the graph be 
minimized. normally, grabcut be an interact techniqu that be typic initi with a bound rectangl 
and then follow with user-drawn stroke that further clarifi the object of interest. biliscreen us grabcut 
with a similar procedure, but without human intervention. 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



20:10 • mariakaki et al. 

fig. 4. the procedur for sclera segmentation. the first iter of grabcut be initi with sever translat rectangl 
in parallel. the one that leaf a region that most resembl the eye be use a the region of interest for the second iter 
of grabcut. the second iter of grabcut us adapt threshold to select the brightest region within the eye. 

befor segmentation, bilater filter be appli to smooth local nois while maintain strong edges. for the 
first iter of segmentation, the eye be extract use grabcut with rectangl for initi (fig. 4, left). 
thi not onli limit the search space for the sclera, but also remov most of the skin around the eye, reduc 
ani effect those pixel could have on color histogram or adapt threshold late in the algorithm. the locat 
of the eye within the imag can vary, so rectangular initi at differ locat be tested. To determin 
which output be most like to onli contain the eye, the segment region from each initi be describ 
use the calcul list in tabl 2. As the second column indicates, some of the metric be meant to be 
minimized, while other be meant to be maximized. those that be meant to be minim be negat so that 
high valu alway impli that the region be more eye-like. the metric be combin use the mahalanobi 
distanc rel to all of the other segment regions. overall, thi calcul result in high distanc for 
segment region that be small, elliptical, flat, and divers in color, a well a rectangular initi that 
like do not crop out the eye. the segment region with the high distanc win out and be pass along to 
the second part of the sclera segment algorithm. 

after the first iter of grabcut be applied, the pixel that be assign to the foreground be consid to 
be part of the eye, regardless of whether they be label a “definit foreground” or “possibl foreground”. A 
second iter of grabcut be then use to extract the sclera from the eye (fig. 4, right). the second iter of 
grabcut normal requir user interaction. In biliscreen, however, the grabcut initi can be bootstrap 
automat use adapt and pre-defin thresholds. after convert the imag to the hsl color space, the 
four possibl pixel assign be initi a follows: 

• definit foreground: top 90th-percentil of L channel valu 
• definit background: bottom 50th-percentil of L channel valu 
• possibl foreground: otsu threshold [24] on L channel valu 
• possibl background: invers otsu threhsold on L channel valu 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



biliscreen: smartphone-bas scleral jaundic monitor for liver and pancreat disord • 20:11 

tabl 2. metric use to rate a result of grabcut a an eye 

name min/max descript 
area fraction min the fraction of the region’ area over the total area of the 

region of interest 
ellips area fraction max the fraction of the region’ area over the area of the 

ellips that best fit the region 
inclin min the inclin of the ellips that best fit the region 
color variat max the standard deviat of the color across the region 
variat over border min the standard deviat of the bright valu across the 

top and bottom border of the rectangl use to initi 
grabcut 

In case when a pixel satisfi multipl assignments, the strong assert be priorit (i.e., definit 
foreground over possibl foreground). these assign be base on the assumpt that the brightest region 
in the eye should be the sclera. thi assumpt fail when glare appear within the eye, which be alway the case 
with the biliscreen box and sometim the case with the biliscreen glasses. glare correspond to high valu in 
the light channel of the hsl imag (L > 230). pixel with glare be replac use inpainting, a reconstruct 
process that re-evalu those pixels’ valu via the interpol of nearbi pixels. onc grabcut be run for the 
second time, the pixel that belong to the “definit foreground” and “possibl foreground” label be selected. 
the result mask be then clean by a morpholog close oper to remov ani tini regions. 

the distanc between the smartphon and the person’ face chang depend on which biliscreen accessori 
be in use while the pictur be be taken. the smartphon be at a fix distanc of 13.5 cm from the person’ 
face when the biliscreen box be in use and at a variable, farther distanc when the biliscreen glass be in use. 
chang in distanc can have a modest effect on the light becaus the flash impart more light on the eye 
when it be closer to the face. however, thi effect be constant with the biliscreen box and be cancel out by 
the color calibr procedur for the biliscreen glasses. the distanc does, however, have a great effect on 
the paramet for segmentation. As the distanc between the smartphon and the person’ face increases, the 
effect size of the eye in the imag shrinks. the size of the rectangl use to initi the first iter of 
grabcut have fix dimens for the biliscreen box (∼600 × 200 px) and dynam dimens accord to the 
size of the frame for the biliscreen glass (∼90% of width × 60% of height). 

4.2 glass segment 
the goal of the glass segment be to identifi the border of the color squar around the rim of the 
glass and the white portion at the bridg of the nose so that their color can be use for calibration. An exampl 
of correct segment be provid in fig. 5. the process start with identifi the fiduci at the corner of the 
glasses. the fiduci be design to be square-shaped, but unless they be view straight on, they can appear 
more a quadrilaterals. black quadrilater be found by convert the imag to grayscal and filter it so 
that onli the contour with four corner and a bright valu less than 60 be kept. the small quadrilater 
correspond to the fiducials, while the other correspond to the outlin of the color squar around the rims. 
the fiduci be roughli one-fourth the size of the color squares. therefore, quadrilater that be less than 
half of the averag quadrilater area be classifi a fiducials; the other quadrilater be classifi a color 
squares. To confirm that the fiduci belong to the glass and not someth in the background, the algorithm 
check that the pixel immedi outsid of their border be white. If ani fiduci be not found becaus of 
glare or some other error, their locat be interpol or extrapol base on the locat of the discov 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



20:12 • mariakaki et al. 

fig. 5. An exampl of correct segment for the glasses. the region over the bridg of the nose be use a a white refer 
for both sides. 

fig. 6. illustr show how the posit of know fiduci or color squar can be use to (left) interpol or 
(right) extrapol the posit of miss ones. 

fiduci and the know geometri of the glasses. the left side of fig. 6 show an exampl of interpolation. when 
there be know fiduci that be along the same vertic and horizont ax a where the miss fiduci 
should be, the corner of the miss fiduci can be estim by use the intersect of those lines. the right 
side of fig. 6 show an exampl of extrapolation. If there be not enough know fiduci to use interpolation, we 
reli on the know rel dimens of the glass to estim where they would most like lie. 
the posit of the fiduci be then use to check the posit of the color squares. the fiduci be 

connect with straight line to provid guid on which the other squar should lie. ani quadrilater found 
outsid of those bound be discard a the background. the fiduci be then use to develop a one-to-on 
map between the name of the color squar (e.g., left yellow, right 33% gray) and their locat in the 
image. In the end, there should be two color squar along each side of the len and black patch at the far 
bottom corners. the locat of the larg black-bord quadrilater be compar to the expect posit 
of the color squares. If the distanc between a detect quadrilater and the expect posit of a color 
squar be less than a quarter of the expect square’ width, the quadrilater be match with the correspond 
label. there may not be enough detect black-bord quadrilater to assign a border to everi squar label. 
thi can be attribut to, among other reasons, glare from the camera or ambient light that obscur black 
outlines. like the miss fiducials, the miss color squar can be found use a combin of interpol 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



biliscreen: smartphone-bas scleral jaundic monitor for liver and pancreat disord • 20:13 

and extrapolation. after the squar around the rim of the glass be found, the white rectangl that rest on 
top of the bridg of the nose be select use a specifi offset from the rim to provid a white color reference. 

both interpol and extrapol in thi algorithm assum that the squar be linearli arrang around the 
glasses. the glass be design to make interpol and extrapol straightforward, but there be case 
when user have to bend them so that they would fit comfort on their faces. In these cases, it can be difficult to 
find fiduci and color squar when quadrilater detect have alreadi failed. that be said, the advantag 
of the biliscreen glass design be that there be squar with the same color on each side. It be prefer to 
detect the squar on the same side a the eye of interest sinc they good repres the light shone on that 
particular side, but if one of those squar cannot be found, the other side can be use a a contingency. 

4.3 glass color calibr 
By identifi the color squar of the glasses, biliscreen imag can be normal to a common reference. 
do so remov the effect of the ambient light and the camera sensor’ response, both of which can chang 
the appear of the sclera. 

the calibr procedur involv identifi the calibr matrixc that best map the color of the glasses’ 
squar observ in the imag to their actual colors. more formally, defineo a the matrix of observ color and 
T a the matrix of target colors, where each row contain an rgb vector that correspond to a color square. 
the matrix C defin the linear transform such that: 

 

tr1 tg1 tb1 
tr2 tg2 tb2 
... 

... 
... 

trk tgk tbk 

 

= 

 

or1 og1 ob1 
or2 og2 ob2 
... 

... 
... 

ork ogk obk 

 

 

c11 c12 c13 
c21 c22 c23 
c31 c32 c33 

 
(1) 

becaus imag file be gamma-encod to optim the usag of bits, gamma correct must be appli to 
the observ color from the imag so that linear oper on them be also linear. thi be do by rais the 
valu in O by a constant (γ = 2.2 for standard rgb imag files). after a calibr matrix be applied, the gamma 
correct can be revers by rais the valu of the matrix to 1/γ . 
the calibr matrix C be calcul use an iter least-squar approach detail by wolf [37]. the 

calibr matrix be first initi under the assumpt that the individu color channel be uncorrel and 
onli requir a gain adjust that would scale the mean valu of the observ channel valu to their targets: 

C = 

 

mean(tri )/mean(ori ) 0 0 
0 mean(tgi )/mean(ogi ) 0 
0 0 mean(tbi )/mean(obi ) 

 
(2) 

for each iteration, the current calibr matrix be appli to the observ color to produc calibr colors. 
the color repres by the row be convert to the cielab color space so that they can be compar to 
the target in T use the ciede2000 color error [32], the current standard for quantifi color difference. A 
new calibr matrix C be comput that reduc the sum of squar errors, and the process repeat until 
convergence. 
for biliscreen, the row of the target color matrix T be defin a the expect rgb color vector of the 

glasses’ squar accord to their specification. the row of the observ color matrixo be comput by find 
the median vector in the hsl color space of the pixel within the bound of the squar found in section 4.2 
(exclud the fiducials) and convert the vector back to rgb. for a region R with N 3-dimension colors, the 
median vector be defin as: 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



20:14 • mariakaki et al. 

vm = argmin 
vi ∈R 

N∑ 
j=1 
∥vi −vj ∥2 (3) 

the median vector be prefer over take the mean or median across the channel independ becaus it 
guarante that the result be a color that exist within the origin image; by treat the channel independently, 
the combin of valu in the three channel may not ever appear in the image. the differ between the 
two approach be typic insignific when the region be uniform (a be the case with the color squares), but 
be a precaut take nonetheless. 
the calibr procedur be repeat for both eye use the color squar closest to them. thi be do 

becaus the ambient light effect be not alway uniform; there may be a shadow or beam of light that creat 
a gradient across the face, make one side look slightli differ from the other. there can also be case when a 
color squar be wash out by glare from the smartphone’ flash. If the error between the color squar and 
the expect color be 5 unit more than the error between the correspond color squar on the opposit side 
and the expect color (color differ be unitless), the latter be used. We never encount a case when squar 
of the same color on opposit side of the face be simultan obstructed. If that be the case, however, 
that color could simpli be thrown out of the calibr procedure. 

4.4 featur extract 
jaundic be character by yellow discoloration, so the featur extract from biliscreen’ imag should 
summar the color of pixel belong to the sclera. the color of the sclera be describ use the median vector 
over the pixel that belong to the sclera for the same reason describ at the end of section 4.3. more often 
than not, the sclera contain other compon like vessel or a gradient from the eye’ curvature. In these cases, 
aggreg the color channel independ can lead to a color that be not present in the sclera. for example, if 
an otherwis pristin sclera contain mani blood vessels, take the mean of the color channel independ 
will repres the color of the sclera a a pinkish color; the median vector will repres it a white assum 
there be more white area than there be red. the median vector be also use for when sclera segment includ 
superflu pixel outsid of the sclera. assum most pixel belong to the sclera, those pixel do not factor in 
to the final sclera color. 

tabl 3. variat for featur extract 

pixel select method 
all pixel all pixel 
No glare L ≤ 220 in hsl space 
No glare or vessel L ≤ 220 and H ≥ 15 in hsl space 
No glare or eyelash 5 ≤ L ≤ 220 in hsl space 
No glare, vessels, or eyelash 5 ≤ L ≤ 220 and H ≥ 15 in hsl space 
color space 
rgb, hsl, hsv, l*a*b*, ycrcb 

there be two consider that must be consid for featur extract (tabl 3). the first be which 
pixel be consid in the calculation. the most obviou answer be to use all the pixel that surviv the sclera 
segment present in section 4.1. As mention earlier, though, not all pixel within the boundari of the 
sclera actual repres the color of the sclera. blood vessel and eyelash can add undesir complic to 
the data. the median vector be meant to allevi their effects, but a an extra precaution, biliscreen us the 5 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



biliscreen: smartphone-bas scleral jaundic monitor for liver and pancreat disord • 20:15 

differ pixel select method describ in tabl 3. the threshold for the differ method be select 
empir by examin imag with promin case of glare, vessels, and eyelashes. they be by no mean 
intend to captur all case of non-sclera pixels; in fact, they be kept conserv on purpos to ensur that 
enough pixel remain in the calculation. 
the second consider for featur extract be which color space be used. imag be save from the 

smartphon camera in the rgb color space. convert the imag to a differ color space be simpli a calcul 
across the three channel that express those number in a differ way, someth that variou machin 
learn model and featur transform techniqu can learn on their own. nevertheless, explicitli carri 
out color convers can rearrang the color data in such a way that few featur be needed. biliscreen 
comput featur for the 5 differ color space list in tabl 3. beyond featur from the variou color spaces, 
biliscreen also comput the pairwise-ratio of the three channel in rgb. the intuit behind these featur be 
that a yellow color will have low blue-to-r and blue-to-green ratios. 
biliscreen comput color represent of the sclera use everi combin of pixel select method 

and color space. each color have 3 channels, result in 5 pixel select method × (5 color space × 3 channel 
per color space + 6 rgb ratios) = 105 featur per eye. not all of the featur be use in the final model. some 
pixel select method across the same region can result in the same pixels, and some channel across color 
space repres the same inform in similar manners. automat featur select be use to select the most 
explanatori featur and elimin redund ones. the top 5% of the featur that explain the data accord 
to the mutual inform score function be use in the final models. mutual inform measur the 
depend between two random variabl [16]. We find that the featur that best explain the data come from 
look at the ratio between the green and blue channel in the rgb color space. A healthi sclera should be 
white, which produc high valu across all three color channels. blue be the opposit of yellow, so a the blue 
valu of a white color be reduced, it becom more yellow. thi mean that a high green-to-blu ratio impli a 
more jaundic sclera. 

4.5 machin learn 
separ model be develop for the two biliscreen accessori to determin which would yield the good 
accuracy. the model use random forest regress and be train through 10-fold cross-valid across 
participants. note from tabl 1 that the distribut of bilirubin level be not evenli distributed; the healthi 
particip recruit from the univers gener have similarli low valu within 0.1 mg/dl, while the patient 
from the medic center have a far wider spread. the threshold use in biliscreen split the particip such that 
the normal and elev class have roughli equal size (31 vs. 25). the borderlin class be roughli half a larg 
(14), which be to be expect give that it be hard to catch such cases. To ensur that the train set be balanc 
dure cross-validation, split be assign use stratifi sampl across the three bilirubin level classes. To be 
more specific, the typic fold for our dataset includ 3 particip with normal bilirubin levels, 1 particip 
with a borderlin bilirubin level, and 3 particip with elev bilirubin levels. 

the data collect procedur result in 2 trial per accessori × 4 gaze direct per trial = 8 imag per 
accessory. note that each imag contain 2 eyes, lead to 16 eye imag per accessory. each eye be summar 
with a featur vector that lead to it own bilirubin level prediction. for the result that be present in thi 
paper, the estim from the 8 imag be averag to produc a final bilirubin level estim that be report 
back to the user. In the future, we plan to examin method for select the best subset of imag and onli use 
them in the calculations. 

5 result 
our evalu examin biliscreen’ two major components: the segment algorithm and the sclera color- 
to-bilirubin level regression. We first examin the perform of the glasses’ and sclera segmentation. We then 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



20:16 • mariakaki et al. 

show how accur biliscreen can be, assum near-perfect segment of the glass and sclera, a well a 
how accur biliscreen be with the current segment algorithms. We conclud by frame the accuraci of 
biliscreen a a classif problem, show how like biliscreen be to make the correct diagnost decision. 

5.1 segment 
all of the imag be hand-annot by the same research for ground truth. for the imag take with 
the biliscreen box, the sclera for both eye be annotated; for the imag take with the biliscreen glasses, 
the sclera of both eyes, the color squares, and the len be annotated. the perform of biliscreen’ 
segment algorithm can be describ use precis and recall. the ground truth pixel annot by the 
research be treat a targets. precis defin the fraction of select pixel that be correct, while recal 
defin the fraction of correct pixel that be selected. A low precis with a high recal would impli that the 
algorithm select most of the pixel that belong to the target, but also includ sever pixel outsid of the target. 
A high precis with a low recal would impli that the algorithm onli select a fraction of the necessari pixels, 
but they be mostli within the target. 

5.1.1 glass segmentation. find the gener region of interest for the sclera when the box be in use be 
trivial; it be base on rough rectangl on either side of the box. for the biliscreen glasses, however, the region of 
interest be defin by the region within the glasses’ lenses. We found that the glass segment algorithm be 
abl to locat the region of interest for the sclera with a mean precis of 94.0 ± 15.0% and a mean recal of 94.4 
± 15.1% across all imag rel to the len border defin by the human annotator. recal be more import 
than precis for thi problem because, a a region of interest, it be okay for superflu pixel to be includ a 
long a those belong to the len be included. the first step of the sclera segment algorithm attempt to 
rule out pixel outsid of the eye agnost of whether they repres skin or someth else. 
the glass segment algorithm be also import for locat the color squar around the len for 

color calibration. On average, the algorithm found the squar with a mean precis of 83.5 ± 24.2% and a mean 
recal of 88.2 ± 24.1% across all images. unlik the sclera region of interest, precis be more import than 
recal for the color squar becaus superflu pixel can add nois to the calcul that summar the 
pixel color to a singl color value. nevertheless, that be the specif reason for whi the median vector be use over 
other aggreg functions. biliscreen can toler mediocr precis a long a most of the pixel belong to 
the color squares, which be true even within a standard deviat of our results. biliscreen also take advantag 
of the fact that there be a copi of each color squar on both side of the face. the expect color of the squar 
be know beforehand, so if a squar on one side appear significantli differ from the other with respect to 
the expect color, biliscreen priorit the one that be closer to expectations. 

mani of the issu that aros for the glass segment can be attribut to their deformability. the glass 
be make from a thin cardstock that could bend if the glass be not larg enough to fit on the participant’ 
head. If biliscreen cannot find a square, the algorithm fit the squar it have found to linear row and column 
and us their intersect to find the miss one. when the row and column be actual curves, line do not 
properli infer the squares’ locations. higher-ord polynomi could have be use to model the curvature, but 
most of the squar requir extrapol rather than interpolation. that be to say, the locat of the squar 
have to be infer outsid of the rang of the avail squares, so even higher-ord function would not alway 
properli locat squares. In the future, we plan on improv the design of the biliscreen glass with a stiffer 
materi and adjust stem to avoid bend in the future. 

5.1.2 sclera segmentation. As be the case for the glasses, ground truth for the sclera segment come 
from manual annotations. pixel perfect label be imposs by hand becaus of artifact like eyelash and 
blood vessel that encroach into the region. nevertheless, those artifact be handl post-hoc dure featur 
extraction, so neither the ground truth annot nor the segment algorithm be requir to handl them. 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



biliscreen: smartphone-bas scleral jaundic monitor for liver and pancreat disord • 20:17 

tabl 4. sclera segment result per eye 

precis recal 
box 74.8 ± 34.1% 56.9 ± 28.6% 
glass 74.8 ± 35.0% 43.1 ± 27.1% 

fig. 7. exampl case of biliscreen’ segment work (left) correctli and (right) incorrectli while the biliscreen box 
be in use. these imag come from individu who be not recruit for the studi in order to protect the privaci of those 
participants. 

for sclera segmentation, a high precis with a low recal be also prefer over a low precis and a high 
recall. dure the featur extract phase, the color of the individu pixel be summar into singl color 
vector that describ the entir region. have a small but correct region be like to result in a similar calcul 
outcome, but includ pixel outsid of the target region can contribut nois to the result. tabl 4 show the 
per-ey precis and recal for both biliscreen accessories. the spread of these measur can be mislead sinc 
the perform of the algorithm be roughli binary; the segment algorithm either identifi a region that 
correspond to the sclera and onli the sclera, or it complet miss and identifi anoth region, though it 
be correct more often than it be not. look deeper into the results, we find that 57.1% of the imag from the 
box be segment with ≥90% precis and 56.5% of the imag with the glass be segment with ≥90% 
precision. failur be not evenli distribut amongst all users. 
fig. 7 show success and unsuccess case of sclera segmentation. for the most part, failur can be 

attribut to mistak in the first half of the sclera segment algorithm, which us grabcut on the region of 
interest to locat the eye. In the first exampl of poor segment (third column of fig. 7), a faint shadow be cast 
onto the top-right part of the sclera sinc it curv away from the smartphone’ flash. the sclera be assum to 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



20:18 • mariakaki et al. 

be the brightest part of the image. therefore, the algorithm prefer the rectangular initi that includ the 
low half of the sclera, which be bright, and the region just below the eye, where the flash reflect off of the skin 
and back to the camera. In the second exampl of poor segment (fourth column of fig. 7), the sclera have a 
natur darker tint. again, the flash produc a reflect under the eye, so the algorithm complet fail to 
select ani part of it. 

the dataset includ some user who squint or blink dure the study. No attempt be make to manual 
curat images, and there be usual still enough expos sclera so that a human observ could bare pick out 
the correct region. nevertheless, we plan on implement qualiti check in a futur version of the biliscreen 
app to handl such cases. for the sclera segment with the glasses, error can also be attribut to incorrect 
region of interest from the segment of the glass themselves. If biliscreen could not the properli locat 
the glasses, then the algorithm make it best guess, which can hinder late part of the pipeline. thi be anoth 
qualiti check that we believ will be necessari in the next version of the biliscreen app. 

5.2 biliscreen a a measur tool 
fig. 8 show the biliscreen’ optim perform for estim a person’ bilirubin level when the exact 
boundari of the sclera be know a priori. Of course, thi claim assum that the color-calibr procedur for 
the glass and the featur extract for both accessori properli captur the inform need to properli 
describ the color of the sclera. although there be like aspect of improv in these regards, we suspect 
that automat segment be the larg contributor of error sinc all calcul thereaft be depend on 
it results. 

the result be present in two differ arrangements. On the left, fig. 8 show the correl of biliscreen’ 
predict with the ground truth measur gather from tsbs. the point be show on a log-scal for 
clariti sinc the distribut be bia toward low values. the dot line on the correl plot indic the 
1.3 mg/dl and 3.0 mg/dl threshold that separ the three group of measurements.with the optim segmentation, 
the pearson correl coeffici between biliscreen’ predict and ground truth be 0.86 with the box and 
0.83 with the glasses. On the right, fig. 8 show the bland-altman plot of the same measurements. again, the 
x-axi show the ground truth measur use a log-scal for clarity. with the box, biliscreen estim the 
user’ bilirubin level with a mean error of -0.17 ± 2.81 mg/dl. with the glasses, biliscreen estim the user’ 
bilirubin level with a mean error of -0.08 ± 3.10 mg/dl. 
the optim model in their current state be more accur for low level (<1.3 mg/dl) than they be for 

high level (>3.0 mg/dl). thi can be attribut to the underli distribut of bilirubin measur for 
our participants’. two particip return a tsb valu great than 20 mg/dl, far beyond the threshold between 
borderlin and elev values. sinc these particip be not thoroughli repres in our dataset, the 
optim model underestim their bilirubin level to fall more in line with the rest of the distribution. In general, 
high tsb valu lead to larg predict error for thi veri reason. compar the box and glass accessories, 
the box yield good results. the box elimin the effect of ambient light on the appear of the sclera. 
the glass requir the extra step of color calibration, which introduc it own error into the pipeline. 

the result show in fig. 9 be present in the same manner a those in fig. 8, but be calcul use 
biliscreen’ automat segment algorithm for the sclera and glasses. We anticip that biliscreen’ overal 
perform would degrad with the use of imperfect segmentation. regard the sclera segmentation, extra 
pixel almost alway belong to the skin surround the eye. skin often appear more yellow than the typic 
white of the sclera, so signific patch of skin can improperli lead to overestimation. the median color vector 
be use dure featur extract to counteract such behavior, but it be not suffici for case when the major 
of the extract region belong to the skin. the predict result use biliscreen’ automat segment 
algorithm confirm our hypothesis, particularli for the glasses. the pearson correl coeffici for pictur 
take with the glass drop to 0.78, and the mean error of that model widen to 0.15 ± 3.55 mg/dl. To our surprise, 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



biliscreen: smartphone-bas scleral jaundic monitor for liver and pancreat disord • 20:19 

fig. 8. the (left) correl and (right) bland-altman plot for biliscreen’ bilirubin measur with the (top) box and 
(bottom) glass use the optim sclera and glass segmentation. note that the ax of the correl plot be both in 
log-scale, a be the x-axi of the bland-altman plot. 

the pearson correl coeffici for the box rise to 0.89, and the mean error improv to -0.09 ± 2.76 mg/dl. A 
care comparison of fig. 8 against fig. 9 reveal whi thi be the case. when the optim segment be use 
to extract features, the model underestim high tsb values. becaus the addit of skin pixel can lead to 
overestimation, the underestim be revert and those predict be improved. the model still overestim 
all users, includ those with normal and borderlin bilirubin levels, but the improv on the elev level 
outweigh the small error that be incur for those low levels. 

the result present up until thi point use all 8 imag for each accessory, come from the 4 gaze direct 
and the 2 trials. ask the user to look in differ direct provid differ view of the sclera, some of 
which may exhibit more jaundic than others. although these pictur take less than a minut to collect in total, 
we recogn that request user for 8 imag can be burdensome. use the optim segment results, we 
find that there be littl disadvantag to use the imag from a singl gaze direction; the pearson correl 
coeffici for the box and glass accessori vari by no more than 0.05 for ani give direction. 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



20:20 • mariakaki et al. 

fig. 9. the (left) correl and (right) bland-altman plot for biliscreen’ bilirubin measur with the (top) box and 
(bottom) glass use biliscreen’ sclera and glass segment algorithms. note that the ax of the correl plot 
be both in log-scale, a be the x-axi of the bland-altman plot. 

tabl 5 present the pearson correl coeffici and error for biliscreen’ bilirubin measur with the 
box and glass accessori use the system’ segment algorithm. far more variat can be see use the 
automat segmentation, particularli when use the glass and look straight ahead. thi could be becaus 
when the person look straight ahead, the onli part of the sclera that be expos be thin region near the 
frame of the glasses. these region be more like to be cover in a shadow sinc they curv away from the 
camera and into the eye socket. the shadow not onli affect segmentation, but also the color that be convey to 
the camera. beyond thi behavior, we do not believ there be ani signific trend across differ gaze directions. 
incorpor more imag into the final calcul allow biliscreen to good toler an singl imag with 
incorrect segmentation. sometimes, the result improv becaus incorrectli segment imag be remov 
from the final calculation. other times, the result worsen becaus those same imag be the onli one 
avail for final calculation. 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



biliscreen: smartphone-bas scleral jaundic monitor for liver and pancreat disord • 20:21 

tabl 5. biliscreen measur result across differ subset of imag 

box - pearson correl coefficient, mean error ± std error 
all imag 0.89, -0.09 ± 2.76 mg/dl 
look up 0.84, -0.06 ± 3.03 mg/dl 
look left 0.85, -0.15 ± 2.89 mg/dl 
look right 0.82, -0.13 ± 3.21 mg/dl 
look straight ahead 0.87, -0.05 ± 2.78 mg/dl 
glass - pearson correl coefficient, mean error ± std error 
all imag 0.78, 0.15 ± 3.55 mg/dl 
look up 0.72, 0.06 ± 3.18 mg/dl 
look left 0.82, -0.06 ± 3.22 mg/dl 
look right 0.83, -0.31 ± 3.09 mg/dl 
look straight ahead 0.51, 0.28 ± 4.72 mg/dl 

fig. 10. roc curv show biliscreen’ efficaci a a screen tool use the (left) box and (right) glass use the 
optim sclera and glass segmentation. for the purpos of thi analysis, normal bilirubin level be consid neg 
cases, while borderlin and elev level be consid posit cases. 

5.3 biliscreen a a classifi 
the previou analysi have show the accuraci with which biliscreen can estim a person’ bilirubin level. 
accuraci be alway important, especi for captur trend in the data. nevertheless, the averag user without 
a medic background be like to be more concern about how their estim bilirubin level be classifi rather 
than the valu itself. In other words, if biliscreen be to suggest that user with a borderlin or elev bilirubin 
level refer to a doctor for further tests, they would want assur about biliscreen’ sensit (true posit 
rate) and specif (true neg rate). from the perspect of the user, we group borderlin and elev 
bilirubin level a posit case when the user would be refer to a doctor and normal bilirubin level a 
neg cases. 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



20:22 • mariakaki et al. 

fig. 11. roc curv show biliscreen’ efficaci a a screen tool use the (left) box and (right) glass use biliscreen’ 
sclera and glass segment algorithm. for the purpos of thi analysis, normal bilirubin level be consid neg 
cases, while borderlin and elev level be consid posit cases. 

fig. 10 show the roc curv for biliscreen a a classifi use the optim sclera and glass segmentation. the 
area under the roc curv (auc) be 0.99 for the box and 0.98 for the glasses. use the pre-determin threshold 
of 1.3 mg/dl use by the medic center, biliscreen with the box achiev a sensit of 95.7% and a specif of 
97.4%. the threshold that maxim the accuraci be onli 0.1 mg/dl higher, increas the sensit to 97.4% 
without a chang to the specificity. sinc the biliscreen model with the glass be more prone to overestim 
low bilirubin levels, it achiev a sensit of 100% and a specif of onli 71.4%. the threshold that optim 
accuraci lead to a sensit of 92.8% and a specif of 94.3%. 
fig. 11 show the same curv for biliscreen a a classifi use the system’ segment algorithms. the 

auc be 0.96 for the box and 0.95 for the glasses. again, use the pre-determin threshold of 1.3 mg/dl lead to 
high sensit and low specif sinc both model overestim with the accident incorpor of skin 
pixels. use the optim threshold that maxim accuracy, biliscreen with the box achiev a sensit of 
89.7% and a specif of 96.8%. with the glasses, biliscreen have a sensit of 82.1% and a specif of 96.1%. 

6 discuss 
our goal be to develop a smartphone-bas system that would estim a person’ bilirubin level by quantifi 
the extent of jaundic in their sclera. We believ that biliscreen be the first step toward these goals. We design 
and evalu two differ accessori - a box and glass - that allow for the sclera’ true color to be measured. 
In our evaluation, we found that the box accessori perform good than the glasses, achiev a pearson 
correl of 0.89 and a mean error of -0.09 ± 2.76 mg/dl against a blood draw. As a classifier, the biliscreen app 
and box accessori achiev a specif of 89.7% and a sensit of 96.8%. 

6.1 hardwar 
the biliscreen box be design to block out ambient lighting, allow the smartphone’ flash to replac an 
otherwis vari surfac reflect compon with a constant one. however, the model associ with the box 
do not account for differ camera sensors. all of the data for thi studi be collect use the same iphon 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



biliscreen: smartphone-bas scleral jaundic monitor for liver and pancreat disord • 20:23 

SE device. should anoth devic be used, the biliscreen model for the box would need to account for the camera 
sensor’ response. thi issu could be remedi in one of two ways. first, imag could be gather from the 
differ camera and separ model could be train for each of them. thi would clearli be a time-consum 
endeavor, but lead to result like the one present in the paper. An altern approach would be to perform a 
one-tim calibr procedur a prescrib in section 4.3 use a color calibr card within the box. the 
result calibr matrix would then be store and appli on all imag take with the same device. thi 
could be do offlin by a research with a collect of devices, or the user could be ask to do it befor use 
the biliscreen app. the color squar from the biliscreen glass could even be integr into the biliscreen 
box so that a separ color calibr card do not need to be purchased. 

the latter approach assum that a calibr matrix can perfectli correct an image’ represent of color. 
Of course, thi be the same assumpt behind the biliscreen glasses. If the assumpt be not true, then the effect 
of the surfac reflect compon and the camera sensor’ respons cannot be fulli eliminated. We believ that 
thi assumpt hold well enough that the linger extern effect on the sclera’ color be negligible, but have 
yet to conduct a formal studi on the matter. 

6.2 softwar 
prior work have propos a varieti of techniqu for sclera segmentation. however, we found that they be not 
suitabl for peopl with jaundic either becaus they assum strict placement of the eye or that the color of the 
sclera would alway be pale white. We develop a novel sclera segment algorithm that circumv these 
issu while achiev a mean per-imag precis of 74.8 ± 34.1% with the box and 74.8 ± 35.0% with the glasses. 
the median be much high than the mean in both case and the fact that the precis be great than 50% be 
suffici for biliscreen’ featur extraction, but we recogn that there may be other segment method 
that would achiev even good results. the techniqu we be most interest in pursu be fulli convolut 
neural network (fcns) [21]. fcn take advantag of regular convolut network that have be train to 
reach astonishingli high accuraci at identifi objects, onli instead of the fully-connect layer at the end 
that produc object labels, fcn use deconvolut to achiev a label for everi pixel. We believ we can train a 
similar network for our use case, though thi would requir far more label data than what have be acquir to 
thi point. 
As mention in variou part of the paper, optim can be make throughout biliscreen’ pipeline. We 

use the mutual inform score function [16] to automat select the top 5% of the featur that best 
explain the sclera color. In the future, we plan on manual examin the contribut of the featur and 
determin if certain featur calcul be redundant. the final bilirubin estim be also base on all 8 imag 
captur per accessory. take so mani imag can be burdensom for the user, but we also believ that get 
the differ view of the sclera ensur that ani region particularli affect by jaundic be captured. that 
be said, we have found that use all of the imag onli provid a small improv to the final results. We 
plan on investig thi trade-off further. 

6.3 futur applic 
biliscreen do not directli ass a person’ risk of pancreat cancer; it examin the sclera for jaundice, one of 
pancreat cancer’ symptoms. jaundic appear in other conditions, such a hepat and gilbert’ syndrome. 
examin if there be differ between the visibl symptom of these diseas warrant further investigation. 

the deploy implement of biliscreen depend on the target demograph for whom the app be designed. 
If biliscreen be to be deploy a a screen application, we would priorit notifi user about the possibl 
risk of pancreat cancer, even at the cost of extra fals positives. thi would be implement by lower the 
decis threshold for classifi a user’ bilirubin level to increas sensit and decreas specificity; for 
example, lower the decis threshold for biliscreen with the box accessori improv it sensit from 89.7% 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



20:24 • mariakaki et al. 

to 95.2% while degrad the specif from 96.8% to 71.2% (fig. 11, left). the downsid to thi chang be that 
biliscreen could induc a great deal of stress by fals inform user that they may have a condit a seriou 
a pancreat cancer. To combat thi issue, biliscreen could requir multipl consistent, high measur befor 
prompt the user to consult a clinician. If biliscreen be to be deploy a a diseas manag tool, the 
trend of the data would be most import to clinicians. 
look beyond jaundice, quantit visual examin of the sclera can yield other fruit observations. 

osteogenesi imperfecta, a genet disord that result in brittl bones, produc a blue ting in the sclera [33]. 
diabet result in few capillaries, dilat macrovessels, and chang in the curvatur in the cover of the 
sclera [25, 26]. hyperemia and conjunctivi can affect both the amount and contrast of the blood vessel on the 
scleral surfac [14]. biliscreen’ sclera segment algorithm could be use a a start point for a system that 
search for these symptom and others. 

7 conclus 
ubiquit bilirubin assess could have a signific impact on the current state of pancreat cancer diagnosis. 
To thi end, we have present biliscreen, a smartphon app that analyz digit photograph of the eye for 
the degre of jaundic that present in the sclera. We test two differ accessori to be use in conjunct 
with biliscreen to allow the sclera’ true color to be measured: a 3d-print box that block out extern light 
and a pair of glass that provid refer for color calibration. We evalu biliscreen in a studi with 70 
individu with vari bilirubin level and found that the box accessori lead to good results. use the box 
accessori lead to a pearson correl of 0.89 and a mean error of -0.09 ± 2.76 mg/dl against a blood draw. As a 
classifier, biliscreen with the box be abl to screen particip for further consult with 89.7% specif 
and 96.8%. sensitivity. It be our hope to continu build on our initi prototyp of biliscreen with improv 
models, a more conveni and autom smartphon app, and a longer-term studi that captur trend of 
bilirubin levels. 

8 acknowledg 
We thank the nation scienc foundat and the coulter foundat for their funding. We thank elli robert 
for help collect data dure the earli stage of the project. We thank mike clark for help design the 
biliscreen glasses. finally, we thank elliot saba, ruth ravichandran, mohit jain, and edward wang for provid 
their feedback on the work. 

refer 
[1] alireza abdolvahabi, brandon W. taylor, rebecca L. holden, elizabeth V shaw, alex kentsis, carlo rodriguez-galindo, shizuo mukai, 

and bryan F. shaw. colorimetr and longitudin analysi of leukocoria in recreat photograph of child with retinoblastoma. 
plo one, 8(10):e76677, oct 2013. 

[2] american cancer society. cancer fact & figur 2016. technic report, american cancer society, atlanta, ga, 2016. 
[3] andrew bastawrous, hillari K. rono, iain A. T. livingstone, helen A. weiss, stewart jordan, hannah kuper, and matthew J. burton. 

develop and valid of a smartphone-bas visual acuiti test (peek acuity) for clinic practic and community-bas 
fieldwork. jama ophthalmology, 133(8):930, aug 2015. 

[4] vinod K bhutani, loi johnson, and emidio M sivieri. predict abil of a predischarg hour-specif serum bilirubin for subsequ 
signific hyperbilirubinemia in healthi term and near-term newborns. pediatrics, 103(1):6–14, 1999. 

[5] gile bond-smith, neal banga, tobi M hammond, and charl J imber. pancreat adenocarcinoma. bmj, 344, 2012. 
[6] yuri Y boykov and marie-pierr jolly. interact graph cut for optim boundari & region segment of object in ND images. In 

proc. iccv ’01, volum 1, page 105–112. ieee, 2001. 
[7] simona crihalmeanu and arun ross. multispectr scleral pattern for ocular biometr recognition. pattern recognit letters, 

33(14):1860–1869, 2012. 
[8] abhijit das, umapada pal, miguel angel ferrer ballester, and michael blumenstein. A new effici and adapt sclera recognit 

system. In 2014 ieee symposium on comput intellig in biometr and ident manag (cibim), page 1–8. ieee, 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



biliscreen: smartphone-bas scleral jaundic monitor for liver and pancreat disord • 20:25 

dec 2014. 
[9] abhijit das, umapada pal, miguel angel ferrer ballester, and michael blumenstein. sclera recognit use dense-sift. In intern 

confer on intellig system design and applications, isda, page 74–79. ieee, dec 2014. 
[10] lilian de greef, mayan goel, min joon seo, eric C larson, jame W stout, jame A taylor, and shwetak N patel. bilicam: use mobil 

phone to monitor newborn jaundice. In proc. ubicomp ’14, page 331–342, 2014. 
[11] maria syl D De La cruz, alisa P young, and mack T ruffin. diagnosi and manag of pancreat cancer. american famili physician, 

89(8):626–32, apr 2014. 
[12] mario E giardini, iain A T livingstone, stewart jordan, nigel M bolster, tund peto, matthew burton, and andrew bastawrous. A 

smartphon base ophthalmoscope. proc. embc ’14, 2014:2177–2180, 2014. 
[13] dorothi M greig, bruce T porteous, and allan H seheult. exact maximum a posteriori estim for binari images. seri of the 

royal statist society, 51(2):271–279, 1989. 
[14] G. heath. the episclera, sclera and conjunctiva. An overview of relev ocular anatomy. differenti diagnosi of ocular disease, 

9(2):36–42, 2006. 
[15] gudrun J klinker, steven A shafer, and takeo kanade. A physic approach to color imag understanding. intern journal of 

comput vision, 4(1):7–38, 1990. 
[16] LF kozachenko and NN leonenko. sampl estim of the entropi of a random vector. problemi peredachi informatsii, 23(2):9–16, 

1987. 
[17] everett lawson, jason boggess, siddharth khullar, alex olwal, gordon wetzstein, and ramesh raskar. comput retin imag 

via binocular coupl and indirect illumination. In proc. siggraph ’12, page 51, 2012. 
[18] somsak leartveravat. transcutan bilirubin measur in full term neonat by digit camera. medic journal of srisaket surin 

buriram hospitals, 24(1):105–118, 2009. 
[19] terenc S leung, karan kapur, ashley guilliam, jade okell, bee lim, lindsay W macdonald, and judith meek. screen neonat 

jaundic base on the sclera color of the eye use digit photography. biomed optic express, 6(11):4529–4538, 2015. 
[20] rainer lienhart and jochen maydt. An extend set of haar-lik featur for rapid object detection. In proceedings. intern 

confer on imag processing, volum 1, page 0–3, 2002. 
[21] jonathan long, evan shelhamer, and trevor darrell. fulli convolut network for semant segmentation. In proceed of the 

ieee comput societi confer on comput vision and pattern recognition, volum 07-12-june, page 3431–3440, mar 2015. 
[22] dan L longo, anthoni S fauci, denni L kasper, stephen L hauser, J larri jameson, and joseph loscalzo. 

harrison’ principl of intern medicine. 18th edition, 2006. 
[23] marco marcon, eliana frigerio, and stefano tubaro. sclera segment for gaze estim and iri local in unconstrain 

images. In compimage, page 25–29, 2012. 
[24] nobuyuki otsu. A threshold select method from gray-level histograms. ieee transact on systems, man, and cybernetics, 

9(1):62–66, jan 1979. 
[25] christoph G owen, richard SB newsom, alicja R rudnicka, sarah A barman, and E goeffrey woodward. diabet and the tortuos 

of vessel of the bulbar conjunctiva. ophthalmology, 115(6):e27–e32, 2008. 
[26] christoph G owen, richard SB newsom, alicja R rudnicka, and tim J ellis. vascular respons of the bulbar conjunctiva to diabet 

and elev blood pressure. ophthalmology, 112(10):1801–1808, 2005. 
[27] vitor F pamplona, ankit mohan, manuel M oliveira, and ramesh raskar. netra: interact display for estim refract error 

and focal range. acm transact on graphic (tog), 29(4):77, 2010. 
[28] vitor F pamplona, erick B passos, jan zizka, manuel M oliveira, everett lawson, esteban clua, and ramesh raskar. catra: cataract 

probe with a lightfield display and a snap-on eyepiec for mobil phones. In proc. siggraph ’11, page 7–11, 2011. 
[29] danni pascale. rgb coordin of the macbeth colorchecker. technic report, 2006. 
[30] carsten rother, vladimir kolmogorov, and andrew blake. grabcut: interact foreground extract use iter graph cuts. acm 

transact on graphic (tog) ’04, 23(3):309–314, 2004. 
[31] mario A ruiz, sammi saab, and leland S rickman. the clinic detect of scleral icterus: observ of multipl examiners. militari 

medicine, 162(8):560–563, 1997. 
[32] gaurav sharma, wencheng wu, and edul N. dalal. the ciede2000 color-differ formula: implement notes, supplementari test 

data, and mathemat observations. color research and application, 30(1):21–30, feb 2005. 
[33] DO sillence, alison senn, and DM danks. genet heterogen in osteogenesi imperfecta. journal of medic genetics, 16(2):101–116, 

1979. 
[34] audrey vincent, joseph herman, rich schulick, ralph hhruban, andmichael goggins. pancreat cancer. the lancet, 378(9791):607–620, 

aug 2011. 
[35] paul viola and michael J jones. rapid object detect use a boost cascad of simpl features. In comput vision and pattern 

recognit (cvpr), volum 1, page 511–518, 2001. 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 



20:26 • mariakaki et al. 

[36] russel wiesner, erick edwards, richard freeman, ann harper, ray kim, patrick kamath, walter kremers, john lake, todd howard, 
robert M. merion, robert A. wolfe, ruud krom, and unit network for organ share liver diseas sever score committee. model 
for end-stag liver diseas (meld) and alloc of donor livers. gastroenterology, 124(1):91–96, jan 2003. 

[37] stephen wolf. color correct matrix for digit still and video imag systems. page 1–40, 2003. 
[38] zhi zhou, eliza yingzi du, N. luke thomas, and edward J. delp. A new human identif method: sclera recognition. systems, 

man and cybernetics, part A: system and humans, ieee transact on, 42(3):571–583, may 2012. 

receiv februari 2017; accept april 2017 

proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquit technologies, vol. 1, no. 2, articl 20. public date: may 2017. 


abstract 
1 introduct 
2 relat work 
2.1 sclera imag 
2.2 jaundic assess 
2.3 ocular diagnost applic 

3 data collect 
3.1 enrol 
3.2 data collect procedur 
3.3 biliscreen accessori 
3.4 biliscreen applic 

4 biliscreen algorithm 
4.1 sclera segment 
4.2 glass segment 
4.3 glass color calibr 
4.4 featur extract 
4.5 machin learn 

5 result 
5.1 segment 
5.2 biliscreen a a measur tool 
5.3 biliscreen a a classifi 

6 discuss 
6.1 hardwar 
6.2 softwar 
6.3 futur applic 

7 conclus 
8 acknowledg 
refer 

