






































â•œbreakthroughâ•š algorithm exponenti faster than ani previou one 


“breakthrough” algorithm exponenti faster than ani 
previou one 

smarter, faster algorithm cut number of step to solv problem 

new algorithm us adapt sampl to exponenti speed up comput 

what if a larg class of algorithm use today — from the algorithm that help u avoid traffic to the 
algorithm that identifi new drug molecul — work exponenti faster? 

comput scientist at the harvard john A. paulson school of engin and appli scienc (seas) have 
develop a complet new kind of algorithm, one that exponenti speed up comput by dramat 
reduc the number of parallel step requir to reach a solution. 

the theoret research be present at the acm symposium on theori of comput (stoc), june 25-29 
and the experiment research will be present at the intern confer on machin learn 
(icml), juli 10 -15. 

A lot of so-cal optim problems, problem that find the best solut from all possibl solutions, such 
a map the fast rout from point A to point B, reli on sequenti algorithm that haven’t chang sinc 
they be first describ in the 1970s. these algorithm solv a problem by follow a sequenti step-by- 
step process. the number of step be proport to the size of the data. but thi have lead to a comput 
bottleneck, result in line of question and area of research that be just too comput expens to 
explore. 

“these optim problem have a diminish return property,” say yaron singer, assist professor of 
comput scienc at sea and senior author of the research. “a an algorithm progresses, it rel gain 
from each step becom small and smaller.” 

“breakthrough” algorithm exponenti faster than ani previou one https://www.seas.harvard.edu/content/breakthrough-algorithm-exponenti... 

1 sur 4 09-07-18 à 21:03 



yaron singer, assist professor of comput scienc at seas, design a new type of algorithm. 
(photo courtesi of eliza grinnell/harvard seas) 

singer and hi colleagu asked: what if, instead of take hundr or thousand of small step to reach a 
solution, an algorithm could take just a few leaps? 

“thi algorithm and gener approach allow u to dramat speed up comput for an enorm 
larg class of problem across mani differ fields, includ comput vision, inform retrieval, 
network analysis, comput biology, auction design, and mani others,” say singer. “we can now 
perform comput in just a few second that would have previous take week or months.” 

“thi new algorithm work, and the correspond analysis, open the door to new large-scal 
parallel strategi that have much larg speedup than what have ever be possibl before,” say jeff 
bilmes, professor in the depart of electr engin at the univers of washington, who be not 
involv in the research. “these abil will, for example, enabl real-world summar process to be 
develop at unpreced scale.” 

traditionally, algorithm for optim problem narrow down the search space for the best solut one 
step at a time. In contrast, thi new algorithm sampl a varieti of direct in parallel. base on that 
sample, the algorithm discard low-valu direct from it search space and choos the most valuabl 
direct to progress toward a solution. 

take thi toy example: 

you’r in the mood to watch a movi similar to the avengers. A tradit recommend algorithm would 
sequenti add a singl movi in everi step which have similar attribut to those of the avengers. In 
contrast, the new algorithm sampl a group of movi at random, discard those that be too dissimilar to 
the avengers. what’ left be a batch of movi that be divers (after all, you don’t want ten batman movies) 
but similar to the avengers. the algorithm continu to add batch in everi step until it have enough movi 
to recommend. 

thi process of adapt sampl be key to the algorithm’ abil to make the right decis at each step. 

“tradit algorithm for thi class of problem greedili add data to the solut while consid the entir 
dataset at everi step,” say eric balkanski, a graduat student at sea and co-author of the research. “the 
strength of our algorithm be that in addit to add data, it also select prune data that will be ignor 
in futur steps.” 

“breakthrough” algorithm exponenti faster than ani previou one https://www.seas.harvard.edu/content/breakthrough-algorithm-exponenti... 

2 sur 4 09-07-18 à 21:03 



the black line show the number of step a tradit algorithm take to solv a problem while 
the red line demonstr the number of step the new algorithm needs. 

In experiments, singer and balkanski demonstr that their algorithm could sift through a data set which 
contain 1 million rate from 6,000 user on 4,000 movi and recommend a person and divers 
collect of movi for an individu user 20 time faster than the state-of-the-art. 

the research also test the algorithm on a taxi dispatch problem, where there be a certain number of 
taxi and the goal be to pick the best locat to cover the maximum number of potenti customers. use a 
dataset of two million taxi trip from the new york citi taxi and limousin commission, the adaptive- 
sampl algorithm found solut 6 time faster. 

“thi gap would increas even more significantli on larg scale applications, such a cluster biolog 
data, sponsor search auctions, or social medium analytics,” say balkanski. 

Of course, the algorithm’ potenti extend far beyond movi recommend and taxi dispatch 
optimizations. It could be appli to: 

design clinic trial for drug to treat alzheimer’s, multipl sclerosis, obesity, diabetes, hepat C, 
hiv and more 
evolutionari biolog to find good repres subset of differ collect of gene from larg 
dataset of gene from differ speci 
design sensor array for medic imag 
identifi drug-drug interact detect from onlin health forum 

thi process of activ learn be key to the algorithm’ abil to make the right decis at each step and 
solv the problem of diminish returns. 

“breakthrough” algorithm exponenti faster than ani previou one https://www.seas.harvard.edu/content/breakthrough-algorithm-exponenti... 

3 sur 4 09-07-18 à 21:03 



“thi research be a real breakthrough for large-scal discret optimization,” say andrea krause, professor of 
comput scienc at eth zurich, who be not involv in the research. “one of the big challeng in 
machin learn be find good, repres subset of data from larg collect of imag or video to 
train machin learn models. thi research could identifi those subset quickli and have substanti 
practic impact on these large-scal data summar problems.” 

singer-balkanski model and variant of the algorithm develop in the paper could also be use to more 
quickli ass the accuraci of a machin learn model, say vahab mirrokni, a princip scientist at googl 
research, who be not involv in the research. 

“in some cases, we have a black-box access to the model accuraci function which be time-consum to 
compute,” say mirrokni. “at the same time, comput model accuraci for mani featur set can be 
do in parallel. thi adapt optim framework be a great model for these import set and the 
insight from the algorithm techniqu develop in thi framework can have deep impact in thi import 
area of machin learn research." 

singer and balkanski be continu to work with practition on implement the algorithm. 

“breakthrough” algorithm exponenti faster than ani previou one https://www.seas.harvard.edu/content/breakthrough-algorithm-exponenti... 

4 sur 4 09-07-18 à 21:03 


