






































break bottleneck to the electronic-photon inform technolog revolut 


break bottleneck to the electronic-photon inform technolog revolut 

jackson holtz UW new 

new releas | research | scienc 

april 25, 2018 

thi artist render magnifi a electro-opt modulator.virginia commonwealth univers image/nathaniel kinsey 

research at the univers of washington, work with research from the eth-zurich, purdu univers and virginia commonwealth university, 
have achiev an optic commun breakthrough that could revolution inform technology. 

they creat a tini device, small than a human hair, that translat electr bit (0 and 1 of the digit language) into light, or photon bits, at speed 
10 of time faster than current technologies. 

break bottleneck to the electronic-photon inform technolog ... https://www.washington.edu/news/2018/04/25/breaking-bottlenecks-to-t... 

1 sur 2 04-05-18 à 12:14 



“a with earli advanc in inform technology, thi can dramat impact the way we live,” say larri dalton, a UW chemistri professor emeritu 
and leader in photon research. 

these new electro-opt devic approach the size of current electron circuit element and be import for integr photon and electron on a 
singl chip. the new technolog also involv util of a particle, a plasmon polariton, that have properti intermedi between electron and 
photons. thi hybrid particl technolog be refer to a plasmonics. 

the find be publish today in the journal nature. 

“the devic have be built a a plasmon modulator,” say christian haffner, a graduat student at eth-zurich and lead author of the paper. “thi be 
unusu a the tradit implement reli on photon rather than plasmonics. As a matter of fact, research avoid plasmonics, a plasmon be 
know in all industri a a technolog that come at the price of high optic losses. yet – and thi be by far the most spectacular find – a trick have 
be found to use plasmon without suffer from such high losses.” 

To increas the information-handl capac of computing, telecommunications, sens and control technologies, data need to be commun with 
high bandwidth over vast distanc without signal (information) degrading, or consum too much energi and gener too much heat. that’ where 
the new technolog describ in the natur articl fit in. call an electro-opt modulator, the devic convert electr signal into optic one capabl 
at travel either over fiberglass optic cabl or wirelessli through space via satellit and cell towers. thi must be accomplish with excel energi 
effici use extrem small devic capabl of process massiv amount of data. 

“the devic must be veri sensitive, capabl of respond to veri small electr fields. If the field need to control the devic be small, then the power 
consumpt be low a well. thi be import a energi effici be critic to all applications,” co-author dalton said, adding, “you want to avoid 
gener heat and inform degrad in comput or telecommun applications.” 

thi late advanc follow on a breakthrough in 2000 when dalton and a team of UW and univers of southern california research first introduc 
newli design electro-opt polym or plastics, which be integr into centimeter-long devic that could be oper with less than a volt and 
with bandwidth exceed 100 gigahertz. unfortunately, these devic be much larg than electron data-gener element and be not suit for 
integr of electron and photon element on a singl chip. 

however, transit to plasmonics, thi footprint issu have now be solved. and it all start when an intern team of scientist and engin 
set out to improv the devic by integr good organ electro-opt materi with plasmonics. plasmon be creat when light imping onto a 
metal surface, such a gold. photon then pa on part of their energi to the electron on the metal surfac such that the electron oscillate. these new 
photon-electron oscil be call plasmon polaritons. work with plasmon polariton permit dramat reduct in the size of optic circuitri and 
bandwidth oper mani time that of photonics. compar to the 2000 discovery, the bandwidth of the devic increas by almost a factor of 10 while 
reduc the energi requir by almost 1,000 and thi translat into a reduct in heating. 

the achilles’ heel of plasmonics, however, be refer to a optic loss. while signal degrad with distanc of transmiss be not a bad a with 
electronics, signal degrad with plasmon be much bad than with photonics. 

“the eth and purdu research conceiv of an eleg devic architectur that address the problem of plasmon loss and achiev loss compar 
to that of all-photon modul by use a combin of plasmon and photonics,” dalton said. 

He call the devic an eleg integr of electronics, photon and plasmonics, use an organ electro-opt materi that permit integr of all 
of the signal process options. 

“thi be a doubli signific advanc in plasmon and organ electroact materials, make possibl through creativ iter between materi 
prediction, design, synthesis, and properti optimization,” say linda S. sapochak, divis director for materi research at the nation scienc 
foundation, which help fund the research. 

the integr of electron and photon on chip have be recogn for more than a decad a a critic next step in the evolut of inform 
technology. inform technolog be the scienc of how we sens our world and both process and commun that information. 

the applic of the new devic can be divid into two categori base on the wavelength of light utilized: fiber optic telecommun and 
optic interconnect in comput util light (photons) at optic frequenc (infrar light), while applic such a radar and wireless 
telecommun use electromagnet radiat in the radiofrequ and microwav (long wavelength light) regions. 

In the telecommun and comput space, electro-opt take inform gener in an electron devic (for example, a comput processor) 
and transform it into light signal that travel over a fiber optic cabl or via a wireless transmiss to anoth electron device. 

“in that sense, you might think of electro-opt a the ‘on-ramp of the inform superhighway,’” say dalton. 

electro-opt also be critic to mani other applic such a radar and gps. It repres critic sensor technology, includ applic such a 
emb network sensing. for example, electro-opt be critic to mani compon of an autonom vehicl and for monitor infrastructur 
element such a build and bridges. the devic be relev to both digit and analog inform processing. 

co-author includ daniel chelladurai, yuriy fedoryshyn, arn josten, benedikt baeuerle, wolfgang heni, tatsuhiko watanabe, tong cui, bojun cheng 
and juerg leuthold of eth zurich institut of electromagnet fields; delwin L. elder of the UW depart of chemistry; soham saha, alexandra 
boltasseva and vladimir shalaev, purdu univers and brick nanotechnolog center; and nathaniel kinsey, virginia commonwealth university. 

fund for thi project be from EU project plasmofab (688166), the erc grant plasilor (640478), the nation scienc foundat 
(dmr-1303080) and the air forc offic of scientif research grant (fa9550-15-1-0319 and fa9550-14-1-0138). co-author kinsey acknowledg 
support from the virginia microelectron consortium and the virginia commonwealth univers presidenti research quest fund. 

### 

contact larri dalton at dalton@chem.washington.edu. 

tag(s): depart of chemistri • larri dalton 

break bottleneck to the electronic-photon inform technolog ... https://www.washington.edu/news/2018/04/25/breaking-bottlenecks-to-t... 

2 sur 2 04-05-18 à 12:14 


