


















































can: creativ adversari network 
gener “art” by learn about style and 

deviat from style norms∗ 

ahm elgammal1† bingchen liu1 moham elhoseiny2 marian mazzone3 

the art & AI laboratori - rutger univers 
1 depart of comput science, rutger university, nj, usa 

2 facebook AI research, ca, usa 
3 depart of art history, colleg of charleston, sc, usa 

june 23, 2017 

abstract 

We propos a new system for gener art. the system gener art by look- 
ing at art and learn about style; and becom creativ by increas the arous 
potenti of the gener art by deviat from the learn styles. We build over 
gener adversari network (gan), which have show the abil to learn 
to gener novel imag simul a give distribution. We argu that such net- 
work be limit in their abil to gener creativ product in their origin 
design. We propos modif to it object to make it capabl of gener 
creativ art by maxim deviat from establish style and minim de- 
viation from art distribution. We conduct experi to compar the respons 
of human subject to the gener art with their respons to art creat by artists. 
the result show that human subject could not distinguish art gener by the 
propos system from art gener by contemporari artist and show in top art 
fairs. 

1 introduct 
sinc the dawn of artifici intelligence, scientist have be explor the machine’ abil to 
gener human-level creativ product such a poetry, stories, jokes, music, paintings, etc., a 
well a creativ problem solving. thi abil be fundament to show that artifici intellig 
algorithm be in fact intelligent. In term of visual art, sever system have be propos to 

∗thi paper be an extend version of a paper publish on the eighth intern confer on comput 
creativ (iccc), held in atlanta, ga, june 20th-june 22nd, 2017. 
†correspond author: ahm elgamm elgammal@cs.rutgers.edu 

1 

ar 
X 

iv 
:1 

70 
6. 

07 
06 

8v 
1 

[ 
c 

.A 
I] 

2 
1 

Ju 
n 

20 
17 

mailto:elgammal@cs.rutgers.edu 
http://digihumanlab.rutgers.edu 
mailto:elgammal@cs.rutgers.edu 


automat creat art, not onli in the domain of AI and comput creativ (e.g. [1, 6, 5, 10] 
), but also in comput graphic (e.g. [22]), and machin learning, (e.g. [16, 12]). 

within the comput creativ literature, differ algorithm have be propos focu 
on investig variou and effect way of explor the creativ space. sever approach 
have use an evolutionari process wherein the algorithm iter by gener candidates, evalu- 
ate them use a fit function, and then modifi them to improv the fit score for the 
next iter (e.g. [14, 6]). typically, thi process be do within a genet algorithm framework. 
As point out by dipaola and gabora 2009, the challeng for ani algorithm center on “how to 
write a logic fit function that have an aesthet sense”. some earli system util a hu- 
man in the loop with the role of guid the process (e.g. [1, 9]). In these interact systems, the 
comput explor the creativ space and the human play the role of the observ whose feedback 
be essenti in drive the process. recent system have emphas the role of percept and 
cognit in the creativ process [4, 5, 10]. 

the goal of thi paper be to investig a comput creativ system for art gener with- 
out involv a human artist in the creativ process, but nevertheless involv human creativ 
product in the learn process. An essenti compon in art-gener algorithm be relat 
their creativ process to art that have be produc by human artist throughout time. We believ 
thi be import becaus a human’ creativ process util prior experi of and exposur to 
art. A human artist be continu expos to other artists’ work, and have be expos to a wide 
varieti of art for all of his/her life. what remain larg unknown be how human artist integr 
their knowledg of past art with their abil to gener new forms. A theori be need to model 
how to integr exposur to art with the creation of art. 

colin martindal (1943-2008) propos a psychology-bas theori that explain new art creation[15]. 
He hypothes that at ani point in time, creativ artist tri to increas the arous potenti of 
their art to push against habituation. however, thi increas have to be minim to avoid neg 
reaction by the observ (principl of least effort). martindal also hypothes that style break 
happen a a way of increas the arous potenti of art when artist exert other mean within the 
role of style. the approach propos in thi paper be inspir by martindale’ principl of least 
effort and hi explan of style breaks. among theori that tri to explain progress in art, we 
find martindale’ theori to be comput feasible. 

deep neural network have recent play a transform role in advanc artifici intel- 
ligenc across variou applic domains. In particular, sever gener deep network have 
be propos that have the abil to gener novel imag to emul a give train distribut 
gener adversari network (gan) have be quit success in achiev thi goal [8]. We 
argu that such network be limit in their abil to gener creativ product in their origin 
design. inspir by martindale’ theory, in thi paper we propos modif to gan’ objec- 
tive to make it abl to gener creativ art by maxim deviat from establish style while 
minim deviat from art distribution. figur 1 show sampl of the gener images. 

2 



figur 1: exampl of imag gener by can. the gener imag vari from simpl abstract 
one to complex textur and compositions. more exampl be show in figur 4.2 and 7 

. 

2 methodolog 

2.1 background 
the propos approach be motiv from the theori suggest by D. E. berlyn (1924-1976). 
berlyn argu that the psychophys concept of “arousal” have a great relev for studi 
aesthet phenomenon [3]. “level of arousal” measur how alert or excit a human be is. the 

3 



level of arous vari from the low level, when a person be asleep or relaxed, to the high 
level when s/he be violent, in a fury, or in a passion situat [2]. among differ mecha- 
nism of arousal, of particular import and relev to art be properti of extern stimulu 
pattern [3]. 

the term “arous potential” refer to the properti of stimulu pattern that lead to rais 
arousal. besid other psychophys and ecolog properti of stimulu patterns, berlyn 
emphas that the most signific arousal-rais properti for aesthet be novelty, surpris- 
ingness, complexity, ambiguity, and puzzlingness. He coin the term coll variabl to refer 
to these properti collectively. 

novelti refer to the degre a stimulu differ from what an observ have seen/experienc be- 
fore. surprising refer to the degre a stimulu disagre with expectation. surprising 
be not necessarili correl with novelty, for exampl it can stem from lack of novelty. unlik 
novelti and surprising which reli on inter-stimulu comparison of similar and differences, 
complex be an intra-stimulu properti that increas a the number of independ element in 
a stimulu grows. ambigu refer to the conflict between the semant and syntact informa- 
tion in a stimulus. puzzling refer to the ambigu due to multiple, potenti inconsistent, 
meanings. 

sever studi have show that peopl prefer stimulu with a moder arous potenti [2, 
20]. too littl arous potenti be consid boring, and too much activ the avers system, 
which result in neg response. thi behavior be explain by the wundt curv that correl 
the arous potenti with the hedon respons [3, 24]. berlyn also studi arous moder 
mechanisms. Of particular import in art be habituation, which refer to decreas arous in 
respons to repetit of a stimulu [3]. 

martindal emphas the import of habitu in deriv the art-produc system [15]. 
If artist keep produc similar work of arts, thi directli reduc the arous potenti and henc 
the desir of that art. therefore, at ani point of time, the art-produc system will tri to 
increas the arous potenti of produc art. In other words, habitu form a constant pres- 
sure to chang art. however, thi increas have to be within the minimum amount necessari to 
compens for habitu without fall into the neg hedon range, accord to wundt 
curv find (“stimuli that be slightli rather than vastli supernorm be preferred”). martindal 
call thi the principl of “least effort”. therefore, there be an opposit pressur that lead to a 
graduat pace of chang in art. 

2.2 art gener agent 
We propos a model for an art-gener agent, and then propos a function model use a 
variant of gan to make it creative. the agent’ goal be to gener art with increas level of 
arous potenti in a constrain way without activ the avers system and fall into the 
neg hedon range. In other words, the agent tri to gener art that be novel, but not too 
novel. thi criterion be common in mani comput creativ systems, howev it be not easi 
to find a way to achiev that goal give the infinit possibl in the creativ space. 

In our model the art-gener agent have a memori that encod the art it have be expos 
to, and can be continu updat with the addit of new art. the agent us thi encod 
memori in an indirect way while gener new art with a restrain increas in arous potential. 
while there be sever way to increas the arous potential, in thi paper we focu on build 

4 



an agent that tri to increas the stylist ambigu and deviat from style norms, while at the 
same time, avoid move too far away from what be accept a art. the agent tri to explor 
the creativ space by deviat from the establish style norm and therebi gener new art. 

there be two type of ambigu that be expect in the gener art by the propos net- 
work; one be by design and the other one be inherent. almost all computer-gener art might 
be ambigu becaus the art gener typic do not have clear figur or an interpret 
subject matter. becaus of this, heath et al argu that the creativ machin would need to have 
perceptu abil (be abl to see) in order to be abl to gener plausibl creativ art [10]. thi 
limit perceptu abil be what caus the inher ambiguity. typically, thi type of ambigu 
result in user be abl to tell right away that the work be gener by a machin rather than 
a human artist. even though sever style of art develop in the 20th centuri might lack rec- 
ogniz figur or lucid subject matter, human observ usual be not fool into confus 
computer-gener art with human-gener art. 

becaus of thi inher ambigu peopl alway think of computer-gener art a be 
hallucination-like. the guardian comment on a the imag gener by googl deepdream [16] 
by “most, however, look like dorm-room mandalas, or the kind of digit psychedelia you might 
expect to find on the cover of a terrenc mckenna book”1. other comment on it a be “daz- 
zling, druggy, and creepy” 2. thi neg reaction might be explain a a result of too much 
arousal, which result in neg hedon accord to the wundt curve. 

the other type of ambigu in the art gener by the propos agent be stylist ambiguity, 
which be intent by design. the ration be that creativ artist would eventu break from 
establish style and explor new way of express to increas the arous potenti of their art, 
a martindal suggested. As suggest by dipaola and gabora, “creator often work within a veri 
structur domain, follow rule that they eventu break free of” [6]. 

the propos art-gener agent be realiz by a model call creativ adversari network 
(can), which we will describ next. the network be design to gener art that do not follow 
establish art movement or styles, but instead tri to gener art that maxim confus human 
viewer a to which style it belong to. 

2.3 gan: emul and not creativ 
gener adversari network (gan) have two sub networks, a gener and a discriminator. 
the discrimin have access to a set of imag (train images). the discrimin tri to dis- 
crimin between “real” imag (from the train set) and “fake” imag gener by the gener- 
ator. the gener tri to gener imag similar to the train set without see these images. 
the gener start by gener random imag and receiv a signal from the discrimin 
whether the discrimin find them real or fake. At equilibrium the discrimin should not be 
abl to tell the differ between the imag gener by the gener and the actual imag 
in the train set, henc the gener succeed in gener imag that come from the same 
distribut a the train set. 

let u now assum that we train a gan model on imag of paintings. sinc the gener 
be train to gener imag that fool the discrimin to believ it be come from the train 

1alex rayner, the guardian, march 28, 2016 
2david auerbach, slate, juli 23, 2015 

5 



distribution, ultim the gener will just gener imag that look like alreadi exist art. 
there be no motiv to gener anyth creative. there be no forc that push the gener 
to explor the creativ space. let u think about a gener that can cheat and alreadi have access 
to sampl from the train data. In that case the discrimin will right away be fool into 
believ that the gener be gener art, while in fact it be alreadi exist art, and henc not 
novel and not creative. 

there have be extens to gan that facilit gener imag condit on cate- 
gori (e.g., [18]) or caption (e.g., [19]). We can think of a gan that can be design and train 
to gener imag of differ art style or differ art genr by provid such label with train- 
ing. thi might be abl to gener art that look like, for example, renaissance, impressionism, 
or cubism. howev that do not lead to anyth creativ either. No creativ artist will creat 
art today that tri to emul the baroqu or impressionist style, or ani tradit style, unless 
do so ironically. accord to berlyn and martindale, artist would tri to increas the arous 
potenti of their art by creat novel, surprising, ambiguous, and/or puzzl art. thi highlight 
the fundament limit of use gan in gener creativ works. 

2.4 from be emul to be creativ 
In the propos creativ adversari network (can), the gener be design to receiv two 
signal from the discrimin that act a two contradictori forc to achiev three points: 1) 
gener novel works, 2) the novel work should not too novel, i.e., it should not be too far away 
from the distribut or it will gener too much arousal, therebi activ the avers system 
and fall into the neg hedon rang accord to the wundt curve, 3) the gener work 
should increas the stylist ambiguity. 

similar to gener adversari network (gan), the propos network have two adversari 
networks, a discrimin and a generator. the discrimin have access to a larg set of art asso- 
ciat with style label (renaissance, baroque, impressionism, expressionism, etc.) and us it to 
learn to discrimin between styles. the gener do not have access to ani art. It gener 
art start from a random input, but unlik gan, it receiv two signal from the discrimin 
for ani work it generates. the first signal be the discriminator’ classif of “art or not art”. 
In tradit gan, thi signal enabl the gener to chang it weight to gener imag that 
more frequent will deceiv the discrimin a to whether it be come from the same distribu- 
tion. sinc the discrimin in our case be train on art, thi will signal whether the discrimin 
think the gener art be come from the same distribut a the actual art it know about. In 
that sense, thi signal flag whether the discrimin think the imag present to it be “art or not 
art”. sinc the gener onli receiv thi signal, it will eventu converg to gener imag 
that will emul art. 

the second signal the gener receiv be a signal about how well the discrimin can clas- 
sifi the gener art into establish styles. If the gener gener imag that the discrimina- 
tor think be art and also can easili classifi into one of the establish styles, then the gener 
would have fool the discrimin into believ it gener actual art that fit within establish 
styles. In contrast, the creativ gener will tri to gener art that confus the discriminator. 
On one hand it tri to fool the discrimin to think it be “art,” and on the other hand it tri to 
confus the discrimin about the style of the work generated. 

these two signal be contradictori forces, becaus the first signal push the gener to 

6 



figur 2: block diagram of the can system. 

gener work that the discrimin accept a “art,” howev if it succeed within the rule of 
establish styles, the discrimin will also be abl to classifi it style. then the second signal 
will heftili penal the gener for do that. thi be becaus the second signal push the 
gener to gener style-ambigu works. therefore, these two signal togeth should push 
the gener to explor part of the creativ space that lay close to the distribut of art (to 
maxim the first objective), and at the same time maxim the ambigu of the gener art 
with respect to how it fit in the realm of standard art styles. 

3 technic detail 

3.1 gener adversari network 
gener adversari network (gan) [8] be one of the most success imag synthesi model 
in the past few years. gan be typic train by set a game between two players. the 
first player, call the generator, G, gener sampl that be intend to come from the same 
probabl distribut a the train data (i.e. pdata), without have access to such data. the 
other player, denot a the discriminator, D, examin the sampl to determin whether they 
be come from pdata (real) or not (fake). both the discrimin and the gener be typic 
model a deep neural networks. the train procedur be similar to a two-play min-max game 
with the follow object function 

min 
G 

max 
D 

V (d,g) = ex∼pdata [logd(x)] + 

ez∼pz [log(1−d(g(z)))], 
(1) 

where z be a nois vector sampl from distribut pz (e.g., uniform or gaussian distribution) and 
x be a real imag from the data distribut pdata. In practice, the discrimin and the gener 
be altern optim for everi batch. the discrimin aim at maxim Eq 1 by mini- 
mize −ex∼pdata [logd(x)] − ez∼pz [log(1 −d(g(z))), which improv the util of the D a a 
fake vs. real imag detector. meanwhile, the gener aim at minim Eq 1 by maxim 
log(d(g(z)), which work good than −log(1 − d(g(z)) sinc it provid strong gradients. 

7 



0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 
-5 

-4 

-3 

-2 

-1 

0 

1 

figur 3: style ambigu cross entropi loss function (two class case). red curve: entropy, blue curve: cross 
entropi with a uniform distribut (invert here for illustration). both function be maxim when the class be 
equiprobable. In contrast to entropy, which go to zero at the boundaries, the invert cross entropi go to neg 
infin at the boundary, which caus hefti penalti for sampl classifi correctly. 

By optim D and G alternatively, gan be train to gener imag that emul the train 
distribution. 

3.2 creativ adversari network 
We modifi the gan loss function to achiev the vision explain in the previou section. fig- 
ure 2 illustr the architecture. We add a style classif loss and a style ambigu loss. 
maxim the stylist ambigu can be achiev by maxim the style class posterior en- 
tropy. hence, we need to design the loss such that the gener G produc an imag x ∼ pdata 
and, meanwhile, maxim the entropi of p(c|x) (i.e. style class posterior) for the gener im- 
ages. however, instead of maxim the class posterior entropy, we minim the cross entropi 
between the class posterior and a uniform target distribution. similar to entropi that be maxim 
when the class posterior (i.e., p(c|g(z))) be equiprobable, cross entropi with uniform target dis- 
tribut will be minim when the class be equiprobable. So both object will be optim 
when the class be equiprobable. however, the differ be that the cross entropi will go up 
sharpli at the boundari sinc it go to infin if ani class posterior approach 1 (or zero), while 
entropi go to zero at thi boundari condit (see figur 3). therefore, use the cross entropi 
result in a hefti penalti if the gener imag be classifi to one of the class with high proba- 
bility. thi in turn would gener veri larg loss, and henc larg gradient if the gener imag 
start to be classifi to ani of the style class with high confidence. hence, we can redefin the 
cost function with a differ adversari object a 

min 
G 

max 
D 

V (d,g) = 

ex,ĉ∼pdata [logdr(x) + logdc(c = ĉ|x)] + 

ez∼pz [log(1−dr(g(z)))− 
K∑ 
k=1 

( 1 
K 

log(dc(ck|g(z))+ 

(1− 1 
K 

)log(1−dc(ck|g(z)) 
) 
], 

(2) 

8 



where z be a nois vector sampl from distribut pz (e.g., uniform or gaussian distribution) and 
x and ĉ be a real imag and it correspond style label from the data distribut pdata. dr(·) be 
the transform function that tri to discrimin between real art and gener images. dc(·) 
be the the function that discrimin between differ style categori and estim the style class 
posterior (i.e., dc(ck|·) = p(ck|·)). 
discrimin training: In Eq 2, the discrimin D encourag maxim Eq 2 by minimiz- 
ing −ex∼pdata [logdr(x) + logdc(c = ĉ|x)] for the real imag and −ez∼pz [log(1 − dr(g(z)))] 
for the gener images. the discrimin be train to, not onli discrimin the real art sampl 
from the gener (fake) ones, but also to identifi their style class though the k-way loss (where 
K be the number of style classes). therefore, the discrimin be simultan learn about 
both the art distribut and art styles. 
gener training: the gener G encourag minim Eq 2 by maxim log(1 − 
dr(g(z))− 

∑K 
k=1( 

1 
K 
log(dc(ck|g(z)) + (1− 1K )log(1−dc(ck|g(z)). thi push the gener 

imag to look a real art (first term) and meanwhil to have a larg cross entropi for p(c|g(z)) 
with a uniform distribut to maxim style ambigu (second term). note that the can gener- 
ator do not requir ani class labels, similar to uncondit gener model. 
model architecture: algorithm 1 illustr can train process. the gener G and similar 
to dcgan architectur [18], first z ∈ r100 normal sampl from 0 to 1 be up-sampl to a 4× 
spatial extent convolut represent with 2048 featur map result in a 4 × 4 × 2048 
tensor. then a seri of four fractionally-strid convolut (in some papers, wrongli call 
deconvolutions). finally, convert thi high level represent into a 256 × 256 pixel image. In 
other words, start from z ∈ r100 → 4 × 4 × 1024 → 8 × 8 × 1024 → 16 × 16 × 512 → 
32× 32× 256→ 64× 64× 128→ 128× 128× 64→ 256× 256× 3 (the gener imag size). 
As describ earlier, the discrimin have two loss (real/fak loss and multi-label loss). the 
discrimin in our work start by a common bodi of convolut layer follow by two head 
(one for the real/fak loss and one for the multi-label loss). the common bodi of convolut layer 
be compos of a seri of six convolut layer (all with stride 2 and 1 pixel padding). conv1 (32 
4× 4 filters), conv2 (64 4× 4 filters, conv3 (128 4× 4 filters, conv4 (256 4× 4 filters, conv5 (512 
4 × 4 filters, conv6 (512 4 × 4 filters). each convolut layer be follow by a leaki rectifi 
activ (leakyrelu) [13, 25] in all the layer of the discriminator. after pass a imag to 
the common conv D body, it will produc a featur map or size (4 × 4 × 512). the real/fak Dr 
head collaps the (4 × 4 × 512) by a fulli connect to produc dr(c|x) (probabl of imag 
come for the real imag distribution). the multi-label probabl dc(ck|x) head be produc 
by pass the(4× 4× 512) into 3 fulli collect layer size 1024, 512, K, respectively, where K 
be the number of style classes. 
initi and training: the weight be initi from a zero-cent normal distribu- 
tion with standard deviat 0.02. We use a mini-batch size of 128 and use mini-batch stochast 
gradient descent (sgd) for train with 0.0001 a learn rate. In the leakyrelu, the slope of 
the leak be set to 0.2 in all models. while previou gan work have use momentum to acceler- 
ate training, we use the adam optim and train the model for 100 epoch (100 pass over 
the train data). To stabil the training, we use batch normal [11] that normal 
the input to each unit to have zero mean and unit variance. We perform data augment by 
add 5 crop within for each imag (bottom-left, bottom-right, mid, top-left, top-right) on our 
imag dataset. the width and hight of each crop be 90% of the width and the hight of the origin 
painting. 

9 



algorithm 1 can train algorithm with step size α, use mini-batch sgd for simplicity. 
1: input: mini-batch imag x, match label ĉ, number of train batch step S 
2: for n = 1 to S do 
3: z ∼ N (0, 1)z {draw sampl of random noise} 
4: x̂← g(z) {forward through generator} 
5: srd ← dr(x) {real image, real/fak loss } 
6: scd ← dc(ĉ|x) {real image, multi class loss} 
7: sfg ← dr(x̂) {fake image, real/fak loss} 
8: scg ← 

∑K 
k=1 

1 
K 
log(p(ck|x̂) + (1− 1K )(log(p(ck|x̂)) {fake imag entropi loss} 

9: LD ← log(srd) + log(scd) + log(1− s 
f 
G) 

10: D ← D − α∂ld/∂d {updat discriminator} 
11: LG ← log(sfg)− scg 
12: G← G− α∂lg/∂g {updat generator} 
13: end for 

tabl 1: artist style use in train 
style name imag number style name imag number 
abstract-expression 2782 mannerism-late-renaiss 1279 
action-paint 98 minim 1337 
analytical-cub 110 naiv art-primitiv 2405 
art-nouveau-modern 4334 new-real 314 
baroqu 4241 northern-renaiss 2552 
color-field-paint 1615 pointil 513 
contemporary-r 481 pop-art 1483 
cubism 2236 post-impression 6452 
early-renaiss 1391 realism 10733 
expression 6736 rococo 2089 
fauvism 934 romantic 7019 
high-renaiss 1343 synthetic-cub 216 
impression 13060 total 75753 

4 result and valid 

4.1 train the model 
We train the network use paint from the publicli avail wikiart dataset 3. thi col- 
lection (a download in 2015) have imag of 81,449 paint from 1,119 artist rang from 
the fifteenth centuri to twentieth century. tabl 1 show the number of imag use in train 
the model from each style. 

10 



figur 4: imag from three baselines. top panel: sampl imag gener by art-train dc- 
gan 64x64 baselin model (top 6 and bottom 6 rank imag be show accord to human 
subject like rate in experi i). middl panel: sampl imag gener by art-train 
dcgan 256x256 baselin model (top 6 and bottom 6 rank imag be show accord to hu- 
man subject like rate in experi ii). bottom panel: sampl imag gener by style- 
classif can model, a variant of can with style classif loss and without the style 
ambigu loss. the imag show recogniz genr such a portraits, landscapes, etc. 

11 



4.2 qualit valid 
assess the creativ of artifact gener by the machin be an open and hard question. As 
note by colton 2008, aesthet assess of an artifact be differ from the creativ assess- 
ment [4]. figur 1, figur 4.2 and 7 show sampl of the gener imag by the propos 
can model. the imag gener by can do not look like tradit art, in term of standard 
genr (portrait, landscapes, religi paintings, still life, etc.). We also do not see ani recogniz- 
abl figures. mani of the imag seem abstract. Is that simpli becaus it fail to emul the art 
distribution, or be it becaus it tri to gener novel images? Is it at all creative? these be hard 
question which we will tri to get an insight to help answer them. 

We evalu the imag gener by three baselin model in comparison to the one gener- 
ate by the propos can model to gain an insight into the differ qualit and quantita- 
tively. all the model be train on the same art dataset, a show in tabl 1. 

the first two baselin be variant of the origin dcgan [18] model train on art data. 
sinc gan aim to emul the train distribution, we should expect train the model on art 
data would result in gener imag that show recogniz figures, subject matters, art genres, 
and styles. the first baselin model be the origin dcgan [18] model train on art data. thi 
model gener imag with 64x64 resolution. although train on art data, thi model fail to 
gener imag that emul the train art. the gener sampl do not show ani recogniz 
figur or art genr or styles. the top panel of figur 4 show sampl of the gener images; 
here we show the six top and six bottom rank imag base on human subject evalu in 
experi I below. 

the second baselin model be the origin dcgan [18] model after add two more layer 
to the gener to increas the resolut to 256x256, i.e., the gener here have the same exact 
architectur a the can model. We also train thi model on the art collection. the gener 
sampl show signific improvement; we can clearli see aesthet appeal composit 
structur and color contrast in the result images. however, the gener imag also do not 
show ani recogniz figures, subject matter or art genres. the middl panel of figur 4 show 
sampl of the gener images; here we show the six top and six bottom rank imag base on 
human subject evalu in experi II below. 

the third model be a variant of the propos can model with the style classif loss 
(without the style ambigu loss). In that model the discrimin learn to discrimin between 
style class along learn the art distribution. the gener have exactli the same loss a the gan 
model, i.e., onli tri to deceiv the discrimin by emul the train distribution. In other 
words, unlik the two first baselin that learn about art (art/nor art), thi model also learn about 
style class in art. We refer to thi model by style-classification-can. the gener imag of 
that model show signific improv in actual emul the art distribution, in the sens that 
we can see lot of hallucin of portraits, landscapes, architectures, religi subject matter, etc. 
We didn’t see ani of that on the first two baselines. the bottom panel of figur 4 show sampl of 
the gener images, which show portraits, landscapes, architectur elements, religi themes, 
etc. thi baselin show that the can model, without the style ambiguity, can good emul 
the art distribut by learn about style classes, howev not creativ (experi IV below be 
design to quantit valid thi claim). 

3https://www.wikiart.org/ 

12 



figur 4.2 show sampl of imag gener by can. the figur show top rank and low- 
est rank imag accord to human subjects. In contrast to the aforement three baselines, 
the propos can model gener imag that can be character a novel and not emul 
the art distribution, however, aesthet appealing. although the gener imag of the can 
model do not show typic figures, genres, styles, or subject matter (similar to the first two baselin 
anyway), we cannot say that thi be becaus it cannot emul the art distribution, since, simply, re- 
move the style ambigu loss reduc the model to the third baselin (style-classification-can) 
which be success in gener such elements. So we can claim that the style ambigu loss 
forc the network to tri to gener novel imag and, in the same time, stay closer to the art 
distribut (bi be aesthet appealing). We will tri to test thi claim quantit by a 
seri of human subject experi in the next section. 

4.3 quantit valid 
We conduct human subject experi to evalu aspect of the creativ of the propos 
model. the goal of these experi be to test whether human subject would be abl to distin- 
guish whether the art be gener by a human artist or by a comput system, a well a to rate 
aspect of that art. however, the hard question be which art by human artist we should use for thi 
comparison. sinc the goal of thi studi be to evalu the creativ of the artifact produc by the 
propos system, we need to compar human respons to such artifact with art that be consid 
to be novel and creativ at thi point in time. If we compar the produc artifact to, for example, 
impressionist art, we would be test the abil of the system to emul such art, and not the 
creativ of the system. therefor we collect two set of work by real artists, a well a four 
machine-gener set a follows: 

1. abstract expressionist set: A collect of 25 paint by abstract expressionist master 
make between 1945-2007, mani of them by famou artists. thi set be previous use 
in recent studi to compar human and machine’ abil to distinguish between abstract 
art creat by artists, child or anim [23, 21]. We use thi set a a baselin set. human 
subject be expect to easili determin that these be creat by artist base on familiarity. 
We use abstract expressionist art in particular becaus they lack recogniz figur or 
lucid subject matter. exist of figur or clear subject matter might directli bia the 
subject to conclud that such paint be do by human when contrast to the gener 
imag which lack such figures. 

2. art basel 2016 set: thi set consist of 25 paint of variou artist that be show in 
art basel 2016, which be the flagship art fair for contemporari art world wide. be show 
in art basel 2016 be an indic that these be art work at the frontier of human creativ 
in paintings, at least a judg by the art expert and the art market. We select thi set at 
random after exclud art that have clear figur or obviou brush stroke which might bia 
the subjects. the collect be show in figur 8. 

3. dcgan sets: We use two set of imag gener by the state-of-th art deep convolu- 
tion gan (dcgan) architectur [18], a describ in the baselin model in section 4.2. 
the first set contain 100 imag gener at 64x64 resolution. the second set consist of 
76 imag gener at 256x256 resolution. 

13 



figur 5: exampl of imag gener by can. top: imag rank high in “likeness” accord 
to human subjects. bottom: imag rank the low by human subjects. 

14 



tabl 2: mean and standard deviat of respons of experi I 
paint set Q1 (std) Q2 (std) 

can 53% (18%)† 3.2 (1.5) ‡ 

dcgan [18] (64x64) 35% (15%) † 2.8 (0.54) ‡ 

abstract expressionist 85% (16%) 3.3 (0.43) 
art basel 2016 41% (29%) 2.8 (0.68) 

artist set combin 62% (32%) 3.1 (0.63) 
all imag be resiz to 512x512 resolut 
† q1t-test (can vs. dcgan) p-valu = 1.9932e− 15 
‡ Q2 t-test (can vs. dcgan) p-valu = 9.3634e− 06 

4. style classif can set (sc-can): a set of 100 imag gener by a variant of the 
model that involv style classifi at the discriminator, a explain in section 4.2. We 
mainli use thi set to compar the effect of add style ambigu to the propos 
loss function. 

5. can set: a set of 125 imag gener by the propos model. 

We use the same set of train imag for all the model and we conduct three human subject 
experi a follows. all gener imag be upscal to 512x512 resolut use a super- 
resolut algorithm. artist imag be also resiz to 512x512 resolution. 

experi I: 
the goal of thi experi be to test the abil of the system to gener art that human user 
could not distinguish from top creativ art that be be gener by artist today. We use four 
imag set (abstract expressionist, art basel, can and dcgan(64x64)). In thi experi each 
subject be show one imag at time select from the four set of imag and asked: 

q1: Do you think the work be creat by an artist or gener by a computer? the user have to 
choos one of two answers: artist or computer. 

q2: the user ask to rate how they like the imag in a scale 1 (extrem dislike) to 5 (extrem 
like). 

results: 18 mturk user particip in thi experiment, where for each imag we receiv 
10 distinct responses. the result be summar in tabl 2. there be sever conclus we 
can draw from these results: 1) As expected, subject rat the abstract expressionist set high 
a be creat by an artist (85%). 2) the propos can model out-perform the gan model 
in gener imag that human subject think be gener by artist (53% vs. 35%). human 
subject also like the imag gener by can more than gan (3.2 vs. 2.8) We perform 
two-sampl t-test to determin the statist signific of these results, with the null hypothesi 
be that the subjects’ respons for both can and gan be come from the same distribution. 
t-test reject thi hypothesi with p-valu = 1.9932e− 15 and 9.3634e− 06 for question 1 and 2 
respectively. thi test highlight that the differ be statist significant. Of cours we cannot 

15 



figur 6: experi I (q1 vs. Q2 responses) 

obvious conclud from thi result that can be more creativ than gan. A system that would 
perfectli copi human art, without be innovative, would score high in that question. however, 
we can exclud thi possibl sinc the gener imag by both can and gan be not copi 
human art a be explain in section 4.2. 3) more interestingly, human subject rat the imag 
gener by can high a be creat by a human than the one from the art basel set (53% 
vs. 41%) when combin the two set of art creat by artists, the imag gener by can 
score onli 9% less (53% vs. 62%). figur 7 show the top rank can imag accord to 
subjects’ responses. figur 6 show a scatter plot of the respons for the two questions, which 
interestingli show weak correl between the like rate and whether subject think it be 
by an artist or a computer. 

4.4 experi ii: 
To confirm the result of experi I we design anoth experi where in each survey we 
show an imag and ask subject a seri of question first befor ask the question whether 
the show imag be gener by a human artist or computer. We hypothes that if that question 
be ask first, thi would have a high chanc of subject answer it randomly, and defer it 
till after a seri of other question about the imag would lead to a more construct response. 

the question be base on the coll variabl a explain in section 2.1 and specifi as: 

Q1 how do you like thi image: 1-extrem dislike, 2-dislike, 3-neutral, 4-like, 5-extrem like. 

Q2 rate the novelti of the image: 1-extrem not novel, 2-some how not novel, 3-neutral, 4- 
somehow novel, 5-extrem novel. 

Q3 Do you find the imag surprising: 1-extrem not surprising, 2-some how not surprising, 
3-neutral, 4-some how surprising, 5-extrem surprising. 

Q4 rate the ambigu of the image. I find thi image: 1-extrem not ambiguous, 2-some how 
not ambiguous, 3-neutral, 4-some how ambiguous, 5-extrem ambiguous. 

Q5 rate the complex of the image. I find thi image: 1-extrem simple, 2-some how simple, 
3-neutral, 4-somehow complex, 5-extrem complex 

Q6 Do you think the imag be creat by an artist or gener by computer? 

We use the same set of imag a in experi I except that we chang the gan set to a 
new set gener by dcgan model with output resolut 256x256, which be the same resolut 

16 



tabl 3: mean and standard deviat of respons of experi II 
Q1 (std) Q2 (std) Q3 (std) Q4 (std) Q5 (std) Q6 (std) 

imag set like novelti surpris ambigu complex human/comput 
dcgan [18] (256x256) 3.23 (0.53) 3.08 (0.50) 3.21 (0.59) 3.37 (0.48) 3.18 (0.63) 0.65 (0.17) 

can 3.30 (0.43) 3.27 (0.44) 3.13 (0.46) 3.54 (0.45) 3.34 (0.50) 0.75 (0.14) 
abstract expresionist 3.38 (0.43) 3.03 (0.38) 2.95 (0.50) 3.17 (0.35) 2.90 (0.35) 0.85 (0.11) 

art basel 2016 2.95 (0.70) 2.69 (0.59) 2.36 (0.66) 2.79 (0.59) 2.46 (0.68) 0.48 (0.23) 

a the can model. both the can and gan set be upsampl to 512x512. all artist set be 
resiz to 512x512 a well. 

results: We conduct thi experi use amazon mturk, where for each imag we re- 
ceiv 10 distinct responses. tabl 3 summar the results. In gener there be no much differ 
in the rate for the differ set for question 1 to 5. howev the respons to Q6 be signif- 
icantli differ for each dataset. the result show that can out-perform gan in gener 
imag that human subject think be gener by artist (75% vs. 65%). thi differ be sta- 
tistic signific (t-test p-value=1.0147 − 05 ). thi result be consist with experi I, 
despit we chang the gan set to a high resolut version. although the same set of can 
imag be use in both experi I and ii, the respons to the human/comput question be 
much high in experi II (75% v 53%), which confirm our hypothesi about defer that 
question. the rank order between abstract expressionist, can, and art basel sets, in regard to 
be creat by artist (q6), be also consist with Q1 in experi 1. 

experi iii: 
thi goal of thi experi be to judg aspect relat to whether the imag gener by can 
can be consid art. We compar the can set with both the art expressionist and the art basel 
sets. thi experi be similar to an experi conduct by snapper et al [23] to determin 
to what degre human subject find the work of art to be intentional, have visual structure, 
communicative, and inspirational. In thi experi an imag be show and the subject be ask 
the follow four questions: 

q1: As I interact with thi painting, I start to see the artist’ intentionality: it look like it be 
compos veri intentionally. 

q2: As I interact with thi painting, I start to see a structur emerging. 

q3: communication: As I interact with thi painting, I feel that it be commun with me. 

q4: inspiration: As I interact with thi painting, I feel inspir and elevated. 

for each of the question the user answer in a scale from 1 (strongli disagree) to 5 (strongli 
agree). the user be ask to look at each imag at least 5 second befor answering. 21 user 
particip in thi experi with respons from 10 distinct user for each image. 

snapper et al hypothes that subject would rate work by real artist high in these scale 
that work by child or animals, and inde their experi valid their hypothesis[23]. 

We also hypothes that human subject would rate art by real artist high on these scale 
than those gener by the propos system. To our surpris the result show that our hypothesi 

17 



tabl 4: mean and standard deviat of the respons of experi iii 
Q1 (std) Q2 (std) Q3 (std) Q4 (std) 

paint set intention visual structur commun inspir 
can 3.3 (0.47) 3.2 (0.47) 2.7 (0.46) 2.5 (0.41) 

abstract expressionist 2.8 (0.43) 2.6 (0.35) 2.4 (0.41) 2.3 (0.27) 
art basel 2016 2.5 (0.72) 2.4 (0.64) 2.1 (0.59) 1.9(0.54) 

artist set combin 2.7 (0.6) 2.5 (0.52) 2.2 (0.54) 2.1 (0.45) 

be not true! human subject rat the imag gener by the propos system high than those 
creat by real artists, whether in the abstract expression set or in the art basel set (see 
tabl 3). 

It might be debat what a high score in each of these scale actual means, and whether 
the differ be statist significant. however, the fact that subject found the imag gen- 
erat by the machin intentional, visual structured, communicative, and inspiring, with similar 
level to actual human art, indic that subject see these imag a art! figur 7 show sever 
exampl gener by can, rank by the respons of human subject to each question. 

experi iv: 
the goal of thi experi be to evalu the effect of add the style ambigu loss to the can 
model, in contrast to the style classif loss, in gener novel and aesthet appeal 
images. In other words, be it learn about style or deviat from style that caus the result to 
be creative. To ass creativ we refer to the most common definit of creativ of an artifact 
a be novel and influenti [17, 7]. however, sinc influenc be not relev here, we use novelti 
a a proxi for creativity. In thi experiment, in order to evalu novelti we use a pool of art 
histori student a sophist art-educ subject who can judg the novelti and aesthet 
good than gener mturk subjects. each subject be show pair of images, one from the can 
set and one from the sc-can model, randomli select and place in random order side by side. 
each subject be ask two question for each pair: 

Q1 which imag do you think be more novel? 

Q2 which imag do you think be more aesthet appealing? 

results: the result of thi experi show that 59.47% of the time subject select can 
imag a more novel and 60% of the time they found can imag more aesthet appealing. 
thi indic the effect of the style ambigu loss in the process of gener by can compar 
to the style classif loss. 

5 discuss and conclus 
We propos a system for gener art with creativ characteristics. We demonstr a realiza- 
tion of thi system base on a novel creativ adversari network. the system be train use a 
larg collect of art imag from the 15th centuri to 21st centuri with their style labels. the 

18 



figur 7: top rank imag from can in human subject experi I and iii 

19 



figur 8: art basel set: a collect of 25 paint select from art basel 2017 art fair. artist 
and year in order: richard caldicott 2003, jigger cruz 2016, leonardo drew 2015, cenk akaltun 
2015, lang Li 2014, xuerui zhang 2015, david smith 1956, kelu Ma 1989, xie nanx 2013, 
pano tsagari 2015, heimo zobernig 2014, zao wou-ki 1958, andi warhol 1985, david smith 
1956, wei ligang 2014, kong chun hei 2016, Ye yongq 2015, wei ligang 2010, xiaorong 
pan 2015, xuerui zhang 2016, xiaorong pan 2015, xiaorong pan 2015, Xu zhenbang 2015, 
xuerui zhang 2016, zao wou-ki 1963. 

system be abl to gener art by optim a criterion that maxim stylist ambigu while 
stay within the art distribution. the system be evalu by human subject experi which 
show that human subject regularli confus the gener art with the human art, and some- 
time rat the gener art high on variou high-level scales. 

what creativ characterist do the propos system have? colton 2008 suggest three 
criterion that a creativ system should have: the abil to produc novel artifact (imagination), 
the abil to gener qualiti artifact (skill), and the abil to ass it own creation [4]. our 
propos system poss the abil to produc novel artifact becaus the interact between 
the two signal that deriv the gener process be design to forc the system to explor creativ 
space to find solut that deviat from establish style but stay close enough to the boundari 

20 



of art to be recogn a art. thi interact also provid a way for the system to self-assess it 
products. the qualiti of the artifact be verifi by the human subject experiments, which show 
that subject not onli thought these artifact be creat by artists, but also rat them high on 
some scale than human art. 

one of the main characterist of the propos system be that it learn about the histori of art 
in it process to creat art. howev it do not have ani semant understand of art behind the 
concept of styles. It do not know anyth about subject matter, or explicit model of element 
or principl of art. the learn here be base onli on exposur to art and concept of styles. In 
that sens the system have the abil to continu learn from new art and would then be abl to 
adapt it gener base on what it learns. 

We leav open how to interpret the human subjects’ respons that rank the can art good 
than the art basel sampl in differ aspects. Is it becaus the user have typic style-backward 
bias? are the subject bia by their aesthet assessment? would that mean that the result be 
not that creative? more experi be definit need to help answer these questions. 

refer 
[1] elli baker and margo I seltzer. evolv line drawings. 1993. 

[2] daniel E berlyne. arous and reinforcement. In nebraska symposium on motivation. uni- 
versiti of nebraska press, 1967. 

[3] daniel E berlyne. aesthet and psychobiology, volum 336. jstor, 1971. 

[4] simon colton. creativ versu the percept of creativ in comput systems. In 
aaai spring symposium: creativ intellig systems, volum 8, 2008. 

[5] simon colton, jakob halskov, dan ventura, ian gouldstone, michael cook, and blanca 
perez-ferrer. the paint fool sees! new project with the autom painter. In proceed 
of the 6th intern confer on comput creativity, page 189–196, 2015. 

[6] steve dipaola and lian gabora. incorpor characterist of human creativ into an 
evolutionari art algorithm. genet program and evolv machines, 10(2):97–110, 
2009. 

[7] ahm elgamm and babak saleh. quantifi creativ in art networks. In proceed 
of the 6th intern confer on comput creativity, 2015. 

[8] ian goodfellow, jean pouget-abadie, mehdi mirza, bing xu, david warde-farley, sherjil 
ozair, aaron courville, and yoshua bengio. gener adversari nets. In advanc in 
neural inform process systems, page 2672–2680, 2014. 

[9] jeanin graf and wolfgang banzhaf. interact evolut of images. In evolutionari pro- 
gramming, page 53–65, 1995. 

[10] derral heath and dan ventura. befor a comput can draw, it must first learn to see. In 
proceed of the 7th intern confer on comput creativity, 2016. 

21 



[11] sergey ioff and christian szegedy. batch normalization: acceler deep network train 
by reduc intern covari shift. arxiv preprint arxiv:1502.03167, 2015. 

[12] justin johnson, alexandr alahi, and Li fei-fei. perceptu loss for real-tim style transfer 
and super-resolution. In european confer on comput vision, page 694–711. springer, 
2016. 

[13] andrew L maas, awni Y hannun, and andrew Y ng. rectifi nonlinear improv neural 
network acoust models. In proc. icml, volum 30, 2013. 

[14] penous machado, juan romero, and bill manaris. An iter approach to stylist chang 
in evolutionari art. 

[15] colin martindale. the clockwork muse: the predict of artist change. basic books, 
1990. 

[16] alexand mordvintsev, christoph olah, and mike tyka. inceptionism: go deeper into 
neural networks. googl research blog. retriev june, 20:14, 2015. 

[17] elliot samuel paul and scott barri kaufman. introduc the philosophi of creativity. In 
the philosophi of creativity: new essays. oxford univers press, 2014. 

[18] alec radford, luke metz, and soumith chintala. unsupervis represent learn with 
deep convolut gener adversari networks. In intern confer on learn 
representation, 2016. 

[19] scott reed, zeynep akata, xinchen yan, lajanugen logeswaran, bernt schiele, and honglak 
lee. gener adversari text-to-imag synthesis. In proceed of the 33rd intern 
confer on machin learning, 2016. 

[20] theodor christian schneirla. An evolutionari and development theori of biphas pro- 
ce underli approach and withdrawal. 1959. 

[21] lior shamir, jenni nissel, and ellen winner. distinguish between abstract art by artist 
vs. child and animals: comparison between human and machin perception. acm trans- 
action on appli percept (tap), 13(3):17, 2016. 

[22] karl sims. artifici evolut for comput graphics, volum 25. acm, 1991. 

[23] lesli snapper, cansu oranç, angelina hawley-dolan, jenni nissel, and ellen winner. your 
kid could not have do that: even untutor observ can discern intention and struc- 
ture in abstract expressionist art. cognition, 137:154–165, 2015. 

[24] wilhelm max wundt. grundzüg de physiologischen psychologie, volum 1. W. engelman, 
1874. 

[25] bing xu, naiyan wang, tianqi chen, and Mu li. empir evalu of rectifi activ 
in convolut network. arxiv preprint arxiv:1505.00853, 2015. 

22 


1 introduct 
2 methodolog 
2.1 background 
2.2 art gener agent 
2.3 gan: emul and not creativ 
2.4 from be emul to be creativ 

3 technic detail 
3.1 gener adversari network 
3.2 creativ adversari network 

4 result and valid 
4.1 train the model 
4.2 qualit valid 
4.3 quantit valid 
4.4 experi ii: 

5 discuss and conclus 

