






































celebr twitter account display â•ÿbot-likeâ•ž behaviour | univers of cambridg 


A twitter user can be a 
human and still be a 
spammer, and an 
account can be 
oper by a bot and 
still be benign. 

— zafar gilani 

the researchers, from the univers of cambridge, use data from twitter to determin whether bot can be 
accur detected, how bot behave, and how they impact twitter activity. 

they divid account into categori base on total number of followers, and found that account with more than 
10 million follow tend to retweet at similar rate to bots. In account with few follow however, bot tend to 
retweet far more than humans. these celebrity-level account also tweet at roughli the same pace a bot with 
similar follow numbers, wherea in small accounts, bot tweet far more than humans. their result will be 
present at the ieee/acm intern confer on advanc in social network analysi and mine (asonam) 
in sydney, australia. 

bots, like people, can be malici or benign. the term ‘bot’ be often associ with spam, offens content or 

1,102 

celebr twitter account display ‘bot-like’ behaviour | univers of cambridg http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/celebrity-twitter-accounts-display-bot-like-behaviour 

1 sur 6 02/08/2017 19:14 



polit infiltration, but mani of the most reput organis in the world also reli on bot for their social medium channels. for example, major news 
organisations, such a cnn or the bbc, who produc hundr of piec of content daily, reli on autom to share the news in the most effici way. these 
accounts, while classifi a bots, be see by user a trustworthi sourc of information. 

“A twitter user can be a human and still be a spammer, and an account can be oper by a bot and still be benign,” say zafar gilani, a phd student at 
cambridge’ comput laboratory, who lead the research. “we’r interest in see how effect we can detect autom account and what effect they 
have.” 

bot have be on twitter for the major of the social network’ exist – it’ be estim that anywher between 40 and 60% of all twitter account be 
bots. some bot have ten of million of followers, although the vast major have less than a thousand – human account have a similar distribution. 

In order to reliabl detect bots, the research first use the onlin tool botornot (sinc renam botometer), which be one of the onli avail onlin bot 
detect tools. however, their initi result show high level of inaccuracy. botornot show low precis in detect bot that have bot-lik characterist in 
their account name, profil info, content tweet frequenc and especi redirect to extern sources. gilani and hi colleagu then decid to take a 
manual approach to bot detection. 

four undergradu student be recruit to manual inspect account and determin whether they be bots. thi be do use a tool that automat 
present twitter profiles, and allow the student to classifi the profil and make notes. each account be collect review befor a final decis be 
reached. 

In order to determin whether an account be a bot (or not), the student look at differ characterist of each account. these includ the account 
creation date, averag tweet frequency, content posted, account description, whether the user repli to tweets, like or favourit receiv and the follow to 
friend ratio. A total of 3,535 account be analysed: 1,525 be classifi a bot and 2010 a humans. 

the student show veri high level of agreement on whether individu account be bots. however, they show significantli low level of agreement with 
the botornot tool. 

the bot detect algorithm they subsequ develop achiev roughli 86% accuraci in detect bot on twitter. the algorithm us a type of classifi 
know a random forests, which us 21 differ featur to detect bots, and the classifi itself be train by the origin dataset annot by the human 
annotators. 

the research found that bot account differ from human in sever key ways. overall, bot account gener more tweet than human accounts. they also 
retweet far more often, and redirect user to extern websit far more frequent than human users. the onli except to thi be in account with more than 
10 million followers, where bot and human show far more similar in term of the volum of tweet and retweets. 

“we think thi be probabl becaus bot aren’t that good at creat origin twitter content, so they reli a lot more on retweet and redirect follow to 
extern websites,” say gilani. “while bot be get more sophist all the time, they’r still pretti bad at one-on-on twitter conversations, for instanc – 
most of the time, a convers with a bot will be mostli gibberish.” 

despit the sheer volum of tweet produc by bots, human still have good qualiti and more engag tweet – tweet by human account receiv on 
averag 19 time more like and 10 time more retweet than tweet by bot accounts. bot also spend less time like other users’ tweets. 

“mani peopl tend to think that bot be nefari or evil, but that’ not true,” say gilani. “they can be anything, just like a person. some of them aren’t exactli 
legal or moral, but mani of them be complet harmless. what i’m do next be model the social cost of these bot – how be they chang the natur and 
qualiti of convers online? what be clear though, be that bot be here to stay.” 

reference: 
zafar gilani, ekaterina kochmar, jon crowcroft. classif of twitter account into autom agent and human users. paper present at 9th ieee/acm 

celebr twitter account display ‘bot-like’ behaviour | univers of cambridg http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/celebrity-twitter-accounts-display-bot-like-behaviour 

2 sur 6 02/08/2017 19:14 



intern confer on advanc in social network analysi and mine (http://asonam.cpsc.ucalgary.ca/2017/asonam2017-acceptedpper.pdf) 
(asonam'17). sydney, new south wales, australia. 

(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) 

the text in thi work be licens under a creativ common attribut 4.0 intern licens (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) . for imag use 
pleas see separ credit above. 

celebr twitter account display ‘bot-like’ behaviour | univers of cambridg http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/celebrity-twitter-accounts-display-bot-like-behaviour 

3 sur 6 02/08/2017 19:14 


