






































china, russia, and the US are all build center for militari AI 


china, russia, and the US are all build center for 
militari AI 

By patrick tucker 

but their burgeon approach to state-sponsor research be diverg a the countri themselves. 

russia and the unit state be move closer to open their own center for military-rel 
research into artifici intelligence, a china do in the spring of last year. but the three govern have 
differ approaches. the u.s. joint artifici intellig center aim to appli lesson from an air forc 
pilot project to other militari services, while the chines approach fuse civilian and militari research and 
russia’ effort be close direct from the kremlin. 

russia 

“what’ interest be the extent to which the russian govern and especi the ministri of defens be 
marshal resourc for the develop of AI for it military,” say sam bendett, an associ research 
analyst at cna and a fellow in russia studi at the american foreign polici council. 

the new innov technopolis, dub era and slat to open in septemb with a bare-bon research 
staff, be plan to grow to a 50-acr citi by 2020. “already, there be dozen of soldier from militari 
compani get sent there, along with the initi private-sector staff,” bendett said. “era militari staff be 
alreadi involv in variou scientif and technic activities, such a the recent launch de-min 
robot competit at the alabino test ground near moscow.” 

subscrib 

receiv daili email updates: 

subscrib to the defens one daily. 

Be the first to receiv updates. 

“no doubt that pentagon’ announc on establish jaic will be met with a certain degre of 
apprehens by the russians, who be concern about signific financi resourc pour into AI 
develop by the american privat sector. currently, russian AI fund be onli a small fraction of what be 
spent in the u.s.— or china, for that matter.” 

among the park’ first missions: explor applic of blockchain for russian cybersecurity. 

u.s. 

the u.s. defens depart effort will be different. rather than an open explor of new technologies, 
the effort will seek to replic the department’ success with project maven, it fledgl AI program for 
object recognition. but it will look across differ servic and missions. If you’r a command and you have 
a problem that AI could help solv — be it logistics, open-sourc data analysis, probabl distribut — 
then someon from the center will want to pitch you on an AI fix for your problem. 

A june 27 memo from deputi defens secretari patrick shanahan call for a set of nation mission 
initiatives, or “large-scal effort to appli AI to a cluster of close related, urgent, joint challenges” to “be 
develop in partnership with the militari depart and services, joint staff…and other dod 
compon and mission owners.” 

the memo also design cio dana deasi to head up the new jaic. 

the announc be veri much in-lin with what sourc told defens one the jaic would focu on back in 
april, just after the announc of the new center. 

“there’ an element [of the defens department] that’ asking, ‘how do we make a project maven factory?’” 
one sourc say then. 

china 

both the russian and the u.s. effort to stand up an AI innov center be behind china. 

the chines govern have say it want to domin a global innov in AI by 2030. and china, too, have 
an AI institut of sort spread across multipl laboratories. the people’ liber armi regularli recruit 
top AI researchers; some offic be also researchers, such a maj. gen. Li deyi, who lead the china 
associ for artifici intelligence. 

china, russia, and the US are all build center for militari AI https://www.defenseone.com/technology/2018/07/china-russia-and-us-are... 

1 sur 2 20-07-18 à 20:24 



“the pla academi of militari scienc have establish a new research center for artifici intelligence, and 
the pla nation nation univers of defens technolog have creat a new institut for intellig 
sciences,” say elsa kania, an adjunct fellow with the technolog and nation secur program at center for 
new american security. “tsinghua university, china’ mit, have establish a ‘high-end’ laboratori for 
militari intelligence.” 

kania note that the university’ mission be align with the chines government’ goal of fuse civilian and 
militari technolog development. 

“in china, lead compani and universities, such a baidu and tsinghua, appear to be engag in military- 
relev research and development. the pla itself have also establish a number of new AI research center 
at some of it premier institutions, includ at the academi of militari scienc and nation univers of 
defens technology.’” she said. 

the three distinct approach to the develop of artifici intellig reflect, in a way, the charact of 
the societi from which they emerge. that they be acceler at the same be a sign of the sens of urgency, 
optim and dread of be left behind that govern be feel around artifici intelligence. 

china, russia, and the US are all build center for militari AI https://www.defenseone.com/technology/2018/07/china-russia-and-us-are... 

2 sur 2 20-07-18 à 20:24 


