






































chinaâ•ž school be quietli use AI to mark studentsâ•ž essay ... but do the robot make the grade? 


china’ school be quietli use AI to mark students’ essay ... but do the robot make the 
grade? 

china have make artifici intelligence-en educ a nation strategy. scmp graphic 

one in everi four school in china be quietli test a power machin that us artifici intellig to mark pupils’ work, accord to scientist involv in the govern 
programme. 

the technolog be design to understand the gener logic and mean of the text and make a reasonable, human-lik judgment about the essay’ overal quality. 

It then grade the work, add recommend improv in area such a write style, structur and theme. 

the technology, which be be use in around 60,000 schools, be suppos to “think” more deepli and do more than a standard spellchecker. 

for instance, if a paragraph start trail off topic, the comput would mark it down. 

the AI grade technolog be suppos to help, rather than replac teachers. photo: afp 

scientist insist the technolog be design to assist, rather than replace, human teachers. 

It could help to reduc the amount of time teacher spend on grade essay and help them avoid inconsist caus by human error such a laps in attent or unconsci 
bias. 

It could also help more students, especi those in remot area with limit access to resources, improv their write skill more quickly. 

the machin be similar to the e-rater, an autom system use by the educ test servic in the US to grade prospect postgradu students’ essays. 

but unlik the e-rater, it can read both chines and english. 

china look to school kid to win the global AI race 

artifici intellig be develop rapidli in china with strong support from the govern and the technolog be use in mani area of everyday life. 

but the extens test of the essay grade machin – built by some of the lead languag process team involv in the govern and military’ internet surveil 
programm – be carri out with unusu secur measur in place. 

In most of the school take part in the programme, parent be not informed, access to the system termin be limit to authoris staff, test result be strictli classified, 
and in some class even the pupil be unawar that their work have be read and score by a machine. 

china’ school be quietli use AI to mark students’ essay ... but do th... http://www.scmp.com/news/china/society/article/2147833/chinas-schools... 

1 sur 3 12-06-18 à 18:52 



school be use the softwar for intern tests, rather than import nation exams. photo: afp 

wang jing, director of academ affair offic in the high school affili to renmin university, one of the country’ most prestigi schools, said: “we be treat [the test] with 
extrem caution. 

“what happen on campu stay on campus. the test result will not be reveal to the public,” he added, in line with the school’ agreement with the project organisers. 

most school interview by the south china morn post – includ the baita middl school in nanchang, sichuan province; the fifth high school in fuyang, anhui and the 
58th high school in qingdao, shandong – give a similar assessment. 

the school say the AI grade machin be far from perfect, with teacher cite mani exampl where a brilliant piec of write be give low marks. 

the softwar be present be use to mark onli intern test and none of the school have plan to use the technolog to grade essay in exam that would affect pupils’ offici 
academ record. 

“it’ still in it infancy,” wang said. 

how ‘china’ mit’ drive the country’ technolog ambit 

but the develop say the machin be alreadi 10 year old and they be increasingli confid about it potential. 

A scientist involv in the project at the school of comput scienc and engin at beihang univers in beij compar it to the alphago, an AI Go player develop by 
googl which have defeat human world champion over the past coupl of years. 

the essay grade machine, emb in a cluster of fast comput in beijing, be improv it abil to understand human languag by use deep learn algorithm to plough 
through essay write by chines student and “compar notes” with human teachers’ grade and comments. 

It be also abl to collect and build it own “knowledg base” with littl or no human intervention. 

“it have evolv continu and becom so complex, we no longer know for sure what it be think and how it make a judgment,” say the researcher, who request not to be 
name due to the sensit of the project. 

china’ school be quietli use AI to mark students’ essay ... but do th... http://www.scmp.com/news/china/society/article/2147833/chinas-schools... 

2 sur 3 12-06-18 à 18:52 



chines Go player Ke jie in a contest against alphago, which have beaten the world’ top players. photo: chinatopix via AP 

accord to a govern document see by the south china morn post, the test involv 60,000 school with more than 120 million peopl involved. 

the AI and human grader give the same score 92 per cent of the time, but the document do not specifi the content and scale of the tests. 

the research confirm the figur but declin to reveal more details. 

“in the futur it may be use to reliev the teacher’ burden but it will never replac teachers. the machin have no soul,” he added. 

microsoft’ AI bot write poetry, host a TV show and can convers like a human in mandarin 

the essay grade machin project be lead by professor zhou jianshe, director of the research centr for languag intellig in china in capit normal university. 

zhou and other senior member of the project have receiv govern and militari award for their contribut to natur languag process and mine inform from 
big data. 

zhou could not be reach for comment. 

the machin can be access from variou onlin portal but be onli open to regist users. 

one english portal, pigai.org, requir a user to regist either a a teacher or student and provid information, such a school name and class number, to verifi their identity. 

thi chines weapon lab be put missil technolog into airport bodi scanner 

user give a similarli mix respons to the machines. while some say they be use and more accur than similar essay grade system overseas, other describ them a 
rubbish. 

some user have argu the softwar cannot distinguish between academ essay and other form of writing. 

one user on zhihu, the larg question-and-answ websit in china, post a screenshot show how the machin have assess an april 2015 washington post comment piec 
“whi be obama stick it to stay-at-hom moms?” a if it be answer an essay question. 

the piec get a score of 71.5 out of 100 and the machin say that while the vocabulari use be “rich and appropriate” it be “slightli short for academ language”. 

It concluded: “the flow can be improv on smoothness; and pleas improv the focu of the article; the paragraph and sentenc should be relat to the topic.” 

A washington post articl be grade by a machin – that could not tell that it be a newspap opinion piec rather than an academ essay. photo: zhihu.com 

zhu xiaoyan, head of the state key laboratori of intellig technolog and system at tsinghua university, say human languag AI technolog have achiev signific progress in 
recent years. 

she say some machin have write articl that go viral on social media, attract more than 10 million views, but do not provid further details. 

but zhu say she have not heard of the essay-grad program add that she would not use a machin to grade her students’ papers, adding: “it’ a human job.” 

Yu yafeng, professor at the institut of educ theori at beij normal university, say comput could help grade candid in subject such a mathemat and physic 
becaus the answer be objective. 

chines surveil programm mine data from workers’ brain 

but essay can contain cultural, emot or person element that a machin would not be abl to gauge. 

“there be no law forbid AI from grade student essays, but thi practic should rais ethic questions,” she said. 

An eight-year-old primari school pupil in chaoyang district, beij say he do not mind an AI machin check hi essays, point out that hi teacher alreadi use readili 
avail technolog to check the answer to basic math questions. 

“our teacher be alreadi use mobil phone to grade our math homework,” he said. 

“take a photo and the score be out. what’ the differ to an essay?” 

thi articl appear in the south china morn post print edit as: school quietli use a.i. to mark student essay 

china’ school be quietli use AI to mark students’ essay ... but do th... http://www.scmp.com/news/china/society/article/2147833/chinas-schools... 

3 sur 3 12-06-18 à 18:52 


