






































commerci quantum technolog in five year : natur new & comment 


subject terms: quantum physic technolog 

natur | comment 

commerci quantum technolog in five year 

03 march 2017 

masoud mohseni, peter read, hartmut neven and colleagu at google' quantum AI laboratori set out invest opportun on the 

road to the ultim quantum machines. 

masoud mohseni, peter read, hartmut neven, sergio boixo, vasil denchev, ryan babbush, austin fowler, vadim smelyanskiy 

& john martini 

commerci quantum technolog in five year : natur new & comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

1 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



relat stori 

physicist propos 

football-pitch-s 

from aspect of quantum entangl to chemic reaction with larg molecules, mani featur of the world cannot be describ effici with 

convent comput base on binari logic. the solution, a physicist richard feynman realiz three decad ago1, be to use quantum 

processor that adopt a blend of classic state simultaneously, a matter does. mani technic hurdl must be overcom for such quantum 

machin to be practical, however. these includ nois control and improv the fidel of oper act on the quantum state that encod the 

information. 

the quantum-comput commun be channel most of it effort toward build the ultim machine: a 

digit quantum comput that toler nois and errors, and that in principl can be appli to ani problem. In 

theory, such a machin — which will need larg processor compris mani quantum bits, or qubit — should be 

erik lucero 

google' cryostat reach temperatur of 10 millikelvin to run it quantum processors. 

commerci quantum technolog in five year : natur new & comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

2 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



quantum comput 

quantum comput 

readi to leap out of the 

lab in 2017 

insid microsoft’ quest 

for a topolog quantum 

comput 

more relat stori 

abl to calcul faster than a convent computer. such capabl be at least a decad away2. correct for 

error requir redundancy, and the number of qubit need quickli mounts. for example, factor a 2,000-bit 

number in one day, a task believ to be intract use classic computers3, would take 100 million qubits, even 

if individu quantum oper fail just onc in everi 10,000 operations. We have yet to assembl digit 

quantum processor with ten of qubits. 

thi conserv view of quantum comput give the impress that investor will benefit onli in the long term. 

We contend that short-term return be possibl with the small devic that will emerg within the next five years, 

even though these will lack full error correction. 

A lack of theoret guarante need not preclud success. heurist 'hybrid' method that blend quantum and classic approach could be the 

foundat for power futur applications. the recent success of neural network in machin learn be a good example. In the 1990s, when the 

comput power requir to train deep neural network be unavailable, it be fashion in the field to focu on 'convex' method (base on 

function with a clear minimum solution) that have a strong theoret basis. today, these method be no match for deep learning. the underli 

algorithm of neural network have hardli changed, yet impress new perform mileston be be reached, thank to 'moore' law'. 

similarly, although there be no proof today that imperfect quantum machin can comput fast enough to solv practic problems, that may change. 

the scale, fidel and control of analog and digit quantum hardwar be improv steadily. We anticip that, within a few years, well- 

control quantum system may be abl to perform certain task much faster than convent comput base on cmo (complementari metal 

oxide–semiconductor) technology. 

here we highlight three commerci viabl us for earli quantum-comput devices: quantum simulation, quantum-assist optim and 

quantum sampling. faster comput speed in these area would be commerci advantag in sector from artifici intellig to financ 

and health care. 

capit on immin advanc in quantum technolog requir that the disciplin broaden it focu and that scientist work more close with 

entrepreneurs. hardwar improv be need to make devic reliabl and control enough to be commercialized. heurist quantum 

algorithm need to be develop that address practic problem within the current hardwar limitations. As research work on quantum 

comput at google, we plan to provid access to our quantum processor through cloud servic to facilit the develop and benchmark 

of quantum algorithm and applic across industries, deliv real benefit to society. 

commerci quantum technolog in five year : natur new & comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

3 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



three prioriti 

If certain feasibl technolog improv be achieved, we believ that emerg quantum processor have a good chanc of carri out the 

follow class of comput task and could becom commerci valuabl within a few years. 

quantum simulation. model chemic reaction and materi be one of the most anticip applic of quantum computing. instead of 

spend years, and hundr of million of dollars, make and character a hand of materials, research could studi million of candid 

in silico. whether the aim be strong polym for aeroplanes, more-effect catalyt convert for cars, more-effici materi for solar cells, 

good pharmaceut or more-breath fabrics, faster discoveri pipelin will bring enorm value. 

comput materi discoveri be alreadi a larg industry. quantum comput promis a radic transition: from the qualit and descript 

to the quantit and predictive. chemical-react rate be extrem sensit to molecular energi and span a rang wider than classic 

method can handle. If robust algorithm be developed, it might be possibl to simul import materi without the overhead of full quantum 

error correction4. for example, algorithm be alreadi know (such a the 'quantum variat eigensolver' approach) that seem to be immun to 

qubit control errors. 

A varieti of busi model could suppli quantum simulators. laboratori might pay a subscript for access. comput compani could act 

a consultants. some busi might exchang equiti in return for quantum-assist breakthrough that lead to innov materi 

developments. 

quantum-assist optimization. A central and difficult comput task in all quantit disciplin of physic and social sciences, and across 

industries, be optimization. such problem be difficult to solv with convent comput becaus algorithm can navig onli slowli through the 

mathemat landscap of possibl solutions; good solut may be hidden behind high barrier that be hard to overcome. the most gener 

classic algorithm use statist method (such a thermal energi distributions) to 'jump' over these barriers. We believ that thi type of classic 

sampl could be enhanc by occasion invok quantum phenomenon such a tunnel (wherebi quantum inform be transmit through 

barriers) to find rare but high-qual solutions. 

commerci quantum technolog in five year : natur new & comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

4 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



for example, onlin recommend and bid strategi for advertis use optim algorithm to respond in the most effect way to 

consumers' need and chang markets. more-pow protocols, base on a combin of quantum and classic solvers, could improv the 

qualiti of product and servic in mani industries. logist compani need to optim their scheduling, plan and product distribut daily. 

quantum-enhanc algorithm could improv patient diagnost for health care. the qualiti of search or product recommend for larg 

information-technolog compani such a ours, microsoft, amazon and facebook could be enhanced. 

quantum sampling. sampl from probabl distribut be wide use in statist and machin learning. In theory, ideal quantum circuit can 

sampl from a larg set of probabl distribut than classic circuit can in the same time. our calcul show that, for rel small 

circuit involv high-fidel quantum gates, it will be possibl to sampl from probabl distribut that be inaccess classically, use a circuit 

of just 7 × 7 qubit in layer that be around 25 deep (ref. 5). 

In fact, sampl from distribut with such a shallow quantum circuit be like to constitut the first exampl of 'quantum supremacy'. thi term be 

coin by theoret physicist john preskill6 to describ the abil of a quantum processor to perform, in a short time, a well-defin mathemat 

erik lucero 

the small of these chips, a 6-mm square, hold 6 qubits. 

commerci quantum technolog in five year : natur new & comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

5 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



task that even the larg classic supercomput (such a china' sunway taihulight) would be unabl to complet within ani reason time 

frame. We predict that, in a few years, an experi achiev quantum supremaci will be performed. 

among promis applic of quantum sampl be infer and pattern recognit in machin learning. To facilit experiment across 

academia and industry, we plan to offer access to the quantum hardwar through a cloud-comput interface. 

technic hurdl 

sever technolog challeng must be overcom for quantum comput to be commercialized. quantum hardwar need to be scale up to 

compet with classic hardware, which have be improv exponenti for decades. qubit requir quantum coherence, which lead to quantum 

entanglement, by analog with how classic circuit requir transistor with gain. combin scale and coher be the big challeng of quantum 

system engineering. It be fundament difficult becaus quantum inform cannot be copi and subsystem be entangled, lead to design 

trade-off that be global in nature. 

We think that superconduct qubit be one of the most promis hardwar platform for quantum computers. base on standard integrated- 

circuit and superconduct technologies, they be rel easi to construct and control. and there be mani possibl design that might suit 

differ requir for digit and analog quantum processors. high-fidel system of around ten qubit have be demonstrated, show the 

feasibl of the engin concepts. 

new technolog be emerg that could aid scalability, such a superconduct bump bond — a two-lay architectur for information- 

process unit and control circuits. prototyp 'quantum annealers' of about 1,000 qubit be alreadi avail commercially7, 8. (these be analog 

quantum processor that could find good-qual solut for certain optim tasks.) 

sever improv be requir for today' imperfect quantum devic to be practical. shallow quantum circuit need high gate fidel and 

more stabil to limit decoherence. quantum-ann hardwar need to be improv with respect to connectivity, control precis and coher 

times, a well a have access to altern anneal schedules9. 

commerci quantum technolog in five year : natur new & comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

6 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



busi opportun 

A new technolog can improv busi in three ways: by increas revenue, reduc cost or lower invest in infrastructure. In the digit 

era, introduc a new technolog have an exponenti impact: even a 1% gain in product qualiti can help a compani to achiev overwhelm 

growth in term of user number or revenue10. thi be the 'superstar effect', which assum close competition, transpar and an effici market. 

If earli quantum-comput devic can offer even a modest increas in comput speed or power, earli adopt will reap the rewards. rival 

compani would face high entri barrier to match the same qualiti of servic and products, becaus few expert can write quantum algorithms, 

and busi need time to tailor new algorithms. the market that be most open to such disrupt be information-rich and digital, and involv 

busi challeng that reli on mani variables. such market includ financi services, health care, logist and data analytics. 

make a busi case requir compani to examin demand and supply. demand can be assess a follows. first, identifi the 'minim viabl 

products' — earli quantum innov with just enough core featur to enter the market. estim whether the innov solv an exist need 

(product–market fit), the time it would take to commerci the product (speed to market) and the market' respons (busi traction). 

greg kendall-ball/natur 

radio-frequ and microwav electron be use at googl to make scalabl control hardware. 

commerci quantum technolog in five year : natur new & comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

7 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



for example, encrypt break — often portray in the medium a a 'killer application' for digit quantum comput — do not score highli in 

term of market fit. It will one day be supersed by cryptosystem that be immun to quantum attack. and most privat enterpris be 

uninterest in break encrypt systems. By contrast, portfolio optim and risk manag need immedi data feedback and could 

benefit from quantum-enhanc models11. more effici quantum-chemistri calcul would revolution the develop of pharmaceuticals, 

catalyt converters, solar cell and fertilizers. 

quantum-assist optim and infer techniqu could empow new machine-learn and artificial-intellig systems. these could 

improv the manag of renew power generators, and of remote-sens and early-warn systems. the techniqu would also aid 

dynam price for onlin good and services, a well a warehous autom and self-driv cars. 

On the suppli side, compani will distinguish themselv through the qualiti of their technolog and teams. pioneer quantum academ and 

entrepreneur will have to work together. thi will be challeng becaus academ incent be often inconsist with those of start-up cultur 

and industry. 

strateg partnership can help busi to stand out. To attract ventur capitalists, the win quantum product should have busi model 

that requir few assets, be low on manufactur cost and clearli help custom to increas their revenues. through the cloud, a compani could 

benefit from use exist data centr when appli classic solver to simpl problems, and invok quantum processor when it matters. 

what now? 

the field of quantum comput will soon achiev a histor mileston — quantum supremacy. It be still unknown whether application-rel 

algorithm will be abl to deliv big increas in speed use the sort of processor that will soon be available. but when quantum hardwar 

becom suffici powerful, it will becom possibl to test thi and develop new type of algorithms. 

over the next decade, academia, industri and nation lab should work togeth to develop quantum simul and quantum machine-learn 

algorithms. We plan to support such research by offer access to google' quantum processor through cloud servic to other that lack the 

necessari capital, expertis or infrastructure. 

natur 543, 171–174 (09 march 2017) doi:10.1038/543171a 

commerci quantum technolog in five year : natur new & comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

8 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



articl pubm 

articl chemport 

articl chemport 

pubm 

articl 

articl pubm chemport 

articl pubm 

tweet follow @naturenew 

refer 

feynman, R. int. J. theor. phys. 21, 467–488 (1982). 

show context 

1. 

touzalin, A. et al. quantum manifesto: A new area of technolog (quantum inform process and commun in europe, 2016); 

avail at http://go.nature.com/2im6rjr 

show context 

2. 

fowler, A. g., mariantoni, m., martinis, J. M. & cleland, A. N. phys. rev. A 86, 032324 (2012). 

show context 

3. 

wecker, d., hastings, M. B. & troyer, M. phys. rev. A 92, 042303 (2015). 

show context 

4. 

boixo, S. et al. preprint at http://arxiv.org/abs/1608.00263 (2016). 

show context 

5. 

preskill, J. in the theori of the quantum world (ed gross, d., henneaux, M. & sevrin, a.) 63–80 (world scientific, 2011). 

show context 

6. 

denchev, V. S. et al. phys. rev. X 6, 031015 (2016). 

show context 

7. 

boixo, S. et al. natur commun. 7, 10327 (2016). 

show context 

8. 

rams, M. m., mohseni, M. & del campo, A. new J. phys. 18, 123034 (2016). 

show context 

9. 

commerci quantum technolog in five year : natur new & comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

9 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



articl pubm 

brynjolfsson, E. & mcafee, A. the second machin age: work, progress, and prosper in a time of brilliant technolog (norton, 2014). 

show context 

10. 

rosenberg, G. et al. ieee J. sel. top. signal process. 10, 1053–1060 (2016). 

show context 

11. 

relat stori and link 

from nature.com 

physicist propos football-pitch-s quantum comput 

01 februari 2017 

quantum comput readi to leap out of the lab in 2017 

03 januari 2017 

insid microsoft’ quest for a topolog quantum comput 

21 octob 2016 

googl move closer to a univers quantum comput 

08 june 2016 

physics: unit to build a quantum internet 

12 april 2016 

the chip be down for moore’ law 

09 februari 2016 

from elsewher 

quantum AI research at googl 

author inform 

affili 

masoud mohseni be senior research scientist at googl quantum artifici intellig laboratori in venice, california. 

peter read be manag director at vitruvian partner in london. 

commerci quantum technolog in five year : natur new & comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

10 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



1 comment subscrib to comment 

hartmut neven be director of engin at googl quantum artifici intellig laboratori in venice, california. 

sergio boixo, vasil denchev, ryan babbush, austin fowler, vadim smelyanskiy and john martini be all part of google' quantum AI 

team. 

compet financi interest 

googl plan to offer access to it emerg quantum processor via a cloud comput service. 

correspond author 

correspond to: masoud mohseni, peter read or hartmut neven 

for the best comment experience, pleas login or regist a a user and agre to our commun guidelines. you will be re-direct back to thi 

page where you will see comment updat in real-tim and have the abil to recommend comment to other users. 

comment for thi thread be now closed. 

pentcho valev • 2017-03-07 06:00 PM 

It seem perpetual-mot machin of the second kind be enter a commerci phase a well, but the scientif commun never 

discu violat of the second law of thermodynamics, even when the report be publish in prestigi journals: 

http://www.azocleantech.com/article.aspx?articleid=610 "A graphen batteri have be develop that have the potenti to convert ambient 

heat into electr current. thi invent increas the prospect of green, clean batteri power by ambient heat, and repres a 

signific progress in the research of self-pow technology." http://arxiv.org/abs/1203.0161 self-charg graphen batteri harvest 

electr from thermal energi of the environment, zihan Xu et al: "moreover, the thermal veloc of ion can be maintain by the extern 

environment, which mean it be unlimited. however, littl studi have be report on convert the ionic thermal energi into electricity. here 

we present a graphen devic with asymmetr electrod configur to captur such ionic thermal energi and convert it into electricity. 

[...] To exclud the possibl of chemic reaction, we perform control experiments... [...] In conclusion, we could not find ani evid 

that support the opinion that the induc voltag come from chemic reaction. the mechan for electr gener by graphen in 

commerci quantum technolog in five year : natur new & comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

11 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



natur issn 0028-0836 eissn 1476-4687 

© 2017 macmillan publish limited, part of springer nature. all right reserved. 

partner of agora, hinari, oare, inasp, crossref and counter 

solut be a pure physic process..." http://scitation.aip.org/content/aip/journal/apl/103/16/10.1063/1.4825269 electr gener from 

ambient heat across a silicon surface, guoan tai, zihan xu, and jinsong liu, appl. phys. lett. 103, 163902 (2013): "we report gener of 

electr from the limitless thermal motion of ion across a two-dimension (2d) silicon (si) surfac at room temperature. [...] ...limitless 

ambient heat, which be univers present in the form of kinet energi from molecular, particle, and ion sources, have not yet be report to 

gener electricity. [...] thi studi provid insight into the develop of self-charg technolog to harvest energi from ambient heat, 

and the power output be compar to sever environment energi harvest techniqu such a zno nanogenerator, liquid and ga flow- 

induc electr gener across carbon nanotub thin film and graphene, although thi remain a challeng to the second law of 

thermodynamics..." https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rvuf7-ttlxo the super supercapacitor. note the "real excit discovery" ("the 

world chang at that point") demonstr by ucla scientist at 1:09. pentcho valev 

see other new & comment articl from natur 

commerci quantum technolog in five year : natur new & comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

12 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 


