









































complet recoveri of valu In diophantin system (corvids) 
sean A. wilner (swilner2@illinois.edu) 

katherin wood (kmwood2@illinois.edu) 
daniel J. simon 

univers of illinoi at urbana-champaign 

introduct 

floods, server fires, lose punch cards, retir collaborators, 
the passag of time–a divers set of disast can destroy a 
data set. If the onli copi of an old set of data sat lock in 
the basement of a since-demolish building, it would seem 
to be go for good; often the onli trace left behind be a set 
of summari statist report in a paper. A mean, a standard 
deviation, and a sampl size may be all that we have of the 
origin data. 

for a certain type of data, these descript statist ac- 
tualli contain enough inform to rebuild each and everi 
possibl distribut of the raw data. ordin and categor- 
ical data, in which a respons be limit to one valu on a 
fix scale (such a an integ from 1 to 7, where 1 may 
be ”strongli disagree” and 7 may be ”strongli agree”), have 
a well-constrain structure. respons can take on a re- 
stricted, know rang of values. the limit and precis 
of thi scale, coupl with the sampl size, mean, and stan- 
dard deviat of the responses, be suffici to defin the 
entir set of possibl respons pattern that could gener 
those summari statistics. importantly, thi can be do in a 
closed-form manner which can be mathemat proven to 
find all possibl solut where such solut exist, and to 
describ characterist of the data which must be true. 

the math date back to the 3rd centuri mathematician dio- 
phantu of alexandria. He studi equat that have come 
to be know a diophantin equations. these be polyno- 
mial equat restrict to the set of integers. set up a 
system of these equat to solv for a set of unknown that 
satisfi the mean, standard deviation, and sampl size of a set 
of ordin data yield a complet solut class for the set of 
respons pattern that satisfi those summari statistics. with 
addit manipul of thi solut class, it be possibl 
to precis describ the characterist of the data that gen- 
erat them. 

We develop an autom approach to thi data recon- 
struction. the corvid (complet recoveri of valu In 
diophantin systems) analysi reli on a system of diophan- 
tine equat to solv for the number of subject who give 
each level of response. with the result solut class, it be 
possibl to precis character the data and enumer ev- 
eri and all solut which gener a set of summari statis- 
tics. use thi tool, one can recreat raw data from report 
statist in case where the origin data be not available, ex- 
plore the properti of the data set which satisfi constraints, 
and experi with how the solut space be affect a the 
distribut paramet change. 

diophantin equat 
diophantin equat take the form of 

∑ 
e∈nn 

( 
ae · 

n 

∏ 
j=1 

x 
e j 
j 

) 
=C 

where C be some constant, the an be integ values, e j be 
the jth element of e, and the x j be the jth variabl which 
can take integ values. In simpl english, thi be all possibl 
n-variabl polynomi restrict such that all number 
involv must be integers. some famou exampl includ 
pythagorean triples: 

x20 + x 
2 
1− x22 = 0 e.g. 32 +42 = 52 

and fermat’ last theorem∗: 

xn0 + x 
n 
1− xn2 = 0 n > 2 

linear equations, rather than gener high order polyno- 
mials, be of special interest to u sinc all linear diophantin 
equat can be directli solved, a luxuri not guarante for 
high order diophantin equat (matiyasevich,1972). 

data recreat 
In order to use diophantin equat to recreat data, we 
must first construct equat which repres the summari 
statist over our data. A natur approach to thi would in- 
volv treat each data point a a variable. however, do- 
ing so result in a quadrat equat due to the squar na- 
ture of the varianc calculation. In order to construct exclu- 
sive linear equations, the variabl we consid be instead 
the number of time each valu of the scale appear in the 
data. for example, if the data rang over a scale from 1− 7, 
we need onli 7 variabl where each correspond a number in 
the rang 1−7 and whose valu be the number of subject who 
select that value. use these variables, summari statist 
can be repres by three equations: 

∑ 
xi∈ 

xi = n (1) 

∑ 
xi∈ 

i · xi = n ·m (2) 

∑ 
xi∈ 

(n ·m−n · i)2 · xi = v · (n−1) ·n2 (3) 

∗fermat’ last theorem be specif that no such solut ex- 
ists. 



where S be the set of possibl valu in our dataset, xi be the 
variabl correspond to the valu i, m be the mean, v be the 
variance, and n be the total number of element of our dataset. 
equat 1 constrain our solut set to have the proper 
number of elements, equat 2 constrain the set to sum to 
the averag of the valu multipli by the number of values, 
and 3 constrain the solut to have the correct variance. 
the mean and varianc be transform from the summari 
statist to achiev integ values. 

thi set of linear diophantin equat can be solv to 
yield the potenti infinit set of all possibl integ solu- 
tions. To solv the system, we use the hermit normal form 
for the matrix describ by our system of equations, a tech- 
niqu laid out in havas, majewski, and matthew (1998). 

the result of the method describ in hava et al. (1998) 
be an initi solut (where ani could possibl exist) to the 
system of equat and a basi for the vector space of all 
transform to that solut which still satisfi the system 
of equations. worth note be that despit the fact that thi 
transform vector space be infinit (and thu our set of so- 
lution be infinite), the set of actual solut be bound sinc 
each variabl correspond to the total number of occurr 
of a give valu in the data set. valid solut therefor can- 
not have neg valu for ani variable. that is, mani (of 
the infinite) solut produc by thi method impli a neg- 
ativ number of occurr of values, and thu be invalid 
solut to our summary-statist equations. 

however, thi techniqu be use even take the neg 
valu into consideration, sinc if it fail to find a solut 
even while allow neg values, no solut can exist 
when restrict solut to contain onli posit values. 

toler and round 
corvid requir extrem precis to find valid solutions, 
often more than would typic be reported. further, round- 
ing error may occur when statist be reported. We circum- 
vent these issu by add adjust toler to both the 
mean and varianc term. toler put an envelop around 
the mean and variance, and the algorithm will search for ev- 
eri viabl combin of mean and varianc within those 
envelop and attempt to find solut for all valid pairs. 

To find valid means, the program first calcul the fol- 
low range: 

m = n(mreported±η) 

where n be the sampl size, mreport be the provid mean, 
and η be the tolerance. ani whole number in thi rang be a 
mean that could have be gener by the data. 

To find valid variances, the program make use of a math- 
emat relationship that defin a possibl varianc for a 
give mean and sampl size. specifically, all valid varianc 
can be reach by start at a valid varianc and move in 
a step size of 

∆v = 
2 

n−1 
(4) 

(for a proof, see appendix b). 
let k = m(n) mod n † and s = 2n−1 , where n be the sampl 

size and m be a valid mean. then a valid initi varianc is: 

vinit = 
(n− k)(m−bmc)2 +(k(dme−m)2) 

n−1 
(5) 

(for a proof see appendix C) and follow from equat 
4, we know that all valid varianc must have the form 

v = vinit + p ·∆v 

= 
(n− k)(m−bmc)2 +(k(dme−m)2)+2p 

n−1 

for some integ p. 
even for extrem larg tolerances, util thi rela- 

tionship allow the program to rapidli determin the valid 
mean/vari pairs. for each pair, corvid check if ani 
solut exist for the pair, even if it initi contain neg 
values; if not, the pair be discarded. If it do have a solution, 
a complet solv be then perform to see if it have a posit 
solution. these solut be returned. 

bound and requir valu 
use the same procedure, it be possibl to determin whether 
there be certain valu that must be present for a solut to 
be possible. We elimin certain valu or rang of valu 
from the scale, and solv the system again for the same sam- 
ple size, mean, and variance. if, after elimin portion of 
the scale, solut do not exist, it mean that there must be 
valu there in all distributions. 

for example, if a give mean, standard deviation, and sam- 
ple size be no longer possibl if the scale be restrict from 
2−7 instead of 1−7, then we can say with mathemat cer- 
tainti that for the data to be possible, there must be respons 
with a valu of 1. 

forbidden valu 
A similar logic appli to find valu which be not pos- 
sible. instead of elimin possibl values, however, they 
be fix at give points. then, a system of equat be set 
up to solv for the new mean and varianc with the give val- 
ue fixed. If no solut be possible, it mean that the data 
cannot have valu at the specifi points. 

for instance, data that be close to floor and have a veri 
small mean and standard deviat may becom imposs 
if a valu be fix at the upper end of the scale. thi mean 
that there be no solut which allow for a respons at that 
value, for ani possibl data. 

enumer of all possibl solut 
If the abov manipul do not suffici constrain the 
possibl gener data, it be possibl (often at appreci 
comput expense) to exhaust enumer all possi- 
ble data which would gener the give summari statistics. 

†nb: m(n) be not necessarili 0 mod n sinc m be not necessarili 
an integ 



By manipul the basi vector that compris the solu- 
tion space, a provabl complet list of all posit solut 
to the set of equat can be generated. A complet for- 
mal proof be give in appendix A, but the gener thrust of the 
proof be a follows: 

1. linearli combin basi vector to produc an altern ba- 
si such that each basi vector have one dimens on which 
it uniqu act with valu one (all other basi vector be 
zero on that dimension) 

2. linearli combin the new basi with the initi (potenti 
negative) solut vector such that the new solut vector 
be zero at everi dimens which be uniqu act upon by 
some basi vector 

3. We can now combin the new basi vector with our new 
solut in a bound fashion to produc all viabl solu- 
tion 

4. sinc the sum of all dimens on which no basi vector 
uniqu act be -1 for each basi vector and n for our initi 
solution, our bound be a total of n addit of basi vector 
sinc ani more addit of basi vector would produc 
a neg sum along the dimens not uniqu act 
upon (and thu a neg number). (n.b. no basi vec- 
tor can be subtract sinc thi would introduc a neg 
valu along the dimens on which it uniqu acts) 

exampl 
the case of the skew data 
let u consid result from a hypothet survey. 20 sub- 
ject be ask to rate how much they like veget a 
a child on a 1 to 7 scale. use R (R core team,2017) and 
the ‘truncnorm‘ packag (trautmann, steuer, mersmann, & 
bornkamp,2014), we gener data with a strong skew to- 
ward the low end of the scale. the averag respons be 
1.85, with a standard deviat of 0.88 (0.875094, to be pre- 
cise). 

given thi low mean and standard deviation, most re- 
spons be like to be toward the ”dislike” end of the rat- 
ing scale. what pattern of respons could yield thi mean 
and standard deviation, and how similar would the possibl 
pattern look? 

there be onli 4 possibl dataset that can gener these 
statist (see figur 1 and tabl 1). all solut be ex- 
treme similar to one another. the high possibl valu a 
data set can have be 5; these statist becom imposs if 
anyon be to realli love veget a a child. the data 
origin gener correspond to solut #1. 

corvid reveal that not onli be there few solut to 
these values, but also that the solut be extrem similar 
to one another. 

the case of the round error 
let u assum a differ sort of problem. imagin anoth 
20-subject survey, thi time with a mean respons of 3.2 and 

figur 1: A 3D histogram of the solut space for the skew 
data. frequenc of the scale valu be on the y-axis, while the 
valu itself be on the x-axis. the z-axi be each separ solu- 
tion. In thi case there be four solutions; due to the extrem 
skew of the data, none have a valu abov 5, and the solut 
that do contain a 5 have onli 1 and 2 for it other values. 

sol # 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
1 8 8 3 1 0 0 0 
2 6 13 0 0 1 0 0 
3 9 5 6 0 0 0 0 
4 7 11 0 2 0 0 0 

tabl 1: number of respond give each valu for the 
skew data. 

a standard deviat of 1.43637. however, let u say that the 
report standard deviat be incorrectli round down to 
1.43, instead of 1.44. 

corvid have no troubl deal with this. two decim 
place be alreadi insuffici precision, so we would have to 
set toler even if the statist be correctli round to 
two decim places. We recommend set the toler up 
to the report precision; here we would set the toler to± 
.01. corvid will then search for all possibl valid standard 
deviat between 1.42 and 1.44, and will therefor find the 
correct value. 

run corvid with thi toler on the SD and no 
toler on the mean (sinc 3.2 be the exact value) result 
in one SD which can produc a solution, and inde it be our 
origin value: 1.43637. despit the round error and the 
rel gener envelop to search through, we be abl 
not onli to find solutions, but in thi case find the origin 
statist a well (although it will not alway be the case that 
onli one valu within the toler result in solutions; there 
may be several, and the high the toler the more like 
there be to be multipl set of statist for which solut 



exist). 
becaus most statist will not be report to the preci- 

sion necessari for corvids, toler around the mean and 
standard deviat be built into the program. It be thu trivial 
to account for round errors, such a thi one; we just need 
to widen the envelop around the give statistic. If ani valu 
result in solutions, corvid will find them. 

the case of imposs valu 
corvid will also return no solut when none be pos- 
sible. take the skew data. let u increas the sampl size 
to 25, adjust the mean to 2, but retain a standard deviat of 
0.875094. It turn out that no combin of 25 valu can 
produc that mean and standard deviation. 

similarly, if we attempt to reconstruct valu with a sampl 
size of 20, a mean of 2, a standard deviat of 0.875094, and 
a scale from 2 - 7, we again see that such valu be impossi- 
ble, even with a fairli gener SD toler of .01. 

solut a a function of paramet valu 
In addit to straightforward data reconstruction, corvid 
can be an exploratori tool. 

let u consid a 1-7 scale with 20 respons and a mean 
roughli in the center of the scale, and observ how the num- 
ber of solut chang a the standard deviat increases. 

mean SD # sol 
3.1 0.5525063 2 
3.1 0.967906 16 
3.1 1.372665 57 
3.1 1.803505 97 
3.1 2.48998 16 
3.1 2.936163 1 

tabl 2: the number of possibl solut for differ SD 
values. 

from tabl 2 we can see that the number of solut have 
a u-shap when compar to the size of the standard devia- 
tion. At both veri small and veri larg valu for the standard 
deviation, the shape the data must take be constrained. for 
small values, all of the data point have to be cluster quit 
close to each other. for veri larg values, they have to be 
extrem far apart; the singl solut for the larg valu 
of the standard deviat in tabl 2 consist sole of 1 and 
7s. between these two extremes, the number of possibl solu- 
tion increas becaus the data have more pattern they can 
take. they could be rel normal distributed, have val- 
ue either close to the mean and or veri far away, and so on. 

By contrast, consid the same 1-7 scale with 20 responses, 
but thi time hold the standard deviat fix and vari the 
mean. 

tabl 3 show that even for the same standard deviation, 
where the mean be locat on the scale affect how mani solu- 
tion can exist for that value. more solut exist for mean 
at the center of the scale, when data can vari on either side. 

mean SD # sol 
1.4 0.9947229 2 
2.6 0.9947229 14 
4.6 0.9947229 22 
6.6 0.9947229 2 

tabl 3: the number of possibl solut for differ mean 
values. 

however, a the mean move toward the endpoint of the 
scale, there be less ”room” for data point to vary, and few 
solut exist. 

python implement 
We have provid a python implement of 
the corvid algorithm that provid the func- 
tional describ above, avail on github at 
https://github.com/katherinemwood/corvids/releases/tag/v1.0.0. 
the code can be download from source, or a stand-alon 
execut can be download and run. 

the sourc code provid three primari functions. the 
recreatedata function take a argument the sampl mean, 
the sampl variance, the sampl size, and the maximum and 
minimum of the scale. If solut exist, the function return 
all possibl solut in a list. option argument includ 
precis argument for the mean and variance; specifi 
these will caus the function to test everi valid mean and/or 
varianc within the rang specifi by the give valu ± pre- 
cision. these argument be use for circumv round- 
ing errors, or statist that be report to an insuffici 
precision. If no toler be give for the values, corvid 
may report that no solut exist when in fact valid solut 
exist at valu that be close to those reported. 

thi function can also check whether valu be possibl 
and whether solut remain possibl under certain valu 
constraints. these be option argument that can be spec- 
ifi and passed. To check whether a give solut be con- 
tain the solut space, it may be pass a the checkval 
argument. 

the analyzeskew function return a list of the skew of 
each solution, the mean skew, and the standard deviat of 
skew. thi can be use a a rough measur of the heterogene- 
iti of the solut space. 

the graphdata function creat an interact 3D his- 
togram of the solut space. note that for larg solut 
spaces, thi can be an extrem slow and costli operation. 
for thi reason, the function plot 40 solut at random by 
default.. 

the code run in multi-process mode by default to decreas 
runtime; thi argument may be disabled. 

If the stand-alon execut be run, then all interact 
occur through a gui. the solut function (get all 
possibl solutions, check custom ranges, and forc the 
inclus of values) be available, a be the graphing. 



see the document accompani the code for more 
usag details. 

comparison to other reconstruct tool 
two extant method exist to reconstruct or otherwis test 
the plausibl of likert-styl data; a bayesian linear-invers 
model (morey,2016) and sprite (heathers,2017). both of 
these method can be much faster than corvids, especi 
for larg scale and sampl size or veri gener toler 
around the mean and variance. sprite in particular be also 
more flexibl than corvids, capabl of accept more pa- 
ramet and work with a great divers of data types. 

however, each of these method be approximate. they reli 
on a form of random sampling, and therefor cannot guar- 
ante the complet of their solut space in all cases. 
corvid can make thi guarantee; becaus it be closed-form 
and deterministic, whatev it return will be the only, and 
every, possibl solut to the give summari statist and 
it will give the same result everi time it be run. If it report 
that no solut be possibl for a give set of values, that be 
a mathemat certainty. 

applic to non-likert data 
appli corvid to likert-scal type data be straightfor- 
ward. however, corvid be not limit to thi data type; it 
can deal with ani type of data that fall on a restrict scale 
for which the respons be integers. 

consid a case in which the overal measur be averag 
accuracy. 20 subject take a short, 10-item test, and get a 
score out of 10; thi be then convert to a percent, and the 
overal averag be taken. It might be report thus: “subject 
be rel accur overall, with an averag of 69.5% 
and a standard deviat of 9.45%.” with a bit of tweaking, 
we can chang thi into someth corvid can solve. 

We know that the limit to our scale will be 0 to 10; a 
subject can either answer 0 item correctly, or they can get 
a perfect 10 out of 10 item correct. We convert the averag 
percent into an averag number of items; on average, sub- 
ject get 6.95 item correct (with a toler of .01), with a 
standard deviat of .945 item (and a toler of .001). 

when these valu be pass to corvids, it will re- 
turn 16 solutions. these solut tell u how mani subject 
score each possibl valu (how mani get 10/10, how mani 
get 9/10, etc). see figur 2 for a plot of these solutions. 

the follow criterion have to be met for corvid to be 
abl to solv a give set of data: 

1. the respons scale must be fixed. there must be a mini- 
mum and maximum respons value, either due to the natur 
of the scale (1 - 7 rating, 0 - 10 item correct) or becaus it 
be report (e.g., “the minimum score in our sampl be 4, 
while the maximum be 17”). 

2. the valu must be transform to integers. If the data 
have discret step and can be transform to integers, they 
can often be solved. for example, even if a scale accept 

figur 2: A 3D histogram of the solut space for the ac- 
curaci data. In thi case, the respons valu be the number 
of item out of 10 that a subject answer correctly, and the 
frequenc be how mani subject achiev that score. 

fraction respons such a .25, a long a the minimum 
step size be fix at .25, it can be transform to an integ 
scale by multipli it by 4. even data that might appear to 
be continuous, such a weight or reaction time, might have 
a minimum step size due to the precis to which it can be 
measur (e.g. 1 gram, 10ms, .5 inches). 

3. the scale must be reason constrained. certain val- 
ues, such a reaction time, in theori have a fix scale (per- 
hap ani time faster than 250m or longer than 2000m be 
discarded, give a maximum and minimum) and a fix 
step size (1ms). If precis on the mean and standard de- 
viation be perfect, solv a scale of thi size might take 
30 minutes. the requir time will increas if toler be 
add and admit more mean/vari pair that have so- 
lutions. 

conclus 
the corvid algorithm can fulli reconstruct raw data from 
summari statist alone. when data gener from a fix 
scale, one need onli the limit and granular of the scale 
(e.g. ”integ 1 to 7”), the mean of the data, the standard 
deviat or variance, and the number of subject collect in 
order to reconstruct everi dataset which could have gener 
those summari statistics. 

corvid can be use in a varieti of ways. reconstruc- 
tion be among it most useful; in case where enough informa- 
tion be report but the origin data be unavailable, corvid 
can return a set of solut that be guarante to contain the 
origin data. corvid can also be use in an exploratori 
way. In some cases, the solut will be quit constrain 
and similar to one another; for example, all of the solut 
will be quit skewed. corvid can be use to explor the 
solut space, and examin which possibl remain when 



the scale be restrict or certain respons valu be requir 
to be present. In the case of our exampl with highli skew 
data, there be absolut no respons possibl abov a 5, 
for instance. corvid can also be use to explor proper- 
tie of distributions; one can gener a set of data accord 
to certain values, and then explor how mani other solut 
exist and what their properti are. 

refer 
havas, g., majewski, B. s., & matthews, K. R. (1998). ex- 

tend gcd and hermit normal form algorithm via lattic 
basi reduction. experiment mathematics, 7(2), 125– 
136. 

heathers, J. (2017). introduc sprite (and the 
case of the carthors child). avail from 
https://hackernoon.com/introducing-sprite-and 
-the-case-of-the-carthorse-child-58683c2bfeb 

likert, R. (1932). A techniqu for the measur of atti- 
tudes. archiv of psychology, 22(140), 1–55. 

matiyasevich, Y. V. (1972). diophantin sets. russian math- 
emat surveys, 27(5), 124–164. 

morey, R. (2016). how to check likert scale 
summari for plausibility. avail from 
http://bayesfactor.blogspot.co.uk/2016/03 
/how-to-check-likert-scale-summaries-for.html 

R core team. (2017). R: A languag and en- 
viron for statist computing. avail from 
https://www.r-project.org/ 

trautmann, h., steuer, d., mersmann, o., & 
bornkamp, B. (2014). truncnorm: trun- 
cat normal distribution. avail from 
https://cran.r-project.org/package=truncnorm 
(R packag version 1.0-7) 

author note 
DS origin pose the question of algorithm recon- 
struct data. SW develop the algorithm, proofs, and 
python implementation. KW discov the determinist 
varianc search, assist in test and debugging, and write 
the documentation. KW and SW draft the manuscript. all 
author critic edit the manuscript. 

appendix A 
formal proof of completeness: 

proof. We begin by assum a give initi solut vector 
(perhap contain invalid neg values) call s1 and a 
basi call B1 of a vector space of transform such that 
the action of ani element of the vector space on our initi so- 
lution produc an addit solut (which may also con- 
tain invalid neg values). our goal be to detail a method 
to produc all possibl solutions, S, with exclus posit 
integr valu at everi index. 

1. ani basi vector of a vector space may be replac by itself 
sum with a scalar multipl of ani other basi vector, 

and the result new set of vector be a valid basi of the 
origin vector space. 

2. given a minim basi (b1) of size m where each vector have 
dimension l, becaus of (1.), we can construct a new 
basi (b2) for the same vector space which have the properti 
that of the rightmost (at least‡) m coordinates, exactli one 
have a valu of 1 and the rest be all 0 where each 1 be at 
a differ index (each vector restrict to these m uniqu 
index under consider be orthogonal). do so may 
result in non-integr valu at some dimens of some 
vectors, however, thi do not caus ani problem sinc 
ani gener non-integr solut can be discard at 
the end. 

3. use b2, we can manipul our start solut s1 
(which may contain invalid neg values) such that the 
rightmost (at least) m coordin be all zero to produc 
a new solut s2 (also potenti contain neg val- 
ues) 

4. B2 and s2 have sever desir properties: 

• each vector in B2 have some dimens on which it 
uniqu act 
• No fraction scalar multipl of the basi element of 
B2 can ever preserv integ valu (all valid action 
by B2 requir integ multipl of the basi elements) 
sinc they have a valu of 1 on the dimens that they 
uniqu act upon.§ 

• ani valid solut s3 must have the form 

s3 = s2 + ∑ 
bi∈b2 

ai ·bi 

where each ai > 0 sinc s2’ rightmost m valu be all 
0 and each bi act uniqu and posit over exactli 
one of those rightmost values, if a basi vector be ever 
subtracted, it would introduc an invalid neg valu 
which no other basi vector could compens for. 

5. sinc the action of ani basi vector in B2 on s2 preserv 
it satisfact of equat 1 - 3, give that equat 1 
requir that the total sum of ani produc s3 be n, the 
sum of the coordin of everi vector in B2 must be 0. 

6. use (2.), we know that the sum of the last m coordin 
be exactli 1. combin thi with (5.) we know that the 
first l−m coordin must sum to -1 

7. lastly, use the fact that s2 satisfi equat 1 and have 
valu of 0 for it rightmost m coordinates, the first l−m 

‡it can be the case that rather than m, the correct valu may in 
fact be more than m when all basi vector be zero on some dimen- 
sion. however, thi do not impact the proof or the algorithm in 
ani way other than the superficial. 

§that is, if the action of a basi vector introduc a non-integ 
valu along the dimens on which it uniqu acts, no other basi 
vector can “fix” it to an integ value. 



coordin must sum to n. thu for ani valid solut s3 
a gener above, 

∑ 
i 

ai ≤ n 

. thus, sinc each ai must be an integer, we can exhaus- 
tive enumer and test all possibl set of ais.¶‖ 

appendix B 
proof. given some initi 

σ2init = 

n 
∑ 

l=1 
(xl−µ)2 

n−1 

let 

∑ 
l 6=i, j 

(xl−µ)2 =C 

1. 

σ2init = 
(xi−µ)2 +(x j−µ)2 +C 

n−1 

2. gener a chang in the data by increas one valu 
and decreas another: 

σ2modi f i = 
(xi−1−µ)2 +(x j +1−µ)2 +C 

n−1 

3. take the differ between these two yield the chang 
in varianc brought about by modifi the dataset: 

∆σ2 = 
(x j +1−µ)2 +(xi−1−µ)2 +c− (xi−µ)2− (x j−µ)2−c 

n−1 
−→ 

∆σ2 = 
(xi−µ)2 +(x j−µ)2− (xi−µ)2− (x j−µ)2−2(xi−µ)+1+2(x j−µ)+1 

n−1 

expand the term and simplifi yields: 

4. 

∆σ2 = 
2(xi− x j)+2 

n−1 
= 

2 
n−1 

· [(xi− x j)+1] 

mean that the result varianc chang from move 
two valu alway have to be a multipl of 2/(n-1). 

¶in practice, we need not enumer all combin up to n, 
and thi search can be consider optim by search space prun- 
ing; however, it be still comput expens for mani datasets. 
‖the theoret time complex for thi be 

(n+m−1 
n 
) 

which 
grow quit quickly; however, in practic search space prune dras- 
tical improv perform 

appendix C 
proof. given k = m · (n) mod n, ∗∗ where n be the sampl 
size and m be the report sampl mean, we will construct the 
dataset with a mani subject a close to the mean a possible. 

k+n · bmc= m ·n 

k+ 
n−k 

∑ 
1 
bmc+ 

k 

∑ 
1 
bmc= m ·n 

move the k into the second summat yield 
n−k 

∑ 
1 
bmc+ 

k 

∑ 
1 
(bmc+1) = m ·n 

sinc bmc+1 = dme −→ 
n−k 

∑ 
1 
bmc+ 

k 

∑ 
1 
dme= m ·n 

and thu we know that a dataset with n−k valu of bmc and 
k valu of dme give u the desir mean of m. comput 
the varianc of thi valid dataset, we obtain: 

v = 
(n− k) · (m−bmc)2 + k · (dme−m)2 

n−1 

∗∗if m be an integer, k = 0 and thi exercis becom trivial so we 
will assum m be not an integ 


