






































creat drive test for self-â†€driv car - ieee spectrum 


volvo-back zenuiti want to prove that autonom vehicl can drive 
more safe than human 

illustration: jude buffum 

east of gothenburg, 

sweden, peopl be usher into 

autonom vehicl for a test drive. 

but there’ a twist: the vehicl 

aren’t actual autonomous—there’ a 

hidden driver in the back—and the 

peopl be particip in an 

experi to discov how they’ll 

behav when the car be chauffeur 

them around. 

At a test track 

At 

—a joint 

ventur between 

and 

, a swedish auto-safeti 

company—thi test be just one of mani 

way we make sure not just that autonom vehicl work but that they can drive more safe than human 

ever could. If self-driv car be ever go to hit the road, they’ll need to know the rule and how to follow 

them safely, regardless of how much they might depend on the human behind the wheel. 

zenuiti 

(https://www.zenuity.com/) 

volvo 

(https://www.volvocars.com/us/foot 

/about) autoliv 

(https://www.autoliv.com/about- 

us/autoliv-brief) 

even now your car doesn’t need you a much a it onc did. advanc comput vision, radar technology, 

and comput platform alreadi interven to avoid accidents, turn car into guardian angel for their 

drivers. vehicl will continu take over more drive task until 

. thi will be the big 

transport revolut sinc car replac horse-drawn carriages. 

they’r capabl of drive themselv 

(/transportation/self-driving/the-first-fully-commercial-robocar-will-be-in-holland) 

creat drive test for self-driv car - ieee spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/transportation/self-driving/creating-driving-test... 

1 sur 8 10-04-18 à 08:50 



but it’ one thing to build a self-driv vehicl that works, and quit anoth to prove that it’ safe. traffic 

can be a unpredict a the weather, and be abl to respond to both mean navig countless 

scenarios. To fulli test all those scenario by simpli drive around would take not year but centuries. 

therefore, we have to find other way to assur safety—th like comput simul and mathemat 

modeling. we’r combin real traffic test with extens augmented-r simul and test case on 

one of the world’ most advanc test track to truli understand how to make self-driv car safe. 

to cruis down a straightaway in the middl of a sunni day. but what 

about what we call corner cases—scenario in which sever unlik factor occur together? A road litter 

with fall branch dure a thunderstorm pose differ challeng to a vehicl than an elk cross the 

road while the sun be setting. 

it’ easi for a self-driv vehicl 

manufactur 

for vehicl that react incorrectly, and so they want to know how the 

vehicl will respond. for us, the big question be “how do we know the vehicl be safe?” 

will like be held liabl (https://www.engadget.com/2017/12/02/california-axes-self- 

driving-car-rule-limiting-liability/) 

but befor that, we must first ask what it mean for a self-driv vehicl to be safe. safe doesn’t mean 

perfect; perfect inform about the environ will never be available. instead, it must mean the self- 

drive vehicl can handl the problem it’ design to handle, like obey speed limits, yield to a car 

merg into it lane, or observ right-of-way at a stop sign. and it must also recogn when it be at risk of 

exceed it design specifications. for example, the vehicl shouldn’t attempt to drive after be place in 

the middl of the forest. 

In 9 out of 10 accid result in fatal or major injuries, mistak by the driver 

, accord to 

multipl u.s. and u.k. sources. becaus of this, the quick answer to what be “safe enough” be usual “better 

than a human driver.” but the devil be in the details. it’ too easi a challeng to surpass the drunken driver or 

even the statist averag driver. the median driver, you might argue, be not veri good. 

be a contribut 

factor (http://cyberlaw.stanford.edu/blog/2013/12/human-error-cause-vehicle-crashes) 

We propos that self-driv car be held neither to a standard so strict that it delay the introduct of a 

life-sav technolog nor to one so lenient that it treat the initi custom a guinea pigs. instead, the first 

self-driv vehicl should be demonstr safer than a vehicl driven by the median human driver. We 

believ that if everi compon can be demonstr to work good than a human and if the complex 

algorithm that govern each compon can interact togeth to drive the vehicle, it’ reason to conclud 

that the car be 

than the human. 

a good driver (http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/technology/2017/11 

/a_self_driving_car_that_kills_is_still_better_than_a_human_driver.html) 

thi mean design the vehicle’ system to handl ani situat within it scope and discount the rest. 

while it be possibl a parachutist could land directli in front of the vehicle, it be so extrem unlik it be not 

requir to consid that scenario for safeti tests. 

photos: zenuiti 

In bad weather situat like heavi snowfall, a self-driv car must 

recogn that it radar [top], camera [bottom], and other sensor could be impaired, and 

adjust it drive strategi accordingly. 

snow-day safety: 

creat drive test for self-driv car - ieee spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/transportation/self-driving/creating-driving-test... 

2 sur 8 10-04-18 à 08:50 



ani potenti for unsaf behavior 

—softwar bugs, hardwar failures, 

sensor limitations, unexpect weather 

conditions—must be show to be veri 

rare. our rule of thumb be that ani one 

of these problem should occur less 

than onc in a billion hour of 

operation. At that low failur rate, all of 

these potenti caus consid 

togeth still produc a vehicl that be 

not onli safe but can be make avail 

without take too long to test. 

however, we shouldn’t expect the car 

to solv a problem that even the veri 

best human driver could not solve. one 

such problem, often trot out by 

ethic professor and the media, be 

. In thi 

hypothet scenario, someon must 

choos between do noth and 

allow a runaway trolley to kill 

sever peopl on one track, or activ 

throw a switch, allow the trolley 

to kill one person on anoth track. the 

parallel to self-driv vehicl be 

clear. what if a vehicl wind up in a 

situat where it must choos between kill sever pedestrian or swerv into a barricad and kill it 

own driver? 

the 

trolley dilemma 

(https://www.theatlantic.com 

/technology/archive/2015/10/trolley- 

problem-history-psychology-morality- 

driverless-cars/409732/) 

but thi question be a red herring. given that the risk of end up in ani fatal accid be low, then the risk of 

end up in a situat where a choic must be make between two be even lower. all we can demand of self- 

drive car be that they should avoid such imposs choic to begin with. 

what appear to be a safe autom vehicle, we be oblig to prove it safe. one way be 

through a brute-forc method. here, the vehicl be test in real traffic until we can say, with statist 

significance, that it’ safe—and that would take hundr of million or even billion of hour on the road. 

the first automobil be test in thi fashion, even if the peopl who drove those car be unwit 

particip in the experiment. 

onc we have 

creat drive test for self-driv car - ieee spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/transportation/self-driving/creating-driving-test... 

3 sur 8 10-04-18 à 08:50 



A crash cours 
In self-driv 
vehicl safeti 
test 

test “drivers” be place in a 

vehicl they believ be 

autonom to see how they 

react to be in a self-driv car. 

In reality, a driver hidden in the 

backseat be steer the vehicle. 

there be some situat you 

just can’t test in real life, like a 

deer jump in front of the 

vehicle. for these situations, the 

best option be to run comput 

simul to see how the 

vehicl behaves. 

zenuiti be test vehicl on 

sweden’ astazero test track. 

the massiv track provid 

multipl settings, includ 

simul residenti areas, 

highways, and forest areas. 

it’ also possibl to use a divide-and-conqu approach. rather than ask 

a complex question, such a whether the vehicle’ sensor can spot 

a deer cross the road dure a blizzard, it’ easi to ask simpler 

questions, such a whether the car can tell when it sensor be block 

by snow, or when hardwar have fail due to cold temperatures. To that 

you could add the question, “if yes, can the vehicl adjust it decis 

make accordingly?” We can then tackl each of these small 

question with whichev verif method be best suit to answer it, 

whether that’ a comput simulation, a quick spin on a test track, or 

put the car in a real traffic situation. 

In reality, ani practic approach will fall somewher between brute- 

forc test and the divide-and-conqu mode. becaus technolog 

develop in fast iterations, it would be wise to emphas divid and 

conquer. for example, whenev the hardwar or softwar be changed, 

ani data collect by a brute-forc approach may no longer be valid. 

divid and conquer direct u to focu on retest the safeti of onli the 

system that be updated, while avoid a time-consum 

regath of data we alreadi have. 

To tackl divide-and-conqu situations, we divid a self-driv 

vehicle’ system into four components—th human-machin interface, 

perception, decis making, and vehicl control. the human-machin 

interfac have to do with the way the vehicl and it user interact. 

percept be how the vehicle’ sensor creat a view of it 

surroundings, decis make plan how the vehicl should respond to 

that view, and vehicl control be the plan’ physic execution. each 

compon have it own corner case and method to verifi that it will be 

accept safe. 

consid the user interfac in a car that drive itself most of the time 

but still requir occasion human intervention. even then, a user may 

impair the vehicle’ perform by tri to take control of the vehicl 

unexpectedly. To find out how peopl react, we simul autonomi by 

hide a profession driver in the back of the vehicle, thu give 

the impress that the vehicl be drive itself, most of the time. We 

call it the “wizard of oz” vehicle, becaus like the famou wizard in the 

movie, we use misdirect to draw attent away from the “man 

behind the curtain,” a the wizard describ himself. 

creat drive test for self-driv car - ieee spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/transportation/self-driving/creating-driving-test... 

4 sur 8 10-04-18 à 08:50 



illustration: jude buffum 

when a test 

track just 

isn’t real 

enough, 

vehicl can be test in real 

traffic situations, whether 

that mean manual drive the 

car to gather sensor data or 

see how the car handl on it 

own, with supervision. 

To understand what the car 

“sees,” the camera can be 

test by show them 

prerecord footage, or by 

log what they pick up dure 

a manual drive. 

place the car’ radar or 

camera in snowi or wet test 

condit test whether the car’ 

“brain” can detect when the 

sensor themselv be 

obstructed. 

it’ not an elabor ruse—w hide the actual driver behind some 

plywood. perhap surprisingly, the test subject rare question the 

backseat enclosure. when one of them do ask, we explain it away a a 

space to hold comput or other equip necessari for the 

prototype. satisfied, our test subject can sit back and experi a 

“true” self-driv car. In fact, they becom so comfort they often 

get bore or even fall asleep—rev that we can’t alway reli on 

driver to react quickli if car need them to take over in a 

tricki situation. 

images: zenuiti 

it’ too danger to test some scenarios, like a pedestrian 

step out in front of a self-driv car in motion, so those kind of tricki “corner cases” 

be conduct in simul to find out how the car responds. 

self-driv simulations: 

In time, a human supervis of the vehicl decreases, the big 

challeng becom show that the vehicl can safe drive— 

unsupervised—in ani situat it may encounter. that mean put 

trust in the vehicle’ sensor after perform standalon sensor tests. 

We can test cameras, for example, in real drive conditions, but it’ just 

a easi to point the camera at a screen display an augment imag 

of a real road. it’ tough to test whether a camera could detect a moos 

on the road in the real world—get the moos to cooper would be 

tricky—but we can test how well the camera see the moos by 

augment actual road footag with an imag of a moos at whatev 

distanc and angl we need. In contrast, when we test the radar, we 

place the radar in a room where we can partial or entir cover the 

radar with water or snow and test whether it recogn the blockage. 

Of course, we also test how these sensor work togeth in the actual 

vehicle. We can oper the vehicl in a self-driv mode to observ 

how well it gather and us the sensor data. we’r primarili concern 

with understand how well the vehicle’ sensor function, so we also 

collect sensor data dure manual drive session to see how well the 

vehicl detect it surroundings. these drive test also give u an 

opportun to determin how well the vehicl detect it own 

limitations—for example, radar work well in fog but 

and 

camera do not. the vehicl must 

recogn those limit and adjust 

accordingly. 

lidar (/cars-that- 

think/transportation/self-driving/tetravue-says-its-lidar-will- 

dominate-the-robocar-business) 

then come perception. In general, the 

best way to test how well sensor 

perform thi job be by place real vehicl in real traffic conditions, in both good and bad weather. for less 

common corner cases, such a detect debri on the road, the real traffic experi be supplement 

with test-track scenarios. 

creat drive test for self-driv car - ieee spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/transportation/self-driving/creating-driving-test... 

5 sur 8 10-04-18 à 08:50 



We conduct our scenario test at the 

, a larg 

test track partial own by the 

research institut of sweden. the test 

track extend through wood area 

and a section simul a town. 

astazero can be configur to tackl 

virtual ani traffic condit we 

would be interest in testing. 

astazero prove ground 

(http://www.astazero.com/) 

We supplement such traffic test 

with increasingli sophist virtual 

simulations. At the same time, 

augment imageri could assist in 

test some corner cases. use 

augment reality, for example, we can 

test how well a vehicl obey u.s. 

traffic sign use a road in sweden; all 

we have to do be superimpos those 

sign over the swedish ones. thi 

approach can be even more help in 

test danger corner case like 

drive near pedestrian at high speed. 

decis make must be evalu 

separ from perception. that is, 

rather than test whether the vehicl 

see the world properly, we judg 

how well it work with the uncertain 

and incomplet pictur that the 

percept system provid it. for 

example, a blind corner could be hide a pedestrian, who’ liabl to step into the road just a the vehicl 

approaches. 

must perceiv that obstruct sight line and take that limit into consider 

by plan to slow down when it approach the corner. like ani human driver, the vehicl must know it 

own limitations. 

the decision-mak system (/cars-that-think/transportation/self-driving/nvidia-or-nxpwhose- 

robocar-brain-will-win) 

creat drive test for self-driv car - ieee spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/transportation/self-driving/creating-driving-test... 

6 sur 8 10-04-18 à 08:50 



we’r also build and continu expand an immens databas of scenario to test the decision- 

make system against ani scenario we choose. consid a self-driv vehicl in a lane adjac to a larg 

18-wheeler travel slightli behind it. ideally, the vehicl will recogn that it be drive in the truck’ blind 

spot and adjust it posit to decreas the chanc of an accident. our databas of scenario can expos the 

vehicle’ decision-mak process to ani varieti of scenario involv lane changes, merges, or other traffic 

condit with differ speeds, positions, and distanc between vehicl to observ what decis the 

vehicl makes. currently, our vehicl can handl lane chang quit well, though we still requir them to 

keep a great distanc from the vehicl around them than a human driver would need. 

images: zenuiti 

ensur that a self-driv car can recogn object like a stall car 

or a moos cross the road be tough if you don’t have one lie around, but real footag 

can be augment with imag of these object to train the car to spot them. 

now you see it: 

last but not least, the car must be abl 

to execut it drive plan. We need to 

know how the vehicle’ normal capac 

to steer and to brake might be limit 

by condit on the road, such a ice. 

We can rely, in part, on comput 

simulations, thank to accur model 

of vehicl components. but we can’t 

model everything; to test how the car 

handl a tire blowout or an 

unexpect pothole, we have to put it 

on the test track. 

we’v spent quit some time on the 

test track tackl the divers 

challeng of on-road objects. even 

small things, such a a rock or an 

exhaust pipe that’ suddenli fall off 

anoth car, can damag a vehicl if it’ 

go fast enough. for all of these 

objects, we need to be sure the vehicl 

can detect them from far enough away 

to brake or chang lane in time. our 

test be ongoing; while we’v gotten 

good result for some obstructions, 

other pose specif challenges. tire in 

the road, for example, aren’t pick up 

by lidar or radar veri well. for the 

vehicl to react to them in time, we still 

need to improv it abil to detect 

them with cameras. 

creat drive test for self-driv car - ieee spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/transportation/self-driving/creating-driving-test... 

7 sur 8 10-04-18 à 08:50 



use a divide-and-conqu approach give u the abil to test how the system compon work together. 

To verifi the complet system mean run countless simul of variou combin of traffic 

situat and introduc failures. 

Of course, other compani be tackl thi problem in differ ways. In our experience, older, big 

compani be reli on brute-forc methods. however, we see valu in be modular and swap out 

hardwar a needed. We also want to keep the driver involv and learn how to build an autonom vehicl 

that be safe for users. 

We can use these method to test the redund of a fulli self-driv vehicle. suppos the vehicle’ brake 

fail. the vehicl must carri out a complex sequenc of actions: It have to detect the problem, plan maneuv 

to react with a minimum amount of risk, and carri out that plan use a secondari system. similar 

redund must be includ for compon like sensors, control units, software, commun 

systems, and the mechan systems, and they must all be test thoroughly. 

even after all that, we need to verifi that the complet system in the real vehicl in real traffic oper safely. 

car manufactur and self-driv vehicl startup will deploy test fleet and driver for thi final step. 

self-driv vehicl be on the way, and they will make road safer and more efficient. but don’t expect to 

see them on street soon. It will still take a while to verifi everi corner case. onc a vehicl have be verifi 

for a specif scenario, like downtown new york citi in july, it will take addit verif to ensur it 

can handl the same area under winter conditions, a well a in downtown shanghai, on countri roads, and 

so forth. 

By focu on the accept rather than obsess over perfection, and by break down the coloss 

number of safeti verif into manag tasks, we can make self-driv vehicl a realiti for mani 

custom around the world. 

thi articl appear in the march 2018 print issu a “drive test for self-driv cars.” 

be the 

technic lead for function safeti in autonom drive at , in göteborg, 

sweden. be technolog advisor at zenuity. 

jona nilsson (https://www.media.volvocars.com/global/en-gb/media/photos/158384/jonas-nilsson) 

zenuiti (https://www.zenuity.com/) 

erik coelingh (https://se.linkedin.com/in/coelingh) 

creat drive test for self-driv car - ieee spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/transportation/self-driving/creating-driving-test... 

8 sur 8 10-04-18 à 08:50 


