


















































creatism: A deep-learn photograph capabl of creat profession work 

hui fang 
hfang@google.com 

googl 

meng zhang 
zhangmeng@google.com 

googl 

abstract 

machine-learn excel in mani area with well- 
defin goals. however, a clear goal be usual not 
avail in art forms, such a photography. the 
success of a photograph be measur by it aesthet 
value, a veri subject concept. thi add to the 
challeng for a machin learn approach. 
We introduc creatism, a deep-learn system for 
artist content creation. In our system, we break 
down aesthet into multipl aspects, each can be 
learn individu from a share dataset of pro- 
fession examples. each aspect correspond to an 
imag oper that can be optim efficiently. 
A novel edit tool, dramat mask, be introduc 
a one oper that improv dramat light for 
a photo. our train do not requir a dataset with 
before/aft imag pairs, or ani addit label to 
indic differ aspect in aesthetics. 
use our system, we mimic the workflow of 
a landscap photographer, from frame for the 
best composit to carri out variou post- 
process operations. the environ for our 
virtual photograph be simul by a collect of 
panorama imag from googl street view. We de- 
sign a “turing-test”-lik experi to object 
measur qualiti of it creations, where profession 
photograph rate a mixtur of photograph from 
differ sourc blindly. experi show that a 
portion of our robot’ creation can be confus with 
profession work. 

1 introduct 
great progress have be make in both camera hardwar and 
comput photography, such that a modern cell phone 
can take technic solid photographs, in term of exposur 
level, nois level, pixel sharpness, color accuracy, etc. how- 
ever, a good photo should be not onli technic solid, but 
also aesthet pleasing. 

aesthet be vagu and subjective, a metric hard to defin 
scientifically. multipl research exist [murray et al., 2012] 
[kong et al., 2016] to collect dataset to defin aesthet qual- 
ity. gener imag toward top aesthet qualiti be an 
even harder problem. A naiv approach use a singl aes- 
thetic predict be insuffici to captur differ aspect in 
aesthetics, a we will show in experiment. 

In thi paper, we introduc creatism, a deep-learn sys- 
tem for artist content creation. here aesthet be treat not 
a a singl quantity, but a a combin of differ aspects. 
each aspect be learn independ from profession ex- 
amples, and be coupl with an imag oper that can mod- 
ifi thi aspect. By make imag oper semi-orthogonal, 
we can effici optim a photo one aspect at a time. 

anoth advantag of coupl an aesthet aspect with an 
imag oper be that we can simul “negative” exampl 
tailor toward that aspect. thi get rid of the need to col- 
lect before/aft imag pair from profession to indic 
how to improv each aspect. In thi project the dataset for aes- 
thetic aspect train be a collect of professional-qu 
photo with no addit labels. 

In addit to learn aesthet aspect with know imag 
operations, we show that it be also possibl to defin new op- 
erat from thi unlabel dataset. By combin a set of 
exist imag filter to gener neg examples, we train 
a new imag operation, dramat mask, that can enhanc dra- 
matic light in photos. 

one stand problem for current enhanc work be 
qualiti metric, especi on high end of aesthetics. A user- 
studi with imag comparison tell which imag be better. 
but a “better” imag may still remain mediocre. A direct 
score method be limit by the expertis of the evaluators, 
who be also suscept to bia in a non-blind setting. 

what be the “ultimate” metric for the high aesthet stan- 
dard human can define? draw inspir from the famou 
turing-test, we propos the follow metric: 

• A gener photo be at profession level, if profession- 
als, in a blind test, can not tell whether it be creat by 
an algorithm, or by anoth professional. 

In our work we use “professional”, i.e. profession pho- 

ar 
X 

iv 
:1 

70 
7. 

03 
49 

1v 
1 

[ 
c 

.C 
V 

] 
1 

1 
Ju 

l 2 
01 

7 

lphilipp 
text tapé à la machin 
At first sight: not so effici compar to professional... to be revis 



tographers, to repres best expert in photography. the 
standard can be further rais by replac that word with, 
say, “top 10 master photograph in the world”. 

We work with profession photograph to defin 4 level 
of aesthet quality, with the top level “pro”. In experi 
we ask profession to rate a random mixtur of photo into 
differ levels, with photo take by our robot mix in. for 
robot creation with high predict scores, about 40% rate 
we receiv be at semi-pro to pro level. while we didn’t beat 
our “turing-test” consistently, we show that creat photo 
use machin learn at profession qualiti be make possi- 
ble. 

our contribut in thi paper are: 
• A deep-learn system that learn differ aspect of 

aesthet and appli imag oper to improv each 
aspect in a semi-orthogon way, use a dataset of pro- 
fession qualiti photo with no addit labels, or be- 
fore/aft imag pairs. 
• introduc dramat mask a a novel imag oper to 

enhanc dramat light in photos. 
• In a “turing-test”-lik experiment, we show that our sys- 

tem can creat photo from environ with some of 
them at semi-pro to pro level. 

the rest of the paper be organ a following: relat 
work be discuss in section 2. We describ the framework 
of creatism system in section 3, includ how to train deep- 
learn model for differ aspect in aesthetics, and how 
to optim each aspect independ in a photo use it 
associ imag operation. two special imag operations, 
crop and dramat mask, be discuss in section 4. To 
evalu photo creat by our robot, aesthet level be de- 
fin in section 5. experi be present in section 6. 

2 relat work 
dataset be creat that contain rate of photograph 
base on aesthet qualiti [murray et al., 2012] [kong et al., 
2016] [lu et al., 2015a]. machine-learn method have 
be use to train model on aesthet qualiti use such 
datasets, with either hand-craft featur [murray et al., 
2012] [marchesotti et al., 2014], or deep neural network [lu 
et al., 2014] [lu et al., 2015b]. 

imag enhanc can be guid by learn aesthet 
model. In [yan et al., 2016] color transform be predict 
from pixel color and semant information, learn from be- 
fore and after imag pair edit by a photographer. 

beyond judg a photo a simpli “good” or “bad”, mul- 
tipl aspect of aesthet can be learn to control imag 
filters. In [jaroensri et al., 2015], imag with bright 
and contrast variat be evalu a accept or not 
by crowd computing, which in turn predict accept rang 
of these filter on new images. however, sampl imag in 
2 − D space of bright and contrast and have them la- 
bele by peopl do not scale well. In thi paper we present 
an approach that studi each filter in it own subspace. We 
also get rid of human label in thi step. 

ava dataset be use to train imag crop in [mai 
et al., 2016], where a sliding-window be appli to an im- 
age to yield the best crop. A recent approach in [chen et al., 

2017] be similar in spirit to ours, where the author learn a 
model for aesthet composit by use random crop a 
neg examples. our approach decoupl multipl aes- 
thetic aspect includ composition. In the special case of 
cropping, we show that a hybrid approach lead to more vari- 
ation of good crop candidates. 

pair-wis imag style transfer be anoth way to enhanc 
images. deep-learn approaches, pioneer by [gati 
et al., 2015], show huge advantag over tradit texture- 
synthesi base approach [hertzmann et al., 2001]. recent 
research also transfer style from photo to photo while pre- 
serv realist detail in result [luan et al., 2017]. how- 
ever, such transfer requir the user to manual provid an 
imag or paint a the target. the success of transfer heav- 
ili depend on how suitabl the target is. 

In generative-adversari network (gans) [goodfellow 
et al., 2014], a gener model G and a discrimin model 
D be simultan trained. It lead to amaz content cre- 
ation ability, be abl to gener plausibl imag of differ- 
ent categori [radford et al., 2015] [nguyen et al., 2016] 
[zhu et al., 2017]. condit can be introduc to control 
gan’ result [mirza and osindero, 2014]. such condit 
may come from anoth image, such that gener result 
becom a variat of the input imag [isola et al., 2016]. 

however, gan result usual contain notic artifacts. 
thi limit it applic in imag enhancement. In thi pa- 
per we introduc an imag oper “dramat mask” that 
us a similar structur a dc-gan [isola et al., 2016]. in- 
stead of output pixel directly, it creat a low-resolut 
mask to modul brightness, condit by origin image. 
thi oper enhanc dramat light in mani photos. 

evalu on aesthet be veri subjective. compar to 
ground truth [mai et al., 2016] [chen et al., 2017] be onli vi- 
abl when ground-truth exists. user studi be anoth option, 
where typic 2 or more imag be compar to yield the 
best one [yan et al., 2016]. however, the win imag in 
a group may still be of low aesthet quality. previou studi 
show that imag comparison can produc absolut rank 
give enough pair [mantiuk et al., 2012]. howev collect- 
ing huge amount of pair from profession be not practical. 
instead, we adapt an approach with an absolut score sys- 
tem. our evalu be a “turing-test” on aesthet quality, 
where profession be ask to give score to a mixtur of 
photo with predefin absolut meaning. 

3 problem formul 
assum there exist a univers aesthet metric, Φ, that 
give a high score for a photo with high aesthet qual- 
ity. A robot be assign a task to produc the best photograph 
P , measur by Φ, from it environ E . the robot seek 
to maxim Φ by creat P with optim actions, control 
by paramet {x}: 

arg max 
{x} 

(φ(p (E , {x}))) (1) 

the whole process of photo gener P (E , {x}) can be 
broken down into a seri of sequenti oper ok, k = 



1...n , control by their own set of paramet {xok}. each 
Ok oper on it subject to yield a new photo: 

Pk = ok({xk}) ◦ .... ◦o1({x1}) ◦ E 
A well-defin and differenti model of Φ will conclud 

our paper at thi point. but in practice, it be next to imposs 
to obtain a dataset that defin Φ. here be sever reason 
why: 

• curs of dimension 
By definition, Φ need to incorpor all aesthet aspects, 

such a saturation, detail level, composition... To defin Φ 
with examples, number of imag need to grow exponen- 
tialli to cover more aspect [jaroensri et al., 2015]. 

To make thing worse, unlik tradit problem such a 
object recognition, what we need be not onli natur images, 
but also pro-level photos, which be much less in quantity. 

• meaning gradient 
even if Φ manag to approxim aesthet qualiti use 

examples, it gradient may not provid guidanc on everi as- 
pect in aesthetics. If a profession exampl be introduc 
mainli for it composit quality, it offer littl insight on 
hdr strength for similar photos. 

• before/aft pair be harder to obtain 
To put thing to extremity, let’ say all pro-level photo 

in thi dataset have a signatur print somewhere, while all 
lower-qu photo don’t. Φ can be train to high accuraci 
just by detect signatures. obvious such Φ provid no 
guidanc to our goal. In realiti it be similarli hard to forc Φ 
to focu on aesthet qualiti alone, instead of other distribu- 
tion imbal between photo at differ quality. 

one use trick be to provid photo-pair befor and after 
post-process by photographers. thi way Φ be forc to 
onli look at differ the photograph made. however, it 
be even harder to collect such a dataset in larg quantity. 

• hard to optim 
It be difficult to optim all aesthet aspect in their joint 

high-dimension space. 

3.1 segment of Φ 
In our paper, we resolv abov issu by choos opera- 
tion Ok to be approxim “orthogonal” to each other. 
with that we segment Φ into semi-orthogon components: 
Φ := Σ 

k 
Φk + φre , where Φk onli measur aesthet 

chang thatok be capabl of causing. thi way applyingok 
have much less impact on all other Φj , j 6= k, which make the 
optim problem separable. 

the object function in Eq (3) be approxim as: 

Σ 
k 

(arg max 
{xok} 

(φi(pi({xok})))) + φres(pn ) 

here each arg max 
{xok} 

(φk(pk({xok}))) becom a lot more 

tractable. intuitively, if Ok be an imag filter that chang 
overal saturation, pk({xok}) := ok({xok}) ◦pk−1 appli 
satur filter, control by {xok}, on a constant input 

photopk−1 from last step. Φk be a metric that onli care about 
how much satur be aesthet pleas for a photo. the 
optim seek the right satur amount that satisfi 
φk. such optim happen in the dimens of {xok}, 
which be much low compar to Eq (3), sometim even in 
1d. 

φre captur all remain aesthet aspect miss by 
{φk}. however, if {ok} exhaust our operations, whose aes- 
thetic effect be alreadi measur by {φk}, there be liter- 
alli noth we can do to improv φres. 

however, aesthet aspect in φre can still be captur to 
evalu overal aesthet quality. We train a scorer Φ 

′ ∼ 
Φ := Σ 

k 
Φk + φre use incept v3 [szegedi et al., 2015] 

to predict ava rank score (see section 5) directli from 
images. thi scorer be late use to rank creat photos. 

3.2 select of oper {ok} 
the intuit behind the requir for {ok} to be “orthog- 
onal”, be that we don’t want a late step Oj to damag aes- 
thetic qualiti Φi that be optim by an earli step oi. 
but in practice, the pixel chang caus by ani imag filter be 
hardli orthogon to that of another. We use thi term loosely, 
and manual pick oper {ok} in follow order: 
• composit an imag from environ 
• appli satur filter 
• appli hdr filter 
• appli dramat mask 
their effect be roughli independ to each other, focus- 

ing on composition, saturation, detail level and low frequenc 
bright variation, respectively. In section 6.3 we will show 
how thi semi-orthogon help each Φk to focu on it re- 
spectiv aesthet aspect. 

3.3 operation-specif aesthet metric {φk} 
let’ use a satur filter Os a an exampl of imag op- 
erations. We want to train a metric φs, that focu onli on 
aesthet qualiti relat to saturation, not on anyth else. 

If a dataset contain photo with label overal aesthet 
quality, it can not be directli use to train Φs becaus contri- 
bution of satur be mix with all other aesthet aspects. 
instead, we propos a method that onli us pro-level photo 
a posit exampl for satur training, with the maxi- 
mum Φs score assign to them. We then randomli perturb 
satur level in these photo use os. it differ to 
the origin photo serf a a penalti on Φs for the perturb 
photo. 

A deep-learn model be then train to predict Φs for 
these photos. sinc a high-scor photo and it low-scor 
counter-part onli differ by the perturbation, the model fo- 
cu onli on whato did, noth else. thi make Φs much 
easi to train than Φ. while gradient in Φ can be ill-defined, 
we can now find gradient for each Φk use it respectiveok. 

sinc neg exampl be gener on the fly, thi 
method remov the need for before/aft photo pair in 
dataset. We can start with a same set of profession photo 
to train differ aspect in aesthetics. 



require: dataset of profession photo {m} 
require: imag oper ok: mout = ok({x}) ◦min 
require: A metric measur similar between two photos: 

sim(m1,m2) ∈ [0, 1]. 1.0 mean identical. 
1: D = {}, a set to hold (image, score) pairs. 
2: for each imag M in {m} do 
3: insert (m, 1.0) in D 
4: # randomli sampl paramet within a range: 
5: for each dimens d in {x} do 

offsetd = random(xmind, xmaxd) 
6: M 

′ 
= ok({offset}) ◦M 

7: insert (M 
′ 
, sim(m,m 

′ 
)) in D 

8: train a model to predict score Φk from D 

the algorithm for train Φk be give below. 
when appli an oper on a photo, we optim fil- 

ter paramet to maxim Φk on the input photo. when 
Ok have onli one parameter, the optim becom a fast 
1d search. In thi project, we optim satur and hdr 
filter use thi method. 

4 special oper 
two special operations, crop and dramat mask, deviat 
slightli from the algorithm in section 3.3. 

4.1 imag composit 
In the first oper ocrop, our robot find the best composi- 
tion from the environment. In our project, the environ 
be repres by a spheric panorama. We first do 6 cam- 
era project to sampl the panorama: each project be 
separ by 60 degre to cover all directions, with pitch an- 
gle look slightli up at 10 degree, field of view 90 degree. 
thi way each project overlap with it neighbor to increas 
chanc for ani composit to be contain in at least one 
projection. 

φcrop be train to pick the best crop for each of these 6 im- 
ages. it train be similarli to other φk, where a perturb 
imag M 

′ 
be a random crop from M . sim(m,m 

′ 
) be simpli 

defin a area(m 
′ 
) 

area(m) . both M and M 
′ 

be resiz to a squar 
of fix size befor training. 

intuitively, the score say that in a profession photo M , 
the photograph chose current composit over a zoomed- 
in version to favor a good composition. sinc crop onli 
remov content, M 

′ 
never creat a case when a good com- 

posit be encompass by unnecessari surroundings. while 
techniqu like imag inpaint can potenti fake some 
surround to a photo, in practic we notic φcrop perform 
reason well without such cases. 

however, crop need special treatment becaus the 
correl between it oper ocrop and other φk. intu- 
itively, if we chang satur of a photo, φcrop be design 
to remain indifferent. but if we crop an imag to a small 
patch, Φs may suffer a lot, becaus imag content be total 
changed. 

thu we can not turn a blind eye to other aesthet aspect 
dure cropping. We instead use 

Φ 
′ 

crop(c) := c× φcrop + (1− c)× Φ 
′ 

Φ 
′ 

be an approxim to Φ that judg overal aesthet from 
section 3.1. c be a constant to weigh in the import of 
composit vs. overal aesthet quality. In section 6.2, 
experi show that such a hybrid metric lead to good 
crop options. 

dure optimization, a slide window at differ size and 
aspect ratio search for crop with high Φ 

′ 

crop(c). 

4.2 dramat mask 
A photograph often need to stay at one spot for hours, 
wait for the perfect lighting. when that doesn’t work out, 
post-process may also add dramat or even surreal light to 
a photo. vignet be a commonli use filter that modul 
bright spatial with fix geometry, usual brighter near 
the center, darker at boundary. chang light base on 
imag content be typic a manual job. 

We want to learn a novel imag operation, dramat mask, 
that enhanc dramat light by modul bright 
gradual in a photo. good exampl with such light must 
exist in {m}. however, {m} contain no addit label to 
indic that. We show that it be still possibl to learn such a 
specif oper from unlabel dataset. 

sinc we do not have an existingodramat to creat {M 
′} 

a neg examples, we use a list of exist imag filter 
{fj} that be capabl to chang bright in variou ways: 
M 

′ 
= randomli pick from {fj ◦m} 

the select of {fj} be discuss in section 6.4. here the 
assumpt be M , be a profession photo, have a chanc 
of contain dramat lighting. If the light in the photo 
be chang significantli by ani Fj , it will like lead to less 
ideal lighting. 

sinc odramat do not exist yet, we no longer separ 
the train of φdramat from the appli of odramat 
a in section 3.3. instead, they be train jointli in a 
generative-adversari network (gan). 

gan have demonstr great capabl in creat appar- 
entli novel content from examples. In most case such cre- 
ation be seed by random number or control parameters. 
it outcom be typic a fixed-s raster in imag space, 
usual with some notic artifacts. gener an imag 
at arbitrari size without artifact be current challenging. 

instead of gener pixel directly, we target to gener 
the “editing” oper odramat use gan, which be less 
suscept to artifacts. thi oper be parameter by a 
low-frequ 8 × 8 mask to modul bright of input 
photo M ‘: 
odramat ◦M 

′ 
:= M 

′ 
+mask× ( brighten ◦M ′ −M ′) 

here “brighten” be an imag filter that make input 
brighter. dure train mask be smoothli up-scal to the 
size of M ‘ use bilinear interpolation. 

We learn how to gener the mask in the gener model 
G. the overal network architectur be dcgan-bas [isola 
et al., 2016], with G condit by our input image. it net- 
work architectur be depict in figur 1. 



figur 1: gan structur for dramat mask training. 

the discrimin model D tri to distinguish imag 
from {m} and {odramat ◦M 

′}. To encourag variat 
in G, we do not have a loss that compar pixel-differ be- 
tween odramat ◦M 

′ 
and the photo M ‘ be deriv from. 

intuitively, there should exist mani differ way to chang 
the light in a scene such that it becom more dramatic. 

due to the competit natur of gan, it be veri difficult 
for G to converg to a static state [goodfellow et al., 2014]. 
instead of wait for an optim mask, we use gan to pro- 
vide multipl candidates. We train multipl model with dif- 
ferent random initialization, collect snapshot over time. 
all snapshot form a set of candid model {m}. In the 
end, Φ 

′ 
be use to pick the best result gener from all mem- 

ber of {m}. 
overall, the algorithm of how our robot oper is: 

require: the robot “travels” through environ {e} 
1: result {r} = {} 
2: photo to process {p} = {}. 
3: for each environ E in {e} do 
4: project E to 6 imag {p0} in differ direct 
5: for each project imag P0 do 
6: for composit import c in {0, 0.5, 1} do 
7: find best crop {p1} use Φ 

′ 

crop(c) 
8: insert top k = 3 crop of {p1} into {p} 
9: for each P1 in {p} do 

10: maxim φhdr: P2 = ohdr ◦ P1 
11: maxim φsaturation: P3 = osatur ◦ P2 
12: dramat mask result {pm} = {}, 
13: for each dramat mask modelm in {m} do 
14: p3i = odramatic(m) ◦ P2 
15: insert p3i to {pm} 
16: P3 = imag in {pm} with max Φ 

′ 
. 

17: insert P3 in {r} 
18: for crop in {r} from same p0, keep one with max Φ 

′ 

19: rank {r} with Φ′ . 

5 aesthet scale 
In thi paper, we target to gener photo toward profes- 
sional qualiti on a measur aesthet “scale”, such that 
they can be compar with all other photo in the world. 

We work with profession photograph to empir de- 
fine 4 level of aesthet quality: 

• 1: point-and-shoot photo without consideration. 
• 2: good photo from the major of popul without 

art background. noth artist stand out. 
• 3: semi-pro. great photo show clear artist aspects. 

the photograph be on the right track of becom a 
professional. 
• 4: pro-work. 
clearli each profession have his/her uniqu tast that 

need calibration. We use ava dataset to bootstrap a con- 
sensu among them. all ava imag be sort by their aver- 
age vote scores. A singl percentag rank score between 
[0, 1] be then assign to each image. for example, an imag 
with rank score 0.7 be rank at top 30% among all ava 
images. 

We empir divid thi rank score into 4 level use 
threshold 0.15, 0.7, 0.85, to roughli correspond to our aes- 
thetic scale. thi correspond be by no mean accurate. 
It onli encourag a more even distribut of sampl ava 
imag across differ qualities. We sampl imag evenli 
from 4 levels, and mix them randomly. 

each profession be ask to score these imag base on 
the descript of our aesthet scale. after each round, we 
find averag score for each photo a the consensus. for indi- 
vidual score deviat a lot from the consensus, we send the 
photo with consensu to the correspond profession for 
calibration. after multipl round we notic a signific 
drop in score deviation, from 0.74 to 0.47. 

At the end of thi project, we ask profession for their 
own descript of our aesthet scale. feedback be summa- 
rize in tabl 1. 

To map ava rank score Φ‘ to aesthet scale in rang 
[1, 4], we fit Φ̄ = a×φ‘ + b to professionals’ score on ava 
dataset. Φ̄ be use in experi to predict score for each 
image. 

6 experi 
6.1 dataset 
for profession landscap photo {m}, we collect ∼ 
15000 thumbnails, from high-rat landscap categori on 
500px.com. our train use thumbnail at a resolut up 
to 299× 299 pixel. 

To make overal style more consistent, we choos to target 
our goal a “color profession landscape”. We remov 
imag from dataset that be black&whit or low in satura- 
tion, with minimum averag satur per pixel set at 55%. 
similar approach can be use to train toward other styles, 
such a “black&whit landscape”. 

ava dataset [murray et al., 2012] be use to train Φ 
′ 
, a 

well a for calibr of professionals’ scores. 

6.2 train of crop filter 
M 

′ 
be randomli crop from M in two batches. the first 

batch concentr on variat close to origin image, so 
we have more exampl to learn when composit be close 



to optimal. the crop width be between (90%, 100%) of 
origin image. aspect ratio be randomli select between 
(0.5, 2), with the area contain within imag space. the 
second batch deviat more from optim composition, with 
width rang (50%, 90%). both batch be equal in number. 
score be defin a area ratio, a describ in section 4.1. the 
train network be incept v3 [szegedi et al., 2015], which 
be use to predict score from input image. 

for each project photo from panorama, we pick top 3 
candid at each composit weight c ∈ {0, 0.5, 1}. all 
these candid move forward in pipelin independently. At 
the end of the pipeline, the candid with high Φ 

′ 
be se- 

lect to repres that photo. 
To further compar effect of composit weights, we 

conduct a separ experiment, where 4 profession be 
present with 3 crop version of a same photo, use the 
top candid from each composit weight c ∈ {0, 0.5, 1}. 
they be ask to pick the one with best composition, or se- 
lect “none”. for all 100 input images, after exclud 10.4% 
rate of “none”, 22% imag receiv a unanim vote 
on one crop candidate. the distribut of c ∈ {0, 0.5, 1} 
for win candid be 9.2%, 47.4% and 43.4%, respec- 
tively. 80% imag have up to two win candidates. the 
distribut of winner be 13.2%, 41.4% and 45.4%, respec- 
tively. thi show that with our hybrid approach, we can pro- 
duce good crop candid than use a singl metric. 

6.3 train of satur and hdr filter 
In our approach the choic of {ok} be flexible. for satur 
filter we use an implement similar to the satur ad- 
justment of “tune image” option in snapseed. dure train- 
ing M 

′ 
be obtain by set satur paramet randomli 

between (0%, 80%) of filter’ range, where 0% turn a photo 
to black & white. per-pixel-channel color differ δ be use 
to deriv satur score, with maximum differ cap 
at 6% for a score 0: 

score := sim(m,m 
′ 
) := 

{ 
1− δ6% , δ <= 6% 
0, otherwis 

for each M , 6 variat of M 
′ 

be gener for train- 
ing, togeth with M . 

hdr filter be train in a same way, use an implemen- 
tation similar to “hdr scape” in snapseed. “filter strength” 
be the onli paramet we modify. 

one differ here be “filter strength” onli go posi- 
tively. while we can reduc satur of an image, there 
be no option to add “negative” hdr effect , which be the di- 
rection we care more. intuitively, we assum hdr effect 
alreadi exist in some M . We want to gener M 

′ 
that con- 

tain “less” hdr, so we can learn how an hdr filter can 
help it to look more like M . We use a simpl trick to mimic 
“negative” hdr effect by a per-pixel operation: 

F (−strength) ◦M = 2×m − F (strength) ◦M (2) 

thi way we expand the rang of “filter strength” 
from (0,max) to (−max,max). We gener {M ′} in 

two batches. for each M , we sampl 6 variat of not- 
enough-hdr exampl M 

′ 

1, with “filter strength” in rang 
(−max,−0.5max). We also sampl 3 variat of too- 
much-hdr exampl M 

′ 

2, with “filter strength” in rang 
(0.5max,max). color differ δ be cap at 20%. 

train of both aesthet metric be same a that of crop- 
ping metric. 

dure optim for each photo, a quick 1d search on 
paramet be appli for each filter. satur paramet be 
tri from 40% to 90%, with step 10%. for hdr, “filter 
strength” paramet be tri from 0% to 70% of maximum 
range, with step 10%. the paramet of each filter with high- 
est score be commit to appli on the photo. 

In figur 2, an exampl of chang in {φk} from differ 
imag oper be visualized. satur of input imag be 
increas from 0 to maximum in figur 2b. satur score 
show a distinct peak, while score for hdr and compo- 
sition remain more flat. 

note that overal aesthet score Φ 
′ 

show continu in- 
creasement, well into satur rang that make the imag 
over-saturated. thi be expected, becaus the train of Φ 

′ 
on 

ava dataset onli involv natur images. sinc a larg por- 
tion of higher-scor imag be more-satur than typic 
user photo directli from a cell phone, Φ 

′ 
grow high with 

increas saturation. however, sinc ava do not inten- 
tional implant over-satur imag a neg examples, 
Φ 

′ 
do not penal over-satur images. thi show that 

a naively-train gener aesthet metric may not be suitabl 
for optim differ aesthet aspects. 

similarly, in figur 2c hdr score show a clear peak when 
hdr strength increases. onc again Φ 

′ 
remain high incor- 

rectli even when hdr strength be too strong. 
figur 2d show the special case of imag composition. 

here a slide window of half imag width move vertic 
across the imag at center, with aspect ratio 1.8. composi- 
tion score contain a peak near imag center. however, both 
satur and hdr score vari a lot. thi be also expected, 
becaus imag statist regard satur and detail level 
both chang a the slide window moves. In other words, 
crop oper be less “orthogonal” to other imag oper- 
ations, which lead to our hybrid approach on composit 
score. 

for some photo {φk}may becom less orthogonal. for ex- 
ample, when pixel over-saturate, detail be also lost, which 
may impact hdr score that measur detail level. figur 3b 
show such an example, where a satur increases, hdr 
score start to chang too. In such a case, two linear search 
in satur and hdr strength separ may not yield op- 
timal solution. global method like gradient-desc can find 
good solution, at the cost of more expens search. In thi 
paper we use separ linear-search to gener all results. 

6.4 train of dramat mask 
We use follow imag filter with equal chanc to gener 
{fj}. (note that they can be replac by other reason 
alternatives.) 
• snapse “tune image”, bright paramet randomli 

from (10%, 45%) and (55%, 90%) 



(a) input imag (b) increas satur to max (c) increas hdr strength to max (d) crop imag with a slide windowfrom top to bottom 

figur 2: score chang when imag (a) be modifi by differ operations. 

(a) input imag (b) increas satur to max 

figur 3: satur and hdr score coupl when increas- 
ing satur for imag (a). 

• snapse “tune image”, contrast paramet randomli 
from (10%, 45%) and (55%, 90%) 
• snapse “hdr scape”, paramet randomli from 

(10%, 100%) and (−100%,−10%). neg effect be 
simul use Eq (6.3) 
• snapse “vignette”, with “outer brightness” in 

(0%, 35%) to darken boundary, and (60%, 70%) to 
brighten boundary. 
• A curve-edit filter, where 6 control point evenli 

span bright range, move within (−15%, 15%) 
of total range. 
• A flatten-bright filter with strength (10%, 100%), 

and strength (−100%,−10%) use Eq (6.3) 
the flatten-bright filter move each pixel’ bright 

b toward the gaussian smooth averag of it neighborhood b 
with strength s ∈ (0, 1): bnew = b×s+b×(1−s). gaussian 
radiu be 0.05× (width + height). 

We train 37 model with differ random initi 
for about 2,000,000 step each. for each model, we collect 
snapshot of train paramet roughli everi 100000 steps. 
We then appli all these model on a test dataset, and pick 
best mask for each imag use Φ 

′ 
. We rank model by num- 

ber of final result they contributed, and keep top 50. after 
manual examination, 20 of these models, especi earli in 
training, gener visibl artifact to differ degrees. after 
remov them, we eventu keep top 30 model a {m}. 

To good align 8×8 mask with photo content at full resolu- 
tion, we appli a joint bilater upsampl [kopf et al., 2007] 
on the mask against the photo befor gener the final re- 
sult. the effect of dramat mask vari by images. some- 

figur 4: imag befor and after appli dramat mask. 

time it mimic tradit vignetting. but in more gener 
case the bright modul be base on imag content. 
figur 4 show sever examples. 

An end-to-end exampl be show in figur 5, where a 
panorama in (a) be crop into (b), with satur and hdr 
strength enhanc in (c), and final with dramat mask ap- 
pli in (d). 

6.5 photo creation 
the environ for our robot be simul by a collect of 
panorama imag from googl street view. most trail we 
chose be collect on foot, instead of by vehicles. loca- 
tion we pick includ banff, jasper and glacier nation 
park in canada, grand canyon and yellowston nation 
park in us, and foot trail in alps, dolomit and big sur. 
panorama be sampl spars along each trail to reduc 
data amount and redundancy. neighbor panorama be 
typic separ by ten of meter or more. altogeth 
∼ 40000 panorama be used. from them ∼ 31000 pho- 



(a) 

(b) (c) (d) 

figur 5: A panorama (a) be crop into (b), with satur 
and hdr strength enhanc in (c), and with dramat mask 
appli in (d). 

to be creat with predict score Φ̄ >= 2.5. 
street view imageri we use contain some artifacts, 

which have an impact on qualiti of our results. over-exposur 
happen quit often in brighter area, such a on cloud, which 
wash out details. misalign and blurri part can also be 
notic in our results. 

dure evaluation, we manual remov result with se- 
vere misalignment/blur, street view equipments, black area 
after panorama stitching, larg portion of highway and larg 
human figures. 

6.6 evalu 
We work with 6 profession for evaluation. We select them 
with a minimum requir of a bachelor’ degre in pho- 
tographi and 2+ year experi a a profession photog- 
rapher. To keep the evalu a object a possible, they 
be not inform of our imag creation attempt. 

We conduct 6 round of calibr a describ in sec- 
tion 5, use ∼ 2200 ava imag in total. the score devia- 
tion per imag drop from initi 0.74 to 0.47. 

We randomli sampl 400+ photo from our creation, 
with predict score Φ̄ uniformli distribut between 
(2.5, 3.0). (most photo receiv a predict score < 3.0 
after linear fit of φ̄.) they be randomli mix with 800 
photo from ava and other sources, sampl across differ 
quality. 

figur 6 show how score distribut for photo at differ- 
ent predict scores. A high predict score lead to high 
score from professionals, which show Φ̄ be correl to 
professional’ taste. more accur predict of profession- 
als’ score be still to be achieved. averag score per imag be 
the averag of individu score from all 6 profession for 
each image. 

for 173 evalu photo with a high predict score >= 
2.9, 41.4% of individu score receiv from profession 

(a) (b) 

(c) (d) 

figur 6: individu (a) and per-imag averag (b) score dis- 
tribut for imag at differ predict scores. As a com- 
parison, score distribut for top-rank ava photo be 
show in (c) and (d), which be arguabl a reason col- 
lection of actual profession work. 

be at or abov semi-pro level (>= 3.0), with 13% of them 
>= 3.5. 

As a comparison, score distribut for sampl high- 
rank ava photo be also show in figur 6 (c) and (d). 
We can see even for top 5% photo ([0.95, 1] in graph) in ava 
dataset, arguabl all at profession quality, onli 45% score 
be at or abov 3.5. thi may serv a an estim of the 
“ceiling” for such an algorithm. 

some exampl of creat photo with predict score 
> 2.7 be display in figur 7. To demonstr their qual- 
iti variat accord to the professionals, we select photo 
with averag profession score < 2.0 in first row, ∼ 2.5 in 
second row, and > 3.0 in last row. 

more success case be manual select from all of 
the results, and present in figur 11. photo in left column 
be creat from panorama in right column. for each photo, 
predict score and averag score from profession be dis- 
played. the chanc to encount result with similar score 
can be look up in figur 6 (b). 

We compil a show-cas webpag that contain ad- 
dition result with nearbi street view panorama at: 
https://google.github.io/creat 

acknowledg the author would like to acknowledg 
vahid kazemi for hi earli work in predict ava rank 
score use incept network, and sagarika chalasani, nick 
beato, bryan klingner and rupert breheni for their help in 
process googl street view panoramas. We would like to 
thank peyman milanfar, tomáš ižo, christian szegedy, jon 
barron and sergey ioff for their help comments. huge 
thank to our anonym profession photographers. We 
hope you be not read thi paper to introduc bia in your 
futur ratings! 

https://google.github.io/creat 


1.9 1.8 
1.9 

2.4 

2.5 

2.4 

3.3 3.0 3.0 

figur 7: exampl photo with predict score > 2.7. av- 
erag profession score be display below. 

refer 
[chen et al., 2017] chen, y., klopp, j., sun, m., chien, s., and ma, 

K. (2017). learn to compos with profession photograph 
on the web. corr, abs/1702.00503. 

[gati et al., 2015] gatys, L. a., ecker, A. s., and bethge, 
M. (2015). A neural algorithm of artist style. corr, 
abs/1508.06576. 

[goodfellow et al., 2014] goodfellow, i., pouget-abadie, j., mirza, 
m., xu, b., warde-farley, d., ozair, s., courville, a., and ben- 
gio, Y. (2014). gener adversari nets. In ghahramani, z., 
welling, m., cortes, c., lawrence, N. d., and weinberger, K. q., 
editors, advanc in neural inform process system 27, 
page 2672–2680. curran associates, inc. 

[hertzmann et al., 2001] hertzmann, a., jacobs, C. e., oliver, n., 
curless, b., and salesin, D. H. (2001). imag analogies. In 
proceed of the 28th annual confer on comput graph- 
ic and interact techniques, siggraph ’01, page 327–340, 
new york, ny, usa. acm. 

[isola et al., 2016] isola, p., zhu, j., zhou, t., and efros, A. A. 
(2016). image-to-imag translat with condit adversari 
networks. corr, abs/1611.07004. 

[jaroensri et al., 2015] jaroensri, r., paris, s., hertzmann, a., by- 
chkovsky, v., and durand, F. (2015). predict rang of ac- 
ceptabl photograph tonal adjustments. In ieee intern 
confer on comput photography, houston, tx. 

[kong et al., 2016] kong, s., shen, x., lin, z., mech, r., and 
fowlkes, C. C. (2016). photo aesthet rank network with 
attribut and content adaptation. corr, abs/1606.01621. 

[kopf et al., 2007] kopf, j., cohen, M. f., lischinski, d., and uyt- 
tendaele, M. (2007). joint bilater upsampling. acm transac- 
tion on graphic (proceed of siggraph 2007), 26(3):to 
appear. 

[lu et al., 2014] lu, x., lin, z., jin, h., yang, j., and wang, J. Z. 
(2014). rapid: rate pictori aesthet use deep learning. In 
proceed of the 22nd acm intern confer on mul- 
timedia, MM ’14, page 457–466, new york, ny, usa. acm. 

[lu et al., 2015a] lu, x., lin, z., jin, h., yang, j., and wang, J. Z. 
(2015a). rate imag aesthet use deep learning. ieee 
transact on multimedia, 17(11):2021–2034. 

[lu et al., 2015b] lu, x., lin, z., shen, x., mech, r., and wang, 
J. Z. (2015b). deep multi-patch aggreg network for imag 
style, aesthetics, and qualiti estimation. In 2015 ieee interna- 
tional confer on comput vision (iccv), page 990–998. 

[luan et al., 2017] luan, f., paris, s., shechtman, e., and bala, K. 
(2017). deep photo style transfer. corr, abs/1703.07511. 

[mai et al., 2016] mai, l., jin, h., and liu, F. (2016). composition- 
preserv deep photo aesthet assessment. In 2016 ieee con- 
ferenc on comput vision and pattern recognit (cvpr), 
page 497–506. 

[mantiuk et al., 2012] mantiuk, R. k., tomaszewska, a., and man- 
tiuk, R. (2012). comparison of four subject method for imag 
qualiti assessment. comput. graph. forum, 31(8):2478–2491. 

[marchesotti et al., 2014] marchesotti, l., murray, n., and per- 
ronnin, F. (2014). discov beauti attribut for aesthet 
imag analysis. corr, abs/1412.4940. 

[mirza and osindero, 2014] mirza, M. and osindero, S. (2014). 
condit gener adversari nets. corr, abs/1411.1784. 

[murray et al., 2012] murray, n., marchesotti, l., and perronnin, 
F. (2012). ava: A large-scal databas for aesthet visual anal- 
ysis. In 2012 ieee confer on comput vision and pattern 
recognition, page 2408–2415. 

[nguyen et al., 2016] nguyen, a., yosinski, j., bengio, y., doso- 
vitskiy, a., and clune, J. (2016). plug & play gener net- 
works: condit iter gener of imag in latent space. 
corr, abs/1612.00005. 

[radford et al., 2015] radford, a., metz, l., and chintala, S. 
(2015). unsupervis represent learn with deep convo- 
lution gener adversari networks. corr, abs/1511.06434. 

[szegedi et al., 2015] szegedy, c., vanhoucke, v., ioffe, s., 
shlens, j., and wojna, Z. (2015). rethink the incept ar- 
chitectur for comput vision. corr, abs/1512.00567. 

[yan et al., 2016] yan, z., zhang, h., wang, b., paris, s., and yu, 
Y. (2016). automat photo adjust use deep neural net- 
works. acm transact on graphics, 35(2):11. 

[zhu et al., 2017] zhu, j., park, t., isola, p., and efros, A. A. 
(2017). unpair image-to-imag translat use cycle- 
consist adversari networks. corr, abs/1703.10593. 



score descript 
1.0 beginner: point-and-shoot without consider for composition, light etc. (it can still be technic good, i.e., good focus, good exposure...) 

- thi photo have no attent to light, composition, or moment and there be no clear intent. look like a photo take by accid or like someon just held the 
camera up and press the shutter button... it’ not clear whi anyon would take thi photo or want to look at thi photo. 
- thi score repres failur to use the camera properli and/or creat anyth that resembl a passabl photo. 
- these photograph clearli be point and shoot with no intent of a composit in mind. these photograph usual lack contrast or thought and have noth 
interest in their subject matter. 
- No artist merit or intent and do not follow basic rule of composition, light or focus. 

2.0 amateur: good photo for peopl without a background in photography. noth stand out a embarrassing. but noth artist either. light andcomposit be ok. the major of popul fall between 1 and 2. 
- i’m simpli bore when I look at thi imag and it creat a sens of indifference. the imag do not engag me at all and there be noth interest in the photo. 
thi could be a combin of a poorly-lit imag of a boring, clich subject, and/or, an unsettl composit with poor tonal values. 
- thi photo have a clear subject and thing like composit and moment be ok but not great. you can tell that thi person saw someth of interest and they 
document it, but they be still not think like a photograph becaus there be no attent to light, which be what photographi be all about. 
- pure point-and-shoot. these photo show u what be in front of the person take the photograph. there be a pass sens for compos the element within the 
frame. the angl be almost alway at stand eye level. however, mani of these imag be accept to look at, and will often show interest landscapes. the 
key point of classif here, be that the imag do not exhibit profession photograph skill. A point-and-shoot photograph can still make a nice imag if 
they be stand in front of beauti landscape. 
- these photograph have some degre of thought put into the composition, with a strong imag in mind. the imag may have a clear message, but they miss the 
mark by either forget about contrast or composition. these be imag that would usual fall into a camera phone photograph category. 
- intent in composition, light or framing, but poorli executed. possibl bad editing, out of focus, fragmenting, pixel or poor quality. 

2.5 someth artist obvious present in thi photo. however, the attempt in thi photo, content or editing, can not be call successful. 
- the photo feel like it be taken, not made. though the imag be clear, there may be an attempt at composit without resolve, there be no point of focus, and/or 
the tonal rang may be onli in the mid-ton make it flat. the light have not be consid to best captur the subject, and/or there be distract object in the 
photo that keep it from the 3, 3.5, and 4 caliber. 
- you can tell in thi photo, that the person be pay attent to light! they be start to think like a photographer. thing like composition, moment and subject 
be an improv but still lacking. there be attent to the way that light interact with a subject or environment, even though the usag of light might not be 
veri good. 
- thi rate mark a step in the right direct beyond point-and-shoot photography. there be an effort here to creat a good photo (interest angle, composition, 
use of silhouette, compel lighting, etc....) however, the imag still do not fulli add up to a well-mad photograph. (these be the sort of imag you’ll see in 
a photo-1 class. good effort and intentions, but more skill need to be applied). 
- these photograph have the intent of a good photograph but be miss out on mani of the key element of a profession photograph. thi usual mean 
lack of focu or composition. the photo may have a beauti imag but be crop out a person. the photograph may have a beauti mountainside, but the entir 
imag be not straight. 
- averag photo, not good or bad. follow rule of composit with light and framing, but not particularli well executed. 

3.0 semi-pro: one be on a path to becom a profession photographer! 
- I feel thi be the critic break-point. the imag be good with an effort to make/captur the shot, but the photo reveal a skill-level of one who do not have a lot of 
experi make great imag and may employ the use of photoshop in an attempt to enhanc the photo. thi be what I call over-cook the image. It cheapen 
the photo and be a dead giveaway of an explor ameteur. It be almost a if the photograph be tri too hard. the photo may also be technic and aesthet 
miss an element that would make it a 3.5. I would expect to find mani of thi calib of imageri in a local art fair. 
- thi photo have attent to light, a clear subject, good composit and a clear intent but more than a few factor be still lacking. usag of light be better, but not 
great. the moment be a littl awkward and the subject be boring. 
- thi be a good photograph that works. the gener approach have creat a worthwhil landscape. thi often includ at least one profession strategi that bring 
the imag togeth (strong composition, depth-of-field, interest angle, compel lighting, etc....) 
- these photograph show a strong understand of imageri and composit with a clear intention. these photograph fall short when it come to a subject matter 
that defin a perfect photograph. 
- abov averag imag with clear thought, focu and frame put into it. 

3.5 
- the imag be good than most, but have be do befor in a more complet way. usual the subject be amaz but the light could be good at a differ time 
of day, or have ani combin of great and slightli sub-great components. it almost a 4, but I reserv 4 for onli the best. 
- thi photo have excel use of light, a clear subject, a clear intent and almost all of the characterist of a profession craft photo but there be just one factor 
that’ off. either the subject be boring, the moment be a littl awkward, or the composit be a littl messy. 
- thi can be a tricki rating. for this, I often ask ”what could have be do here that would make thi photo even better, and worthi of a 4 rating?” In that sense, 
I use 3.5 to mark down from 4. mayb the photograph oversatur a perfectli good landscape, mayb they collid some element within the frame (ansel 
adam often mention this). Or mayb the imag just need one more element, someth that a profession would be mind of. 
- these photograph have beauti imageri but do not have the focu or the perfect composit that make a photograph truli professional. these be usual 
almost perfect photograph but be miss out on the techniqu that make a photograph stand out a a perfect image. 
- great imag with purpos depth of field and frame clearli take by someon with photograph knowledge. 

4.0 pro: photo you think deserv to be call take by a professional. 
- thi photo be made, not taken. everyth in the imag be work togeth to the sum of a great image. without question thi imag be make by a skill 
craftsman, one who be technic fluent, environment aware, have good time and/or patience, be in command of post product and do not use clichd and 
overus filters, and offer a control composit that have a relationship with the subject. anyon who see thi imag would consid it professional. 
- thi photo be creat by someon who have studi photographi and refin their craft. there be a great moment/interest subject in great light. there be 
meaning interact between light and subject. excel use of composition. the moment be just right, and you can clearli see the photographer’ intent. 
- thi be a well-mad profession photograph which exhibit experience, technic know-how, and abov all els - a sens for the strategi which go into make 
strong landscap imagery. 
- these photograph be clearli shot by a profession with a precis composit in mind. there be a strong contrast of dark and lights. these photograph use 
techniqu that show a strong understand of their camera equipment. 
- excel image, reserv onli for the best imag with well thought out intent and dynam compositions, good light with balanc in color and tone 
and purpos in or out of focus. 

tabl 1: for each aesthet score, text in bold summar our initi description, follow by select comment from profes- 
sional photographers. 



predict: 2.6, pro average: 3.3 

predict: 2.7, pro average: 3.0 

predict: 2.6, pro average: 3.0 

predict: 2.6, pro average: 3.3 

predict: 2.8, pro average: 3.3 

predict: 2.8, pro average: 3.2 



predict: 2.8, pro average: 2.8 

predict: 2.7, pro average: 3.3 

predict: 2.6, pro average: 3.5 

predict: 2.9, pro average: 3.3 

predict: 2.4, pro average: 2.8 

predict: 2.8, pro average: 3.3 



predict: 2.8, pro average: 3.0 

predict: 2.9, pro average: 3.8 

predict: 2.9, pro average: 2.8 

predict: 2.4, pro average: 2.7 

predict: 2.2, pro average: 3.0 

predict: 2.8, pro average: 3.5 



predict: 2.4, pro average: 2.8 

predict: 2.7, pro average: 3.0 

predict: 2.6, pro average: 3.2 

predict: 2.8, pro average: 2.5 

predict: 2.7, pro average: 3.3 

figur 11: success case in our creation, with predict and averag profession rating. 




