






































european commiss : cordi : new and event : crosstalk in social dilemma could hinder cooper 


crosstalk in social dilemma could hinder cooper 

relat inform 

A new mathemat framework take into account ‘crosstalk’ and incorpor the impact of players’ interact in simul of 

repeat social dilemma could help good analys cooper dynam within a population. 

the analysi of social dilemmas, situat in which privat interest be at odd with 

collect interests, have attract a great deal of attent among researchers. thi be not 

surpris becaus variou challeng problem that we face – from the deplet of 

natur resourc to intergroup conflict – are, at their core, social dilemmas. 

research frequent use the experiment game method to studi such problem with 

comput simulations. An experiment game – such a the prisoner’ dilemma – be a 

situat in which particip choos between cooper and non-coop 

alternatives, yield consequ for themselv and others. 

analys of thi phenomenon have previous assum that a player engag in onli one repeat game at a time, or that a player’ action in 

one game be independ of all of their other interactions. however, a team of scientists, support by contribut from the eu-fund graph 

game project, argu that these assumpt don’t necessarili appli to real-lif social dilemma where human be often involv in mani 

simultan games, and interact with other player spill over into other games, mean these game involv crosstalk. 

In such social dilemmas, mutual cooper be good than mutual defect and yet, there be an incent to defect. direct reciprocity, which be 

base on repeat interact between the same two players, be a mechan for cooperation: ‘I help you and you help me’. cooper can be 

achiev if particip in such game adopt condit cooper strategi such a ‘tit-for-tat’ (I begin by collabor and then i’ll do 

whatev you do last), or ‘win-stay, lose-shift’ (I begin with cooperation, then i’ll continu do what i’m do until I lose). 

research from ist austria and their collabor at harvard, yale and stanford univers examin cooper dynam through repeat 

game and introduc a new framework to analys crosstalk between a player’ concurr games. write in the journal ‘natur 

communications’, they say “a player’ decis be subject to ‘crosstalk’ when an interact that a player have in one repeat game influenc 

how the veri same player behav in anoth repeat game.” 

In order to quantifi the overal effect of crosstalk, the research repres the structur of the popul by arrang player on a graph. the 

team’ find show that in the presenc of crosstalk, even a singl defect player can caus the complet breakdown of cooper in a 

society. “nevertheless, cooper can prevail if the popul be structur and if subject be suffici forgiving,” the research noted. 

accord to a statement by one of the research institut involv in the project, “crosstalk also necessit strategi with the ‘correct’ level of 

forgiveness: too harsh, and you end up with a societi where no one cooperates, too generous, and defect can also spread a player learn to 

take advantag of other players.” 

the paper conclud that in today’ highli connect world, a harsh cooper strategi such a ‘tit-for-tat’ be particularli unabl to deal with 

crosstalk. 

some of the discoveri in the graph game project includ the analysi of multi-dimension quantit object in graph games. result 

includ applic of graph game in domain such a design of secur protocol (that be correct by construct and attack-free), and 

evolutionari game theori (for model problem relat to popul dynam or model growth of cancer). 

for more information, pleas see: 

graph game 

source: base on project inform and medium report 

© scanrail1, shutterstock 

european commiss : cordi : new and event : crosstalk in social... https://cordis.europa.eu/news/rcn/128967_en.html 

1 sur 2 12-03-18 à 22:01 



project 

new 

programm 

countri 

subject 

inform process and inform system - mathemat and statist - other technolog - social scienc and human 

last updat on 2018-03-08 

graph game - quantit graph games: theori and applic 

the more you dislike, the less you'r will to help 

scienc explain whi some game can't realli be master 

fp7-ideas-erc 

austria 

european commiss : cordi : new and event : crosstalk in social... https://cordis.europa.eu/news/rcn/128967_en.html 

2 sur 2 12-03-18 à 22:01 


