







































electr and comput engin at carnegi mellon univers - 


datta lead nsf project on account decis system 

new 

event 

seminar 

year of women 

diploma ceremoni 

extern press 

newslett 

social media directori 

august 14, 2017 

increasingly, decis and action affect people' life be determin by autom 
system process person data. excit about these system have be accompani 
by seriou concern about their opac and threat they pose to privacy, fairness, and other 
values. exampl abound in real-world systems: target’ use of predict pregnanc statu 
for marketing; google’ use of health-rel search queri for target advertising; race 
be associ with autom predict of recidivism; gender affect display job- 
relat ads; race affect display search ads; boston’ street bump app focu pothol 
repair on affluent neighborhoods; amazon’ same day deliveri be unavail in black 
neighborhoods; and facebook show either “white” or “black” movi trailer base upon 
“ethnic affiliation.” 

recogn these concerns, cylab’ anupam datta, associ professor of electr and 
comput engin at carnegi mellon' silicon valley campus, will lead a $3 million 
nation scienc foundat project on account decis system that respect privaci 
and fair expectations. the project seek to make real-world autom decision-mak 
system account for privaci and fair by enabl them to detect and explain 
violat of these values. the project will explor applic in onlin advertising, 
healthcare, and crimin justice, in collabor with domain experts. 

the project team includ matthew fredrikson, assist professor of comput science, and 
ole mengshoel, princip system scientist in electr and comput engineering. the 
project also mark a collabor between cmu, cornel tech, and the intern 
comput scienc institute; addit contributor be helen nissenbaum, professor of 
inform scienc at cornell, thoma ristenpart, associ professor of comput scienc 
at cornell, and michael C. tschantz, senior research at the intern comput scienc 
institut in berkeley. 

relat people: 

anupam datta 

directori new & event carnegi mellon univers 

electr and comput engin at carnegi mellon univers - http://ece.cmu.edu/news/story/2017/08/datta-leads-nsf-project-on-accountable-decision-systems... 

1 sur 3 22/08/2017 14:19 



“A key innov of the project be to automat account for whi an autom system with 
artifici intellig compon exhibit behavior that be problemat for privaci or fairness,” 
say datta. “these explan then inform fix to the system to avoid futur violations.” 

“the hard part be creat such explan for system that employ statist machin 
learning,“ add mengshoel. “but do so be critical, sinc these method be increasingli 
use to power autom decis systems.” 

but in order to address privaci and fair in decis systems, the team must first provid 
formal definit framework of what privaci and fair truli entail. these definit must 
be enforc and context-dependent, deal with both protect inform itself—lik 
race, gender, or health information—a well a proxi for that information, so that the full 
scope of risk be covered. 

“commit to philosoph rigor, the project will integr social meaning concept of 
privacy, fairness, and account into it scientif efforts,” comment nissenbaum, 
“therebi ensur it relev to fundament societ challenges.” 

"although scienc cannot decid moral questions, give a standard from ethics, scienc can 
shed light on how to enforc it, it consequences, and how it compar to other standards, ” 
say tschantz. 

anoth fundament challeng the team face be in enabl account while 
simultan protect the system owners’ intellectu property, and privaci of the 
system’ users. 

“sinc account mechan requir some level of access to the system, they can, 
unless care designed, leak the intellectu properti of data processor and compromis 
the confidenti of the train data subjects, a demonstr in the prior work of mani on 
the team,” say fredrikson. 

“unfortunately, we don’t yet understand what machin learn system be leak about 
privacy-sensit train data sets. thi project will be a great opportun to investig the 
extent to which have access to predict function or their paramet reveal sensit 
information, and, in turn, how to improv machin learn to be more privaci friendly.” 

datta have assembl a truli interdisciplinari team of research for the project. combin 
the skill of expert in philosophy, ethics, machin learning, security, and privacy, datta hope 
to success enabl account in autom decis systems—an achiev that 
would add a layer of human to artifici intellig systems. 

learn more about datta' research: 

electr and comput engin at carnegi mellon univers - http://ece.cmu.edu/news/story/2017/08/datta-leads-nsf-project-on-accountable-decision-systems... 

2 sur 3 22/08/2017 14:19 

lphilipp 
zone de text 
i'm not total convinc that' possibl :) 

lphilipp 
zone de text 
interst point: 

how revers engin appli to decis of ML can reveal privat featur of specif row in the learn data? 

it' a good and new question!!! 



inform 
appli now 
admiss faq 
inform for 
california program 
map & direct 
fact & rank 
career 
contact 

quick link 
undergradu portal 
graduat portal 
faculti & staff portal 
alumni 
directori 
cours 

stay connect 
cmu electr & comput engin 
5000 forb ave 
hamerschlag hall 
pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890 

2016 © cmu electr & comput engin 

electr and comput engin at carnegi mellon univers - http://ece.cmu.edu/news/story/2017/08/datta-leads-nsf-project-on-accountable-decision-systems... 

3 sur 3 22/08/2017 14:19 




