







































We should use nuke to deflect asteroids, say astro algorithm 


We should use nuke to deflect 
asteroids, say astro algorithm 

By jacob aron 

asteroid 

what could we do if an asteroid be on a collis cours with earth? 

detlev van ravenswaay/sci photo librari 

IF AN asteroid be set to hit earth, human would have to scrambl to 

conduct the world’ riskiest experiment. We have never tri to shove a 

space rock off it course, so ani defenc effort would be a shot in the 

dark. 

peopl have come up with idea – like chuck nuclear weapon at an 

incom threat – but with limit asteroid defenc budgets, which 

should we pursue? An algorithm call the deflector selector say 

nuke would do the job about half the time. 

To be clear, erika nesvold, formerli at the carnegi institut for 

scienc in washington dc, and her team don’t suggest we give a 

comput free reign over nuclear missiles. “we be absolut not 

advoc put the algorithm in charg of asteroid defence,” she 

says. 

advertis 

instead, their machin learn algorithm can studi a popul of 

potenti hazard objects, and determin which technolog have the 

best chanc of deflect them from earth’ path. 

To build the algorithm, nesvold and her colleagu simul six 

million hypothet object with the potenti to hit earth. next, they 

look at how earli each could be detect befor collision, and the 

veloc chang need to knock it off course. finally, they look at 

which of three technolog would be best at do this: nuclear 

weapons, kinet impactor or graviti tractors. 

nuclear weapon releas an explos force, while a kinet impactor be 

We should use nuke to deflect asteroids, say astro algorithm https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg23731653-800-we-should-use-... 

1 sur 2 12-03-18 à 19:04 

lphilipp 
text surligné 
In clear, ML be use here a a power interpolator!!! 



essenti like tri to shoot one bullet out of the air with a much 

small one. graviti tractor be more subtle. the idea here be to put a 

spacecraft near an asteroid, and let it gravit pull slowli tug the 

rock off course, but the concept hasn’t be tested. 

all thi number crunch requir a cluster of 100 comput core 

run for around 40 hours. To bring the time down, the research 

turn to machin learning. use the simul a train data, they 

taught an algorithm to studi a give popul of object and decid 

which tech have the best chanc of deflection. nesvold say after the 

algorithm be trained, it can suppli an answer in second instead of 

hours. 

the team tri their train algorithm on three populations: hazard 

near-earth asteroids, comet and rubbl pile – loos collect of 

material, rather than solid objects. In each case, nuclear weapon could 

tackl about 50 per cent of the objects. kinet impactor and graviti 

tractor have low success rate (arxiv.org/abs/1802.00458). 

that might suggest we should invest in nuclear weapon a our asteroid 

defenc of choice, but there be issu when it come to mount these 

on rockets. “the risk creat by pursu a nuclear asteroid defenc 

programm would far outweigh the actual risk pose by asteroid 

impacts,” say eric christensen at the catalina ski survey. 

the graviti tractor success rate improv when the asteroid be 

spot earlier. “that point to the need for good asteroid monitor 

and detect surveys,” say nesvold. “earlier detect of potenti 

impactor will provid more lead time to plan and execut a mission,” 

agre christensen. 

thi articl appear in print under the headlin “deflector selector 

say nuke asteroids” 

We should use nuke to deflect asteroids, say astro algorithm https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg23731653-800-we-should-use-... 

2 sur 2 12-03-18 à 19:04 


