


























































































determinist control of magnet vortex wall chiral by electr field 


1scientif report | 7: 7613 | doi:10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9 

www.nature.com/scientificreport 

determinist control of magnet 
vortex wall chiral by electr field 
R. P. beardsley1, S. bowe1,2, D. E. parkes1, C. reardon 3, K. W. edmonds1, B. L. gallagher1, 
S. A. cavill2,3 & A. W. rushforth1 

concept for inform storag and logic process base on magnet domain wall have great 
potenti for implement in futur inform and commun technologies. To date, the 
need to appli power hungri magnet field or heat dissip spin polar current to manipul 
magnet domain wall have limit the develop of such technologies. the possibl of control 
magnet domain wall use voltag offer an energi effici rout to overcom these limitations. 
here we show that a voltage-induc uniaxi strain induc revers determinist switch of the 
chiral of a magnet vortex wall. We discu how thi function will be applic to scheme 
for inform storag and logic processing, make a signific step toward the practic 
implement of magnet domain wall in energi effici computing. 

magnet domain wall separ region of a ferromagnet materi in which the magnetis point in differ- 
ent directions. If the magnet materi be pattern into a quasi 1D object, such a a nanowire, the domain wall 
separ region in which the magnetis point in opposit direct and can be propag along the length 
of the nanowir by the applic of magnet field or electr currents. thi be highli attract for imple- 
mentat in magnet data storage1, 2 and concept for perform logic operations3 in which inform be 
encod a the presenc or posit of a domain wall. It have also be propos to use the intern structur of the 
domain wall to encod information. for example, depend on the wire geometri and magnet parameters, the 
domain wall structur can be that of a vortex consist of a circul pattern of magnet moment in the plane 
of the wire, which point out of the plane at the centr of the wall (fig. 1(a)). the sens of circul of the mag- 
netisation, i.e. the chiral of the wall, can be use to encod inform a binari “1” or “0”4, and nanowir net- 
work design to use vortex domain wall to perform the key logic process oper have be proposed5. 
In such scheme it be propos to switch the chiral by drive the domain wall through a nanowir network 
contain notch via the applic of an extern magnet field or electr current. experimentally, chiral 
rectif have be achiev by propag vortex domain wall along wire with asymmetr notches6, rec- 
tangular end geometries7 and around curv section of wires8 or rings9 use extern magnet fields. similarly, 
the magnet vortex state in nanodisk have be revers by tailor magnet field pulses10, 11. the use of 
extern appli magnet field creat limit in term of scalabl and the abil to address individu 
domain walls, while the use of electr current caus joul heat and produc stray magnet (oersted) 
field which limit pack densiti due to interact between neighbour elements. In order to utilis vortex 
domain wall in ani commerci viabl technolog it will be necessari to develop electr method to control 
the chiral of individu address domain wall revers and with low power. 

electr field can provid a practic and energi effici mean to control magnetis becaus their 
applic do not requir larg current densiti and do not gener oerst magnet fields. one rout to 
achiev coupl of the electr field to the magnetis be via mechan strain in a hybrid piezoelectric/fer- 
romagnet structure. A voltag appli to the piezoelectr compon induc a mechan deform which 
transfer to the ferromagnet layer and alter the magnet anisotropi via invers magnetostriction. the method 
have be use to modifi magnet anisotropi and to demonstr rotat of the magnet easi axi direction12, 13. 
detail model predict that the implement of these method in devic consist of singl domain 
magnet element could lead to inform storag devic with order of magnitud good energi effici 
than present technolog reli on electr currents14. To date, the use of invers magnetostrict to control 

1school of physic and astronomy, univers of nottingham, nottingham, ng7 2rd, unit kingdom. 2diamond 
light sourc chilton, didcot, oxfordshire, ox11 0de, uk. 3depart of physics, univers of york, heslington, 
york, yo10 5dd, unit kingdom. R. P. beardsley and S. bow contribut equal to thi work. correspond 
and request for materi should be address to s.a.c. (email: stuart.cavill@york.ac.uk) or a.w.r. (email: andrew. 
rushforth@nottingham.ac.uk) 

received: 15 may 2017 

accepted: 5 juli 2017 

published: xx xx xxxx 

open 

http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7550-6415 
mailto:stuart.cavill@york.ac.uk 
mailto:andrew.rushforth@nottingham.ac.uk 
mailto:andrew.rushforth@nottingham.ac.uk 


www.nature.com/scientificreports/ 

2scientif report | 7: 7613 | doi:10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9 

domain wall have result in movement between random pin sites15, 16 or between posit along the cir- 
cumfer of a ring structure17, 18, local pin of a domain wall at a posit in a nanowire19, pin at mobil 
ferroelectr domain walls20 and tune of the domain wall velocity21 or width22. the possibl of switch the 
domain wall configur by electr field have not be consid befor now. 

In thi articl we demonstr that the chiral of a vortex domain wall can be control revers by creat 
a strain-induc inhomogen uniaxi magnet anisotropi energi profil in the vicin of the domain wall. 
use micromagnet calcul we simul the magnetis dynam in respons to a strain puls and 
show that the chiral switch can aris from the nucleat of a second vortex core follow by the damp 
precession motion of the cores. We discu how the method might be implement in devic concept for low 

figur 1. devic geometri and characteristics. (a) A represent of a vortex domain wall situat in 
a magnet nanowire. arrow repres the direct of the magnetisation. (b) A schemat of the devic 
consist of a nickel ring situat on top of a pmn-pt chip. A voltag appli across the thick of the chip 
gener a uniaxi strain in the plane. (c) schemat represent of the uniaxi strain a a function of the 
electr field appli to the pmn-pt, base on ref. 23. EC be the ferroelectr coerciv field. roman numer 
correspond to the electr field valu label in fig. 2. 

figur 2. xmcd-peem imag of strain-induc chiral switch in vortex domain walls. red shade 
repres magnetis point from right to left. blue repres magnetis point from left to 
right. panel sequenc (a) to (e) and (f) to (j) show the evolut of a tail to tail and head to head vortex 
wall respect a a function of the electr field appli to the pmn-pt. the axi of the induc uniaxi 
anisotropi be repres by the arrow. roman numer correspond to the electr field label in fig. 1(c). 



www.nature.com/scientificreports/ 

3scientif report | 7: 7613 | doi:10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9 

energi electr field oper non-volatil inform storag and logic processing. the use of electr field to 
manipul the configur of magnet domain wall will reduc the energi requir to switch the magnet 
state in non-volatil inform storag and process technolog by order of magnitude. 

the experiment demonstr be achiev by posit a vortex domain wall along the circumfer 
of a ring structure, close to the axi of the uniaxi anisotropy. the devic (fig. 1(b)) consist of a piezoelectr 
[pb(mg1/3nb2/3)o3]0.68 -[pbtio3]0.32 (pmn-pt) (011) substrat with top and bottom electrodes, onto which be 
fabric a 20 nm thick Ni ring of outer(inner) diamet 7.7μm (5.7 μm). applic of an electr field between 
the top and bottom electrod result in mechan deform of the pmn-pt substrat and induc a uniaxi 
strain of order 10−3 in the plane of the Ni ring. imag of the magnet contrast be obtain use the x-ray 
photoemiss electron microscop (x-peem) on beamlin i06 at the diamond light sourc synchrotron. 

the applic of an electr field across the thick direct of a pmn-pt (011) substrat be know 
to result in a two stage revers of the ferroelectr polaris vector at the ferroelectr coerciv field ec23. 
switch of the polaris vector between the <111> direct with compon point out of the plane 
be mediat by a rang of electr field for which the polaris point in the plane. thi be accompani by a 
larg uniaxi strain of order 10−3 in the plane in a narrow rang of electr field around ec, which be approxi- 
mate 0.18–0.19mv/m for our devic (fig. 1(c)). thi result in a uniaxi anisotropi energi of order 10 kjm−3 12. 
further increas of the electr field result in the strain return to a valu close to that at zero field a the 
ferroelectr vector rotat out of the plane toward the < 111 > directions. the sequenc of magnet contrast 
imag in fig. 2 reveal that thi transit be accompani by a revers of the vortex wall chirality. figur 2(a) 
and (b) show the transit from a clockwis tail to tail wall to an anti-clockwis tail to tail wall at electr field 
illustr by point (i) and (ii) in fig. 1(c). the same transit occur between fig. 2(d) and (e) for the opposit 
sign of appli electr field ((iv) and (v) in fig. 1(c)), but an ident uniaxi strain transition. the intermedi 
magnet state be not captur for these transit becaus of the sharp of the transit at EC result in 
the uniaxi strain state be induc and remov between success images. An intermedi magnet state 
can be observ in fig. 2(c) when the electr field have be increas further beyond the ferroelectr coerciv 
field to point (iii) in fig. 1(c). here a revers uniaxi strain be also present, albeit small than that gener at 
the ferroelectr coerciv field. remov of thi uniaxi strain result in the switch of the vortex wall chirality, 
from anti-clockwis to clockwis in the sequenc from fig. 2(b) to (d). To summarise, fig. 2(a) to (e) show that 
three success applic of a uniaxi strain induc three success revers of the vortex wall chirality. 
the chiral switch be also observ for a head to head vortex wall show in fig. 2(f) to (j), but the sequenc 
be interrupt by the movement of the domain wall along the circumfer of the ring in fig. 2(h) to (j). the 
import of pin of the domain wall posit will be discuss in the next section. 

A full understand of the mechan by which the vortex domain wall chiral switch would requir 
knowledg of how the strain profil varies, both spatial and temporally. the structur of ferroelectr domain 
in pmn-pt and the process involv in switch of the ferroelectr polaris vector be area of intens 
research at present. It be know that domain can rang in size from tens24 or hundreds12 of nm up to sever 
ten of µm24 and that differ domain region can repres differ polaris vector a well a differ 
structur phases25 becaus the [pb(mg1/3nb2/3)o3]0.68 -[pbtio3]0.32 composit sit close to a morphotrop 
phase boundary. the applic of an electr field can induc reorient of nanoscal domain and move- 
ment of the boundari of micron scale domain within the same sample24. for our sampl we cannot imag 
the ferroelectr domain structur becaus the presenc of the top electrod prevent escap of photoelectron 
from the pmn-pt. We can, howev consid the extrem cases: (i) the strain in the region of the vortex domain 
wall switch homogen (e.g. via the reorient of nanoscal ferroelectr domain of size much small 
than the vortex domain wall) and (ii) the chang in strain sweep across the devic (e.g. due to a ferroelectr 
domain wall move across the region beneath the vortex domain wall). We find that both mechan can 
induc switch of the vortex wall chirality. We describ the first mechan in detail here becaus the result of 
micromagnet simul most close match the experiment result obtained, and the result of our investi- 
gation of the second mechan be describ in the supplementari note. 

We perform micromagnet simul use the oommf simul package26 use realist paramet 
for nickel (see methods). result from the simulations, present in fig. 3(a) to (e), show success switch of 
vortex wall chiral from anticlockwis to clockwis and back to anticlockwise. the switch event be induc 
by the applic of a uniaxi magnet anisotropi favour an easi axi perpendicular to the circumfer of 
the ring in the vicin of the domain wall, i.e. along the y-axis. the anisotropi caus a flux closur domain pat- 
tern to form, characteris by red and blue triangular region in fig. 3(b) and (d), in order to minimis the mag- 
netic free energy. there be similar between these pattern and the experiment imag in fig. 2(c). crucially, 
the final posit of the flux closur pattern in fig. 3(b) and (d) be offset slightli to the right or left of the axi of 
the anisotropi depend upon the initi chiral of the domain wall. when the anisotropi be chang to an 
easi axi tangenti to the ring in the region of the domain wall (i.e. parallel to the x-axis), the flux closur pattern 
evolv back to a vortex domain wall, with the opposit chiral to the origin state. 

We now examin in detail the import transit involv in thi process. In fig. 3(a) the initi vortex 
domain wall state be make to resembl that in the experiment images, in particular the “s-shape” of the central 
white region, by appli a uniaxi anisotropi of KU = −3 kjm−3 parallel to the x-axis. here the minu sign 
denot the axi of the anisotropi such that a posit or neg valu for KU repres an easi axi parallel 
to the y or x axi respectively. A small uniaxi anisotropi could aris dure fabric of the ring due to dif- 
ferent thermal contract of the Ni and pmn-pt, or due to the ferroelectr domain state prior to electr field 
poling12. upon the applic of a uniaxi anisotropi of KU = +10 kjm−3 (easi axi along the y-axis, also repre- 
sent by the dash line in fig. 3), the flux closur pattern form by revers the direct of magnetis in 
a region on the inner circumfer of the ring, indic by the dash circl in fig. 3(b) and (d). the posit 
of the revers region depend upon the initi chiral of the domain wall, such that the flux closur pattern be 



www.nature.com/scientificreports/ 

4scientif report | 7: 7613 | doi:10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9 

make up of two vortex core of opposit chiral – one from the origin domain wall and one form when the 
magnetis in the region indic by the dash circl reverses. In our simulation, the revers occur by the 
precession dynam of the magnetisation, which be trigger by abruptli chang the anisotropy, and allow 
to proceed use a realist damp coeffici of α = 0.02. In the laboratori experiment, we do not know the 
timescal over which the anisotropi changes. thi will like be govern by the reorient of ferroelectr 
domain or the movement of ferroelectr domain wall between pin site trigger by thermal activation. 
If the anisotropi chang on a timescal that be long compar to the damp of the magnetis (a few ns), 
then the revers of the magnetis can still occur through thermal activ of the magnetis precession. 
We have not investig such processes. onc the region indic have reversed, then the flux closur pattern 
oscil along the circumfer of the ring and settl to the final posit on a timescal of sever nano- 
seconds. the sequenc in supplementari video 1 and 2 show thi oscillatori behaviour for the transit in 
fig. 3(a) to (b) and (c) to (d) respectively. the format of the revers region caus an initi rapid movement 
of the pattern to the left or right a the vortex core gyrate. the direct of thi initi motion be determin by 
the chiral of the origin domain wall. the final offset of the flux closur pattern along the ring be determin 
by thi initi motion of the vortices, after which damp of the magnetis reduc subsequ oscillations. 
upon set the anisotropi back to KU = −3 kjm−3 the format of the vortex wall proce by domain wall 
motion result in the annihil of the inner triangular region adjac to the region mark by the dash 
ring in fig. 3(b) and (d). thi sequenc be show in supplementari video 3 and 4 for the transit in fig. 3(b) 
to (c) and (d) to (e) respectively. for these transit to the singl domain wall state the damp paramet be 
set to a larg valu (α = 0.5) to suppress motion of the domain wall around the ring. If a more realist valu for 
the damp paramet be use (α = 0.02) then the domain wall move around the ring by 90°. experimentally, 
we do not observ such motion due to pin of the domain wall, like by materi defect or edg roughness. 
the except to thi be the sequenc in fig. 2(h) and (i). previou studies17, 18 of vortex domain wall in ni-ring/ 
pmn-pt devic observ rotat of the domain wall posit around the ring, but do not report switch of 
the chirality. 

the sequenc in the simul be deterministic. the initi wall chiral determin the offset of the flux 
closur pattern which in turn determin the chiral of the newli form domain wall. In real devic the final 
posit of the flux closur pattern will depend on sever factor includ the ring dimensions, defects, edg 
roughness, the size of the induc strain, thermal fluctuat and materi paramet such a the magnetisa- 
tion and damping. such factor may introduc some stochast into the magnetis dynam which could 
prevent repeat switch of the chirality. A detail investig of the influenc of such factor be beyond 
the scope of the present work. It should be possibl however, to set the chiral of the domain wall by set the 
offset of the flux closur pattern use an extern impetus, such a a weak magnet field pulse, or an electr 
current pulse. 

the function describ here have potenti for applic in devic for inform storag and logic 
processing. the inhomogen magnet anisotropi profil requir to switch the chiral of a vortex domain 
wall could also be induc in a straight nanowir with voltag gate electrod posit to produc a strain in a 
local region along the wire. the geometri be show in fig. 4 and simul of the chiral revers in respons 
to a voltag puls be present in supplementari video 5. the wire could form part of a larg nanowir circuit 
use for logic process base on domain walls. A gate design that produc an anisotropi gradient may also 

figur 3. micromagnet simul of a head to head vortex domain wall under the action of a uniaxi 
magnet anisotropi energy. (a) to (e) show success switch of the chiral of the vortex wall. the 
transit from panel (a) and (c) to panel (c) and (e) respect involv the revers of the x-compon of 
the magnetis in the region mark by dash circl in (b) and (d). 

http://1 
http://2 
http://3 
http://4 
http://5 


www.nature.com/scientificreports/ 

5scientif report | 7: 7613 | doi:10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9 

be use to move the domain wall along the wire. although the investig of domain wall motion in magnet 
anisotropi gradient be beyond the scope of the present work, we suggest that a devic design in which a succes- 
sion of gate be implement to move and switch the chiral of vortex domain wall would avoid the need to use 
magnet field or electr current in inform process scheme use domain walls, therebi remov 
some of the major practic limit to the develop of such technologies. 

method 
10 mm × 10 mm × 0.5 mm pmn-pt(110) substrat be purchas from atom optic co., ltd. atom forc 
microscopi measur reveal a surfac rough of order 1 nm. ti(5 nm)/au(35 nm) electrod be 
deposit onto the top and bottom side of the pmn-pt by thermal evaporation. the ring pattern be defin 
use electron beam lithographi befor deposit of ni(20 nm)/al(2 nm) by magnetron sputter follow by 
lift-off. 

magnet contrast imag be obtain use the x-ray photoemiss electron microscop (peem) on 
beamlin i06 at the diamond light sourc synchrotron. illumin the sampl at obliqu (16°) incid 
and make use of xmcd at the Ni L3 edg (853 ev) a the contrast mechan allow sensit to in-plan 
moment with a spatial resolut of approxim 50 nm. azimuth rotat of the sampl with respect to the 
incid polar vector allow unambigu assign of the magnet direct in each domain. 
addit electr feedthrough allow the in-situ applic of voltag to the pmn-pt whilst imaging. 

micromagnet simul be carri out use the object orient micromagnet framework 
(oommf) package26 instal on the univers of nottingham high perform comput cluster. 
simul be perform for a half ring geometri with inner diamet = 5.7 µm, outer diamet = 7.7 µm and 
thick = 20 nm. A zoomed-sect be show in fig. 3. the mesh size be 5 nm × 5 nm × 20 nm. magnetis 
M = 490 kam−1. the damp constant be state in the main text. the end of the half ring section be set to 
critic damp to suppress the reflect of spin waves. simul be carri out use uniaxi anisotropi 
energi valu of KU = −3 kjm−3 and +10 kjm−3. 

refer 
1. parkin, S. S. p., hayashi, M. & thomas, L. magnet domain-wal racetrack memory. scienc 320, 190 (2008). 
2. lavrijsen, R. et al. magnet ratchet for three-dimension spintron memori and logic. natur 493, 647 (2014). 
3. allwood, D. A. et al. magnet domain-wal logic. scienc 309, 1688 (2005). 
4. pushp, A. et al. domain wall trajectori determin by it fraction topolog edg defects. natur phys. 9, 505 (2013). 
5. omari, K. A. & hayward, T. J. chirality-bas vortex domain-wal logic gates. phys. rev. appli 2, 044001 (2014). 
6. brandão, J. et al. control of the magnet vortex chiral in permalloy nanowir with asymmetr notches. J. appl. phys. 116, 

193902 (2014). 
7. wilhelm, e.-s., mcgrouther, d., heyne, l., bisig, A. & kläui, M. vortex domain wall chiral rectif due to the interact 

with end domain spin structur in permalloy nanowires. appl. phys. lett. 95, 252501 (2009). 
8. omari, K. et al. ballist rectif of vortex domain wall chiral at nanowir corners. appl. phys. lett. 107, 222403 (2015). 

figur 4. A method to switch the chiral of a vortex domain wall by appli strain locally. A schemat 
represent of a devic element for revers the chiral of a vortex domain wall in a nanowir fabric 
on a piezoelectr substrate. A voltag appli to the electrod induc a mechan strain and a uniaxi 
anisotropi favour an easi axi transvers to the wire. (a), A vortex domain wall posit at the edg of 
the electrod region be transform to a flux closur domain pattern near the electrod (b). (c), relax of 
the induc anisotropi lead to the format of a vortex domain wall with the opposit chiral to the initi 
domain wall. 



www.nature.com/scientificreports/ 

6scientif report | 7: 7613 | doi:10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9 

9. bisig, A. et al. dynam domain wall chiral rectif by rotat magnet fields. appl. phys. lett. 106, 122401 (2015). 
10. uhlir, V. et al. dynam switch of the spin circul in taper magnet nanodisks. natur nanotech. 8, 341 (2013). 
11. antos, R. & otani, Y. simul of the dynam switch of vortex chiral in magnet nanodisk by a uniform field pulse. phi 

rev. B 80(r), 140404 (2009). 
12. buzzi, M. et al. singl domain spin manipul by electr field in strain coupl artifici multiferro nanostructures. phys. 

rev. lett. 111, 027204 (2013). 
13. rushforth, A. W. et al. voltag control of magnetocrystallin anisotropi in ferromagnetic-semiconductor/piezoelectr hybrid 

structures. phys. rev. B 78, 085314 (2008). 
14. hu, j.-m., li, z., chen, l.-q. & nan, c.-w. high-dens magnetoresist random access memori oper at ultralow voltag at 

room temperature. natur commun. 2, 553 (2011). 
15. parkes, D. E. et al. non-volatil voltag control of magnet and magnet domain wall in magnetostrict epitaxi thin films. 

appl. phys. lett. 101, 072402 (2012). 
16. brintlinger, T. et al. In situ observ of revers nanomagnet switch induc by electr fields. nano. lett. 10, 1219 

(2010). 
17. hockel, J. l., bur, a., wu, t., wetzlar, K. P. & carman, G. P. electr field induc magnet rotat in pattern Ni ring/ 

pb(mg1/3nb2/3)o3](1-0.32)-[pbtio3]0.32 heterostructures. appl. phys. lett. 100, 022401 (2012). 
18. sohn, H. et al. electr driven magnet domain wall rotat in multiferro heterostructur to manipul suspend on-chip 

magnet particles. ac nano 9, 4814 (2015). 
19. lei, N. et al. strain-control magnet domain wall propag in hybrid piezoelectric/ferromagnet structures. natur commun. 

4, 1378 (2013). 
20. franke, K. J. A. et al. revers electric-field-driven magnet domain-wal motion. phys. rev. X 5, 011010 (2015). 
21. De ranieri, E. et al. piezoelectr control of the mobil of a domain wall driven by adiabat and non-adiabat torques. natur 

mater. 12, 808 (2013). 
22. bryan, M. t., bance, s., dean, j., schre, T. & allwood, D. A. transvers and vortex domain wall structur in magnet nanowir with 

uniaxi in-plan anisotropy. J. phys. cond. matt. 24, 024205 (2012). 
23. wu, T. et al. domain engin switchabl strain state in ferroelectr (011)[pb(mg1/3nb2/3)o3](1-x)-[pbtio3]x (pmn-pt, 

x = 0.32) singl crystals. J. appl. phys. 109, 124101 (2011). 
24. sato, y., hirayama, T. & ikuhara, Y. real-tim direct observ of polaris revers in a piezoelectr crystal: pb(mg1/3nb2/3) 

o3-pbtio3 studi via in situ electr bias transmiss electron microscopy. phys. rev. lett. 107, 187601 (2011). 
25. rafalovskyi, i., guennou, m., gregora, I. & hlinka, J. macroscop lamellar heterophas pattern in pb(mg1/3nb2/3)o3-pbtio3 singl 

crystals. phys. rev. B 93, 064110 (2016). 
26. donahue, M. and porter, D. G. interag report nistir 6376, oommf user’ guide, version 1.0 (nation institut of standard 

and technology, gaithersburg, md, 1999). 

acknowledg 
thi work be support by the engin and physic scienc research council [grant number ep/ 
h003487/1 and ep/k503800/1]. the author would like to acknowledg diamond light sourc for the provis 
of beamtim under si-9521 and 11327. We be grate for access to the univers of nottingham high 
perform comput facility. 

author contribut 
r.b., s.b., d.e.p., k.w.e., s.a.c. and a.w.r. conduct the peem measurements. c.r. perform electron beam 
lithographi and s.b. carri out the sputter deposition. a.w.r. and s.a.c. design the experiments. a.w.r. 
carri out the micromagnet simulations. all author contribut to the manuscript. 

addit inform 
supplementari inform accompani thi paper at doi:10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9 
compet interests: the author declar that they have no compet interests. 
publisher' note: springer natur remain neutral with regard to jurisdict claim in publish map and 
institut affiliations. 

open access thi articl be licens under a creativ common attribut 4.0 intern 
license, which permit use, sharing, adaptation, distribut and reproduct in ani medium or 

format, a long a you give appropri credit to the origin author(s) and the source, provid a link to the cre- 
ativ common license, and indic if chang be made. the imag or other third parti materi in thi 
articl be includ in the article’ creativ common license, unless indic otherwis in a credit line to the 
material. If materi be not includ in the article’ creativ common licens and your intend use be not per- 
mit by statutori regul or exce the permit use, you will need to obtain permiss directli from the 
copyright holder. To view a copi of thi license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. 

© the author(s) 2017 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 

determinist control of magnet vortex wall chiral by electr field 
method 
acknowledg 
figur 1 devic geometri and characteristics. 
figur 2 xmcd-peem imag of strain-induc chiral switch in vortex domain walls. 
figur 3 micromagnet simul of a head to head vortex domain wall under the action of a uniaxi magnet anisotropi energy. 
figur 4 A method to switch the chiral of a vortex domain wall by appli strain locally. 




