






































develop a secure, un-hack net 


develop a secure, un-hack net 

A method of secur commun between multipl quantum 

devic have be develop by a ucl-l team of scientists, bring 

forward the realiti of a large-scale, un-hack quantum network. 

To date, commun via quantum network have onli be possibl 

between two devic of know proven that have be built 

securely. 

with the EU and UK commit €1 billion and £270 million* 

respect into fund quantum technolog research, a race be on to 

develop the first truli secure, large-scal network between citi that 

work for ani quantum device. 

“we’r in a technolog arm race of sorts. when quantum comput 

be fulli developed, they will break much of today’ encrypt whose 

secur be onli base on mathemat assumptions. To pre-empt 

solv this, we be work on new way of commun through larg 

network that don’t reli on assumptions, but instead use the quantum 

law of physic to ensur security, which would need to be broken to 

hack the encryption,” explain lead author, Dr ciarán lee (ucl 

physic & astronomy). 

develop a secure, un-hack net https://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/0118/110118-unhackable-qua... 

1 sur 3 12-01-18 à 19:03 



publish in physic review letter and fund by the engin 

and physic scienc research council, the studi by ucl, the 

univers of oxford and the univers of edinburgh scientist detail a 

new way of commun secur between three or more quantum 

devices, irrespect of who built them. 

“our approach work for a gener network where you don’t need to 

trust the manufactur of the devic or network for secreci to be 

guaranteed. our method work by use the network' structur to limit 

what an eavesdropp can learn,” say Dr matti hoban (univers of 

oxford, previous univers of edinburgh). 

the approach bridg the gap between the theoret promis of 

perfect secur guarante by the law of quantum physic and the 

practic implement of such secur in larg networks. 

It test the secur of the quantum devic prior to engag in 

commun with the whole network. It do thi by check if the 

correl between devic in the network be intrins quantum 

and cannot have be creat by anoth means. 

these correl be use to establish secret key which can be use to 

encrypt ani desir communication. secur be ensur by the uniqu 

properti that quantum correl can onli be share between the 

devic that creat them, ensur no hacker can ever come to learn 

the key. 

the team use two method – machin learn and causal infer – 

to develop the test for the un-hack commun system. thi 

approach distribut secret key in a way that cannot be effect 

intercepted, becaus through quantum mechan their secreci can be 

test and guaranteed. 

“our work can be thought of a creat the softwar that will run on 

hardwar current be built to realis the potenti of quantum 

communications. In futur work, we’d like to work with partner in the 

UK nation quantum technolog programm to develop thi further. 

We hope to trial our quantum network approach over the next few 

years,” conclud Dr lee. 

the team acknowledg that an un-hack network could be abus in 

develop a secure, un-hack net https://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/0118/110118-unhackable-qua... 

2 sur 3 12-01-18 à 19:03 



the same way that current network are, but highlight that there be also 

a clear benefit to ensur privaci too. 

link 

research paper in physic review letter 

Dr ciarán lee' academ profil 

ucl physic & astronomi 

*uk nation quantum technolog programm 

the quantum age: technolog opportun by the UK govern 

imag 

quantum comput (credit: kevin dooley, source: flickr) 

media contact 

bex caygil 

tel: +44 (0)20 3108 3846 

email: r.caygil [at] ucl.ac.uk 

develop a secure, un-hack net https://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/0118/110118-unhackable-qua... 

3 sur 3 12-01-18 à 19:03 


