









































microsoft word - ferrara2017.docx 


disinform and social bot 
oper IN the run UP TO the 2017 
french presidenti elect 
emilio ferrara 
univers OF southern california, inform scienc institut 

abstract 
recent account from researchers, journalists, a well a feder investigators, reach a unanim 
conclusion: social medium be systemat exploit to manipul and alter public opinion. some 
disinform campaign have be coordin by mean of bots, social medium account control by 
comput script that tri to disguis themselv a legitim human users. In thi study, we describ one 
such oper occur in the run up to the 2017 french presidenti election. We collect a massiv 
twitter dataset of nearli 17 million post occur between april 27 and may 7, 2017 (elect day). We 
then set to studi the macronleak disinform campaign: By leverag a mix of machin learn and 
cognit behavior model techniques, we separ human from bots, and then studi the activ 
of the two group take independently, a well a their interplay. We provid a character of both the 
bot and the user who engag with them, and oppos it to those user who didn't. prior interest of 
disinform adopt pinpoint to the reason of scarc success of thi campaign: the user who engag 
with macronleak be mostli foreign with preexist interest in alt-right topic and altern news 
media, rather than french user with divers polit views. concluding, anomal account usag pattern 
suggest the possibl exist of a black-market for reusabl polit disinform bots. 

introduct 
social medium have be extens prais for their power to democrat onlin conversation. whether in 
the context of civil movement (howard, et al., 2011; gonzález-bailón, et al., 2011; tufekci & wilson, 
2012; gonzález-bailón, et al., 2013; tufekci, 2014; bastos, et al., 2014), polit outreach (bond, et al., 
2012; bakshy, et al., 2015), public health intervent (centola, 2010; dredze, 2012; korda & itani, 2013), 
or situat awar (sasaki, et al., 2010; merchant, et al., 2011; signorini, et al., 2011; paul & dredze, 
2011), platform like twitter and facebook play a central role in the modern inform ecosystem. 
however, such power tool can also be abus for nefari purpos (ferrara, 2015): extremist group 
use social medium for radic propaganda and recruit effort (ferrara, 2017); stock market manipul 
have creat concert effort to game financi system (ferrara, 2015); conspiraci group orchestr 
campaign to distribut fake scientif articl to support anti-vaccin and other anti-sci movements, 
creat massiv public health issu (bessi, et al., 2015; del vicario, et al., 2016). Of great concern for 
democraci be anoth form of social medium manipulation: the rise of popular of bot and disinform 
in the context of polit propaganda (el-khalili, 2013; bessi & ferrara, 2016; ferrara, et al., 2016; shorey 
& howard, 2016; kollanyi, et al., 2016; marwick & lewis, 2017). 

lphilipp 
text tapé à la machin 
realli bad graph :) excel !!! not sharp enough !!! 
must be reviewed! 



research warn about the potenti for abus of the social medium ecosystem for polit propaganda a 
decad ago (howard, 2006; hwang, et al, 2012). the earli report of coordin attack against polit 
candid on social medium date back to 2010 (metaxa & mustafaraj, 2012; ratkiewicz, et al., 2011a; 
ratkiewicz, et al., 2011b). sinc then, an increas account of such event have be record in the context 
of sever elections, both in the unit state (bessi & ferrara, 2016; kollanyi, et al., 2016; shorey & 
howard, 2016; wolley, 2016; wolley & howard, 2016; marwick & lewis, 2017; wang, et al., 2017), and 
all over the world, includ in south america (forelle, et al., 2015; suárez-serrato, et al., 2016), the u.k. 
(howard & kollanyi, 2016), and itali (cresci, et al., 2017). one common trait of these campaign be the 
adopt of autom tool to gener larg volum of social medium post to support, or attack, candidates. 

although autom social medium accounts, refer to a social bot or sock puppets, have in some 
instanc be use for social good (savage, et al., 2016; mønsted, et al., 2017; shirado, & christakis, 
2017), in thi studi we will refer exclus to those use with the intent to deceiv and manipulate. 
anoth form of artifici support express on social medium be via fake followers, often inact account 
that be onli use to increas the onlin popular and/or visibl (e.g., the followership) of a public figur 
(marwick & lewis, 2017). fake follow be not subject of thi studi due to their inactivity. 

On the onset of the 2016 u.s. presidenti election, a rather new phenomenon be observed, in concert with 
social bot and hyper-partisan campaigns: the spread of fake news and the coordin of disinform 
campaign (allcott & gentzkow, 2017; marwick & lewis, 2017; mele, et al., 2017). the adopt of 
autom devic such a social bot in the context of disinform campaign be particularli concern 
becaus there be the potenti to reach a critic mass larg enough to domin the public discours and 
alter public opinion (ferrara, et al., 2016; woolley & howard, 2016; marwick & lewis, 2017); thi could 
steer the public’ attent away from fact and redirect it toward manufactured, plant information.1 

In thi paper, we focu on anoth pivot recent polit event, name the 2017 french presidenti 
elect of may 7, 2017. We aim to describ the social medium dynam relat to one potenti disrupt 
disinform campaign that occur in the run up to the election, know a “macronleaks”. In the 
following, we provid a brief account of the event relat to macronleak a they unfolded. 

the popular 4chan.org messag board host sever larg yet ephemer discuss threads. A popular board 
be the “/pol/” (i.e., politics) community. partli due to it anonym features, partli becaus inact 
discuss thread be quickli and automat archiv by the platform itself, 4chan.org have be 
reportedli function a an effect incub of alt-right and alt-right onlin communities, most 
promin in the unit state (marwick & lewis, 2017). among the thread relat to the 2017 french 
election, the most popular be one center around coordin cyber-attack aim at revel sensit 
inform about then-presidenti candid emmanuel macron (en marche!, 2017). 

signific user particip guarante the gener of a wealth of allegedli incrimin material: 
while most document be manufactur and their fals natur be easili identifiable,2 on friday may 5, 
2017 one user anonym share an email dump contain “correspondence, documents, and photo 
from macron and hi team.”3 shortli after it appearance, a link to the “/pol/” anonym post be share 
on twitter by alt-right activist jack posobiec, which contribut to amplifi the ongo disinform 
campaign object of thi study.4 ultimately, the leak document be share on twitter by wikileaks’ 
offici account itself, although with the disclosur that their authent be unverifi – thi make the 
campaign go viral. 



defin disinform IN the context OF thi studi 
the notion of “disinform campaign” use in thi work warrant a rigor definition. We consid 
macronleak an instanc of disinform a it exhibit two necessari ingredi namely, first, the 
unverifi natur of the share information, and second the coordin effort behind it sharing. 

the unverifi natur of the leak document make thi inform qualifi for the tradit definit 
of “rumor” (allport & postman, 1947). the document circul onlin have be refer to a evid 
of macron’ tax fraud and other illicit activities. the accuraci and relev of these leak document 
have be extens debat for week after the fact. the conclus from offici investig be that, 
although the leak document be not manufactured, there be no evid to support the allegations: most 
of the conclus drawn by the 4chan.org commun be base on erron translat from french, 
a well a bia interpret (or trivial misunderstanding) of french law (en marche!, 2017). 

the voluntari spread of a rumor by mean of an orchestr effort make it a disinform campaign 
(del vicario, et al., 2016). In thi case, 4chan.org serv a incub for the initi attempt to smear the 
candid by manufacturing, planting, or leak allegedli incrimin documents. In addition, one major 
find of thi work, that we will discu in detail later, be the uncov of a social bot oper that 
occur in the run up to elect day aim at amplifi even further the viral share of disinform 
and email leaks. 

summari OF contribut 
In the rest of thi manuscript, we will detail the methodolog approach to data collect and analysis, 
and discu the find and contribut of thi work, which we summar a follows: 

• We monitor the twitter stream between april 27 and may 7, 2017 (elect day), and collect 
a veri larg dataset contain nearli 17 million tweet relat to the 2017 french presidenti 
election. within it, we identifi the subset relat to the macronleak disinform campaign. 

• By exploit combin of machin learn techniqu and cognit behavior modeling, we 
identifi human and social bot particip to the campaign. We studi the characterist of 
both class of user independently, a well a their interplay. 

• We discov that prior user interest reveal the reason of scarc success of the macronleak 
campaign: the user who engag with it be mostli foreign belong to the alt-right twitter 
community, rather than french user (i.e., potenti voters). 

• finally, we uncov that account use to support then-presidenti candid trump befor the 
2016 u.s. elect have be brought back from a limbo of inact (sinc novemb 2016) to 
join the macronleak disinform campaign. such anomal usag pattern point to the 
possibl exist of a black-market for reusabl political-disinform bots. 

method 
data collect 
By follow a consolid strategy, which we previous use to studi the 2016 u.s. presidenti elect 
(bessi and ferrara, 2016), we manual select a set of hashtag and keywords. the list by construct 
contain a roughli equal number of term associ with each of the two candidates, name marin Le 



pen and emmanuel macron, and variou gener election-rel terms: we final defin 23 terms, list 
in tabl 1. the compil of thi list be also inform by earli report by oxford research about the 
most promin election-rel term (desigaud, et al., 2017; howard, et al., 2017). 

We monitor the twitter stream and collect data by use the twitter search api, from april 27 to the 
end of elect day, on may 7, 2017: thi allow u to uninterruptedli collect all tweet contain ani of 
the search terms. the data collect infrastructur ran insid usc server to ensur resili and 
scalability. We chose to use the twitter search api (https://dev.twitter.com/rest/public/search) to make 
sure that we obtain all tweet that contain the search term of interest post dure the data collect 
period, rather than a sampl of unfilt tweets: thi precaut avoid incur in know sampl issu 
relat to collect data use the twitter stream api (https://dev.twitter.com/streaming/overview) rather 
than the twitter search api (morstatter, et al., 2013). 

thi procedur yield a larg dataset contain approxim 17 million uniqu tweets, post by 
2,068,728 million uniqu users. the timelin of the volum of post tweets, down to the resolut of 
minutes, be illustr in figur 1 – and it will be discuss more thoroughli in the data analysi section. 

within thi set, we further identifi the subset of tweet associ with the macronleak campaign. use 
the report from variou news articl a well a by manual inspection, we use the follow key term to 
isol tweet belong to the campaign: #macronleaks, #macrongate, #sortonsmacron, #bayrougate, 
and #rejoignezmarine. all tweet contain ani such term constitut the macronleak corpu that we 
will analyz in detail in thi work. nearli 350 thousand such tweet exist, out of about 17 million overal 
tweets, make the macronleak campaign a small drop (i.e., about 2% of the total) in the ocean of 
inform regard the presidenti election. overall, 99,378 user post tweet in the macronleak 
corpus. 

bot detect techniqu 
one of the most daunt task in social medium analysi be determin whether a user account be control 
by a human or a softwar (i.e., a bot). A great deal of research aim to address thi issue, includ our own 
effort (ferrara, et al., 2016; varol, et al., 2017) and others’ (messias, et al., 2013; yang, et al., 2014; gilani, 
et al., 2015; subrahmanian, et al., 2016). 

In thi realm, botometer6 (formerli botornot) represents, a of today, the onli openli access solut 
(davis, et al., 2016). It consist of an applic program interfac (api) develop in python which 
allow to programmat interact with the underli machin learn system. botomet have be 
proven quit accur in detect social bot (davis, et al., 2016; varol, et al., 2017), 

however, the public interfac of botomet have two limit that prevent u to use it in thi project: 
the framework reli on the twitter api to collect recent data about the account to inspect. the twitter 
api impos veri strict queri rate limits, therefor make it imposs to analyz more than a few 
thousand account with the public botomet python api. In thi study, our goal be to detect bot in a veri 
larg popul of over 2 million users, requir an ad hoc large-scal bot detect solution. the second 
limit be onc again deriv by the twitter api: when botomet inspect an account that have be 
either suspended, protected, quarantined, or deleted, the twitter api do not provid ani detail about it, 
render botomet unabl to make ani determination. sinc thi studi will show that a signific portion 
of bot account involv in macronleak have be either suspended, quarantined, or delet shortli after 
elect day (may 7, 2017), botomet would not repres a suitabl tool to analyz them. 



our bot detect approach 
for the reason mention above, we decid to implement a simpl yet accur bot-detect algorithm 
reflect the follow requirements: 

• the algorithm be accur yet scalabl and can be use to classifi the over 2 million user present 
in our dataset in a reliabl yet time manner; thi will address the scalabl issu of botometer. 

• the algorithm can use histor tweet and account metadata collect and avail in our dataset 
to determin bot and humans, without the need to queri the twitter api for recent data; thi will 
address the limit impos by the twitter api and allow u to analyz all users, not onli the activ 
one at the time of inspection, but also the suspended, protected, quarantined, and delet accounts. 

• the algorithm build on top of the insight and lesson learn from the develop of botometer. 

botometer’ underli machine-learn framework gener a set of over one thousand features, 
span content and network structure, tempor activity, user profil data, and sentiment analysis. these 
indic be aggreg and analyz to determin the likelihood that the inspect account be a bot. 
featur analysi reveal that the two most import class of featur to detect social bot be the metadata 
and usag statist associ with a user account (davis, et al., 2016; varol, et al., 2017). We previous 
illustr (bessi and ferrara, 2017) that the follow indic provid the strong signal to separ 
human from, in particular, polit bots: (i) whether the public twitter profil look like the default one 
or it be custom (it requir human effort to custom a profile, therefor bot be more like to exhibit 
the default setting); (ii) absenc of geograph metadata (human often use smartphon and the twitter 
iphone/android app, which record the physic locat of the mobil devic a digit footprint); and, 
(iii) activ statist such a total number of tweet and frequenc of post (bot exhibit incess activ 
and excess amount of tweets), proport of retweet over origin tweet (bot retweet content much 
more frequent than gener new tweets), proport of follow over followe (bot usual have 
less follow and more followees), the number of time a user have be add to a public list – human 
user be often consid more influenti (aral, & walker, 2012) and their content more “contagious” 
(kramer, et al., 2014; ferrara & yang, 2015a; ferrara & yang, 2015b; mønsted, et al., 2017), etc. 

detect algorithm and featur 
consid these insights, we use the follow user metadata and activ featur to creat a simpl yet 
effect bot detect algorithm:7 

1) “statuses_count”: number of tweet post by the give user; 
2) “followers_count”: number of follow of the give user; 
3) “friends_count”: number of followe (friends) of the give user; 
4) “favourites_count”: number of favorit tweet of the give user; 
5) “listed_count”: number of time the give user have be add to a list; 
6) “default_profile”: binari field that indic whether the user profil have the default set or not; 
7) “geo_enabled”: binari field that indic whether the geo-coordin of the user be available; 
8) “profile_use_background_image”: binari field that indic whether the user profil have the 

default imag or a custom one; 
9) “verified”: binari field that indic whether the account have be verifi by twitter; verifi 

account be consid to belong without doubt to humans.8 
10) “protected”: binari field that indic whether the account have be set a protected.9 



As for machin learn models, we test a varieti of algorithm readili avail in the python toolbox 
name scikit-learn (pedregosa, et al., 2011). 

In line with the consider above, we consid the abil of the algorithm to deal with larg datasets, 
which exclud some comput more demand algorithm (e.g., support vector machines) and 
we benchmark the follow methods: logist regression, decis trees, variou ensembl method 
(random forests, adaboost, extratrees, etc.), k-nearest neighbors, stochast gradient descent, and 
final two-lay neural networks. 

for perform evaluation, we use two standard metric commonli adopt in machin learn research, 
name accuraci and auc-roc (area under the receiv oper characterist curve) (bishop, 2016). 
both score rang between zero and one, the larg the better, with one indic perfect classification. 

We set up a tradit supervis learn task, constitut of three phases, name models’ training, 
valid (a.k.a. perform evaluation), and finally, classif of the user in the twitter french 
elect dataset. 

the first step requir u to train each model with label exampl of the two class of user to detect 
(i.e., human and bots). To thi purpose, we use two dataset contain over five thousand of posit 
(bots) and neg (humans) exampl of twitter user in each category. the former train dataset be 
associ with botomet (varol, et al., 2017); the latter one be a label dataset provid by cresci and 
collabor (cresci, 2017). 

for perform evaluation, to calcul the accuraci and auc-roc score of all models, we use the 
approach of 10-fold cross-validation. thi procedur split the train data into ten equally-s set of 
data-point (preserv the balanc of posit and neg data-point of the origin dataset): one of these 
fold be hold out for valid (i.e., perform evaluation) and the remaind be use for train the 
model (the procedur be iter 10 times, each hold out a differ fold, and then averag the accuraci 
and auc-roc score obtain across the ten round of cross validation). 

all model achiev veri good performance, abov 80% in both accuraci and auc-roc scores. the top 
three model in term of perform be random forest (93% accuracy, 92% auc-roc), adaboost 
(92% accuraci and auc-roc), and logist regress (92% accuracy, 89% auc-roc). the latter also 
be over one order of magnitud faster than nearli ani other model (onli stochast gradient descent be 
compar in term of speed but significantli bad in term of performance). 

for the reason above, we decid to use logist regress a refer model for bot detect purpos 
in the rest of thi study. We retrain a full logist regress model on the ten, simpl metadata and 
activ featur describ above, use all the avail label train data. finally, we use it to classifi 
all two million user in the twitter french elect dataset. An in-depth analysi of our find follows. 

data analysi 
timelin OF event and onlin discuss dynam 
We start by explor the timelin of the gener election-rel discuss on twitter. the broader 
discuss that we collect concern the two candidates, marin Le pen and emmanuel macron, and span 
the period from april 27 to may 7, 2017. the discuss revolv around the 23 key term list in tabl 



1 (desigaud, et al., 2017; howard, et al., 2017) and account for roughli 16.65 million tweets. figur 1 
illustr the timelin of the volum of such tweets, at the granular of the minute, and with gmt-0 time 
zone alignment. let u discu first the dash grey line (left axis): thi show the volum of gener 
election-rel discussion. note that the presidenti elect occur on may 07, 2017. the discuss 
exhibit common circadian activ pattern and a slightli upward trend in proxim to elect day. 
some spike do occur, name on may 3 and on may 7, 2017. asid from the obviou uptak in discuss 
on elect day (i.e., spike on may 7) driven by the offlin events, the previou spike occur at night 
time on may 3, 2017 again in respons to an offlin event, name after the televis polit debat that 
saw Le pen face macron.10 otherwise, the number of tweet per minut averag between 300 and 1,500 
dure the day, and quickli approach de facto zero overnight, consist throughout the entir 
observ window. 

figur 1 also illustr with the purpl solid line (right axis) the volum associ with macronleaks. 
one should first note that the volum be nearli an order of magnitud lesser than the gener election-rel 
discussion. however, the tempor pattern of thi campaign be substanti differ from the gener 
conversation. first, the campaign be substanti silent for the entir period till earli may. We can easili 
pinpoint to the incept of the campaign on twitter, which occur in the afternoon of april 30. after that, 
a surg in the volum of tweets, peak at nearli 300 per minute, happen in the run up to elect day, 
between may 5 and may 6, 2017. It have be alreadi report by prior research (metaxa & mustafaraj, 
2012) that such disinform campaign peak between one and two day befor elections. It be also worth 
note that such a peak be nearli compar in scale to the volum of the regular discussion, suggest 
that for a brief interv of time (roughli 48 hours) the macronleak disinform campaign acquir 
signific collect attention, which in turn could have potenti have disastr effect in term of public 
opinion manipulation. 

To understand the main topic of convers and the main actor therein involved, in tabl 2 and tabl 
3 we report the list of top 20 hashtag and mention users, respectively, with the associ number of 
tweet produc dure our observ window. from tabl 2 we can observ that mani term that we 
use a keyword for data collect appear highli rank in thi list a well (cf. tabl 1). macron canal 
by far the larg volum of tweets, with #macron appear in over 1.5 million tweets. comparatively, the 
offici hashtag of marin Le pen, name #lepen, accru less than one third of that. macron’ promin 
presenc in the discuss be due in part to organ attention, and in part becaus of disinformation: 
#macronleak and #macrongate, the two main hashtag relat to the disinform campaign, featur 
promin in thi top 20 list and appear cumul in about 350,000 tweet in our dataset. more detail 
about thi appear in the next section. finally, the list demonstr the high qualiti of our data collect 
strategy: all hashtag in the list be strictli relat to the elect convers (we manual scrutin up 
to the top 100 hashtag and result be consist with veri littl nois add a we go down the ranking). 

As far a the top mention users, the rank be intuit lead by the two offici account of the candidates, 
with macron accru nearli 30% more mention than Le pen. sever account follow, divid by a larg 
gap. the list includes: 

• other promin politician such a nicola dupont-aignan, florian philippot, jean-luc 
mélenchon, marion maréchal-l pen, and even US presidenti candid hillari clinton, a well 
a sever offici parti twitter accounts. 



• tradit news medium accounts, includ news channel like bfmtv, quotidien (@qofficiel), 
a well a promin journalist like hugo clément. 

• american alt-right medium person like infowars’ editor paul joseph watson (@prisonplanet), 
alt-right activist and the rebel’ correspond jack posobiec, a well a wikileaks. all these 
actor be promin involv with share and discuss the macronleak contents. 

In the next two sections, we will focu on the macronleak campaign and studi social bot oper and 
characteristics; afterwards, we will describ the behavior of human and bot user a well a their 
interactions. these analysi will shed light on the dynam of the macronleak disinform operations. 

macronleak bot and their characterist 
By use a logist regress model train on the ten metadata and activ featur describ above, 
we obtain veri accur user classif on the cross-valid test (92% accuracy, 89% auc-roc). 
We adopt thi model to detect all bot and separ them from human user in our dataset. In the following, 
however, we will focu exclus on the macronleak corpus, the subset of our twitter data that contain 
nearli 350,000 tweet post by nearli one hundr thousand distinct users.11 

out of 99,378 user involv in macronleaks, our model classifi 18,324 of them a social bots, and the 
remaind of 81,054 a human users. the fraction of social bot amount for about 18% of the total user 
involv in the campaign, which be extrem consist with result from previou studi – e.g., our 
analysi of the 2016 u.s. presidenti elect uncov that roughli 15% of the user involv in the 
twitter convers be bots, and account for about 20% of the total tweet (bessi & ferrara, 2016). 

To provid a rigor and thorough assess of the qualiti of the bot detect results, next we provid 
first some exampl of the result gener by our bot detect model (cf. tabl 4), and then a broader 
statist character of the distinct featur exhibit by the bot a oppos to human users. 

tabl 4 show the list of the top 15 twitter account detect a social bot in the macronleak corpu by 
our logist regress model. they be sort by the number of tweet they post dure our observ 
window. We manual investig the statu of these account at the time of our investig (end of may 
2017): the column “status” report whether the account be still active, or otherwis they have be 
delet by the owner, or suspend or “quarantined” by twitter.12 whether an account have be deleted, 
suspended, or quarantined, it be a strong indic that the account have be involv in activ in violat 
of twitter’ term of service: for exampl social bots, when detect by the platform’ algorithms, get 
systemat shut down; user who share inform incompat with twitter’ to can get report 
by others, then scrutin by twitter’ anti-abus team, and suspend or quarantin if found in violation. 

remarkably, among the top 15 social bot detect by our framework, 4 account have be so far deleted, 
7 have be suspended, and 2 have be quarantin by twitter. two account be still active, and they 
may be the result of misclassification. overall, thi exampl of manual verif suggest that we 
obtain 13 correct bot out of 15 detected, an accuraci of nearli 87% which be compat with the cross- 
valid benchmark (92% accuracy, 89% auc-roc). further inspect of highly-rank account be 
consist with thi accuraci performance. 

In general, we have alreadi extens observ in our prior work how detect bot “in the wild” be a 
much more challeng task than tradit machin learn “exercises” where perform be measur 
on valid test set for which label be know (ferrara, et al., 2016; varol, et al., 2017). thi discrep 
happen for a coupl of reasons, most promin becaus oftentim bot use dure tradit training- 



valid benchmark be of the same or similar types, while in the wild (i.e., in the real twitter world) 
one can expect that thousand of variant of social bot may exist. our detect framework seem to 
perform well in real-world detection. We hypothes that thi happen for two reasons. first, the 
framework benefit from it simplicity: logist regress be a veri simpl linear model, and we limit the 
model to learn onli over ten user metadata and activ feature, so overfit issu be limited). second, 
to train our model we use a mixtur of variou type of bot provid by multipl studi (varol, et al., 
2017; cresci, et al., 2017). 

let u provid some characterist of the 13 hand-verifi bot in tabl 4: 

• all account exhibit a disproportion number of tweet contain the macronleak keywords, 
gener over the first week of may 2017. 

• 12 out of 13 bot (all except @yhesum) appear to have a veri limit number of followers, 
suggest that their creator do not emphas the import of the social network dimension, 
which have proven to be a central compon of success and influenc of bot oper in prior 
studi (bessi & ferrara, 2016; ferrara, et al., 2016). the onli except (@yhesum) instead 
appear to adopt the well-known automat reciproc follow-back strategi (i.e., retain a friend 
who follow back an automatically-initi bot followership), a suggest by the veri larg and 
balanc number of friend and follow (nearli ten thousand). 

• two suspici group of bot account with similar name appear: 
o A first class of bot be name *2020 (where * be a randomli gener name, e.g., 

gunbuster2020, dixneuf2020, etc.). four such “2020” bot appear in the top 15 and they all 
exhibit similar activ statistics. further manual scrutini reveal the exist of three 
addit “2020” bot in the macronleak corpus, which be less activ but still ident 
in behavior pattern to the four in the top 15 list. 

o A second class of bot be name *_1337 (where * be a randomli gener name, e.g., 
geoff_1337 and jerry_1337). further scrutini reveal the exist of five other “_1337” 
less activ bots. It be worth note that 1337 spell leet, which stand for “elite” and 
repres an altern alphabet that be primarili use by hack internet communities.13 

In the discuss and conclus section, we will present some addit insight about our find 
relat to the activ and characterist of some of the bot we discovered. We will show some evid 
in support of the hypothesi that onlin market of reusabl polit disinform bot may exist:14 some 
of the bot account we uncov be creat at the begin of novemb 2016, shortli befor the 2016 
u.s. presidenti election, and use onli for a week to support of alt-right narratives; then they “went dark”, 
show no activ till earli may, in support of alt-right agenda and the macronleak disinform 
campaign in the context of the 2017 french presidenti election. evid of such devic be in other 
contexts, e.g., in case of crises, have be alreadi report (starbird, et al., 2014; nied, et al., 2017). 

We enrich our analysi by provid a statist character of the discov bots, and we contrast it 
to the account identifi a human user by our framework. To thi purpose, in figur 2 and figur 3 we 
show two boxplot distribut of the activ and metadata featur respect of the human user and 
the social bot present in the macronleak twitter corpus. We focu onli on the five discret features, 
name number of tweet (statuses_count), number of follow (followers_count), number of friend 
(friends_count), number of favorit (favourites_count), and number of time list (listed_count); thus, we 



exclud the other five binari features, i.e., default_profile, geo_enabled, profile_use_background_image, 
verified, and protected. 

some strong statist differ clearli emerge: along all dimensions, the social bot involv in 
macronleak appear a less activ than the human users. pairwis comparison between bot and human 
of the distribut of these five featur yield addit insights: 

• bot post on averag 2.86 macronleaks-rel tweet (s = 10.3), while human post 3.81 (s 
= 9.68). A t-test and a mann-whitney test yield respect p-valu of 10-18 and 3-80. 

• bot obtain on averag 1,382 follow (s = 22,282), while human have 2,510 (s = 28,542). T- 
test and mann-whitney test score respect p-valu of 3-05 and zero. 

• bot friend on averag 1,058 user (s = 12,190), while human have on averag 1,403 friend 
(s = 3,656). t-test and mann-whitney yield p-valu of 2-04 and zero. 

• bot favorit on averag 228 tweet (s = 924), while human have on averag 13,774 favorit 
(s = 27,001). both t-test and mann-whitney p-valu be zero. 

• finally, bot have be list on averag on 7.42 list (s = 90.3) and human instead on 77.64 (s 
= 560.2). t-test yield a p-valu of 2-62 and mann-whitney a p-valu of zero. 

all p-valu indic that the pair of distribut differ statist veri significantly. It be worth note 
that all distribut be broad and skewed, exhibit a power-law like behavior. for a visual example, 
refer to figur 6, which will be discuss in detail in the next section. 

these result warrant further discussion. recent literatur report extens on tradit type of social 
bot whose autom activ can be easili detect becaus it yield veri high volum of tweets, 
especi retweets, due to incess post and re-shar oper (ferrara, et al., 2016; bessi & ferrara, 
2016). these be histor consid effect strategi a they aim at flood the platform with 
campaign-rel content and canal collect attention. however, in the case of macronleak the 
histor trend appear to be reversed: bot seem to tri “fli under the radars”, post compar or less 
content than human in the same conversation. We hypothes that thi can be a strategi to avoid detect 
and suspens from the platform. 

We final investig whether ani correl between user activ and metadata emerg that could 
indic further anomal behavior pattern in bot a oppos to human users. To thi aim, in figur 4 
we show the featur pearson correl heat map for human user (top), and social bot (bottom figure) – 
exclus for those account involv in the macronleak disinform campaign. two veri differ 
pictur emerge: for human user (N = 81,054) no strong pairwis featur correl occur, a measur 
by the pearson correl coefficient, except for a strong correl (r = 0.79) between the number of 
follow a human user have and the number of time it appear in public list (cf. figur 4, top). these two 
featur be intuit correl becaus more influenti user with more follow be add to public 
list more frequent than less influenti user with few followers. 

A veri differ pictur emerg from the pairwis featur correl of bot account (N = 18,324). the 
strong correl (cf. figur 4, bottom) appear between the number of friend and the number of time 
these bot appear in list (pearson coeffici r = 0.81): thi indic that the more user a bot follow the 
more often it appear in public list of other users, suggest a self-promot mechan commonli 
adopt by bots. the second strong correl emerg between the number of follow and friend 
(pearson coeffici r = 0.65), indic that on averag the bot in the macronleak corpu engag in 



automatic, reciproc follower-friend link (one exampl of such behavior be the bot @yhesum of tabl 
4). To complet the cluster of correl pair of features, number of friend and favorit correl with a 
coeffici r = 0.61, and number of favorit and list appear correl with a coeffici of r = 0.41, 
both indic strong correl pattern of systemat behavior in the bots. 

overall, our analysi highlight exampl of bot involv in macronleak a well a provid a 
statist character of their activ and metadata featur use by our framework to detect them. In 
the next section, we will explor more in detail the behavior of both bot and human user involv in 
macronleak a well a their interactions. 

human and bot behavior and human-bot interact 
like in the previou section, we here first provid a tempor character of the twitter activity, thi 
time specif relat to macronleaks, for both bot and human accounts. In figur 5, we show the 
timelin of the volum of tweet gener (granular of one minute), respect by human user (dash 
grey line) and social bot (solid purpl line), between april 27, 2017 and may 7, 2017, and relat to 
macronleaks. the amount of activ be substanti veri close to zero until may 5, 2017, in line with the 
first coordin effort a well a the inform leak spur from other social platform like 4chan.org, 
a discuss in the introduction. spike in bot-gener content often appear to slightli preced spike in 
human posts, suggest that bot can trigger cascad of disinformation. At peak, the volum of bot- 
gener tweet be compar with the that of human-gener one (the plot, however, do not 
differenti between humans’ retweet of bot-gener content, a oppos to tweet organ 
gener by human users). 

let u investig human-bot interact further, and specif determin what be the characterist of 
the bot that be more frequent retweeted. To thi aim, in tabl 5 we report a list of ten social bot 
frequent retweet by human users. intuitively, some account overlap with the list of most activ bot 
report in tabl 4 – e.g., the @yhesum bot, which we discuss extens before, accru mani 
retweets. all the account in tabl 5 be suspended, deleted, or quarantin by twitter at the time of thi 
write (earli june 2017): thi corrobor the suspect that the account be involv in the incrimin 
activities. the exampl of tabl 5 warrant further discussion, which will allow u to dig more into the 
detail of the strategi adopt by the bot and their effectiveness. 

for each of the exampl bot account appear in tabl 5, we calcul the number of follow these 
account have prior to macronleak (more precisely, the first time they appear in our dataset) a oppos to 
at the end of the observ window (i.e., rel to their last tweet in our dataset). what emerg be that 
six out of ten bot accru a signific and larg number of follow dure the macronleak 
disinform campaign. A few of these exampl account have zero or nearli no follow when they first 
appear in the conversation, and manual verif indic that the account be explicitli creat on 
purpos to dissemin macronleak tweets. It be worth note that be activ in such a type of 
disinform campaign appear to be an effect strategi to accru visibility: sever account obtain 
thousand of follow – in our exampl bot of tabl 5, we notic increas up to nearli fifteen thousand 
follow accumul in the span of less than one week. anoth interest fact that be worth note be 
that the number of retweet receiv by the bot do not seem to be strongli correl with the total 
amount of macronleak tweet post by each bot. the effect of these bots, if measur in term 
of number of accru retweets, appear to be independ of their sheer activity: thi suggest that other 
factors, such a the posit of the bot in the social network, the differ type of messag they post 



and their narr and language, a well a the type of human target they aim at influencing, be all 
ingredi that potenti play a role in bots’ strategies. 

To dig further into the type of user involv in macronleak and contrast that to the user particip 
exclus to the gener election-rel discussion, we extract the most frequent word occur in 
the tweet produc in these two corpora. In tabl 6 we show a exampl the top 16 most frequent token 
term (i.e., individu word obtain after remov stop word and other commonli occur terms) 
occur in the tweet of the two corpora. exclud the name of the two candid that be promin 
featur in both corpora, by contrast the two column stark differ emerge: on the left side of tabl 
6, which repres general-elect frequent terms, we observ sever french word that strongli relat 
to the upcom voting, e.g., voter (to cast one’ vote, in french), vote (“to vote”, in french a in english), 
fait (fact, or event, in french), fair (“to do”, “to make”, “to take”, etc.), tout (all), françai (french), débat 
(debate), etc. On the right side of tabl 6 we see no such a languag characterization, which strongli 
suggest the fact that the macronleak disinform campaign be limit mostli to an english-speak 
audience, and fail to percol in the french-speak twitter community. the most frequent word 
speak along the direct of the main narr that be tailor around the alleg illicit activ and tax 
fraud of the now-presid macron. interestingly, the word campaign itself be promin featur in 
fourth posit with over twenti thousand distinct occurrences, suggest the natur of the oper itself. 

To corrobor thi hypothesis, we extract the most frequent term appear in the self-report profil 
descript that twitter user can decid to includ in their accounts. By use the same filter criteria, 
in tabl 7 we report a exampl the top 16 word token rank by frequenc of appear in the twitter 
profil of user involv respect in macronleak (right column) a oppos to exclus in the 
gener election-rel discuss (left column). tabl 7 provid again a staggeringli differ picture: 
most word occur in the profil of user not involv in macronleak campaign be in french, while 
emblemat the top two key term of macronleaks’ user be maga (“make america great again”, 
the motto of US presid trump), a well a trump itself. while the left column be suggest of term 
that individu interest in french polit would like adopt to describ themselv – politiqu (politics), 
patriot (patriot), françai (french), contr (against), gauch (left), droit (right), etc. – the right side 
featur similar key term in english (conservative, patriot, god, pro-, american, america, christian, 
politics, anti-, life, supporter, country, etc.), which would clearli character a right-lean english- 
speaking, american audience. thi suggest that the larg major of user involv in macronleak have 
prior interest in american politics, in right-w narratives, and in alt-right polit agenda. manual 
inspect of mani of these account confirm thi hypothesis; it also further reveal that some account 
label a bot involv in macronleak be also activ in the alt-right campaign lead to the 2016 
u.s. presidenti elect and be label a bot in our previou studi a well (bessi & ferrara, 2016). 

We next analyz the type of inform sourc that the users, respect human and bots, most 
frequent refer to in their tweets. To thi purpose, in tabl 8 we show for illustr exampl the list 
of the top 10 url that have be tweet within the gener elect discussion. We will consid thi a 
a baselin for comparison and contrast it to the top tweet url show in tabl 9, and discuss later. 
our extens analysi highlight that most url appear in the gener election-rel discuss be 
of the follow three types: 

1. pointer to tweet of either presidenti candidate, (macron and Le pen), or to tweet of other 
promin politician (e.g., nicola dupont-aignan); 

2. pointer to articl publish in establish news medium (le figaro, the guardian, Le monde); 



3. pointer to influenti user on extern medium channel (e.g., youtube, etc.), a well a journalist 
and other influenti user on twitter. 

let u look at the macronleak corpu next. tabl 9 show the list of top 10 url tweet within the 
macronleak campaign. In stark contrast with the gener election-rel discussion, the list of top 
tweet url contain a mix of: 

1. link to hyper-partisan news outlets: the top tweet url point to a stori appear on the 
gateway pundit (an alt-right news media) claim that leak document be origin and 
credible. other highly-tweet stori appear again on the gateway pundit a well a on other alt- 
right websit like zero hedg and gotnew and support the alleg of macron’ financi 
fraud and illicit activities. 

2. link to leak data dumps: the second most tweet url be the link to the archive.i file that 
contain the data of the leak documents; thi file have be extens circul on other 
platform like 4chan.org and be share thousand of time on twitter a well; and, finally, 

3. url point to fake news websites: some blogpost (e.g., on blogspot.dk) qualifi a fake news 
a they seem to be design exclus for financi profit, rather than for polit reasons, e.g., 
in the case of alt-right news medium site like breitbart news, infowars, the gateway pundit, etc. 
pointer to fake news stori prolifer even further down the list of highly-retweet urls. 

We conclud thi analysi section by provid a statist character of the corpus’ features. In 
figur 6 we show two set of probabl distributions, rel to the macronleak tweet corpu (cf., top 
figure), which contain 347 thousand tweets, and an equal-s random sampl of tweet relat to the 
gener french elect discuss post dure the same period (cf., bottom figure). 

In thi order, each plot shows: 

A. the distribut of the total number of tweet post by each user in the give corpus; 
B. the distribut of number of total word token in the give tweet corpus; 
C. the distribut of number of total word token in the user profiles’ descriptions; 
D. the distribut of the number of tweets’ languages; 
E. the distribut of the number of distinct hashtags; 
F. the distribut of the number of distinct user mentions; and finally, 
G. the distribut of the number of distinct urls, appear in the corpus. 

befor contrast the result for the two corpora, let u provid an intuit explan of these features. 

We consid the number of tweet a an indic of volum of activ in a discussion: we hypothes 
that in a bot-driven conversation, highli activ account (due to automation) will contribut give thi 
distribut a fatter tail than in an organ discussion. 

the featur B and C warrant an explan on their construction: for each corpu (i.e., macronleak and 
gener discussion, respectively), we calcul the frequenc of appear of each word in the tweet (b) 
a well a in the user profil descript (c). word distribut enjoy some characterist distributions, 
e.g., the zipf law that suggest that the rank word frequenc should obey a zipfian distribut (adamic, 
2000). our intuit be that the heavier the fat tail of such a distribution, the less divers a tweet corpu be 
(respectively, the user profil appear in it), becaus a fatter tail indic the appear of some 
extrem popular word (in either the tweet or the user profil descriptions). 



featur D simpli indic how mani differ languag appear in a corpus, and the frequenc of tweet 
in that language. A more divers discuss should encompass more languages. We hypothes that the 
rank of the languag be also instrument to determin the audienc mainli involv in that discussion. 

the last three features, E, F, and G, indic the number of distinct hashtags, user mentions, and url 
appear in the give corpus. more divers convers will have lighter tail than discuss domin 
by the pervas frequenc of some of these entities. 

let u now discu the find that emerg from figur 6, follow the order of featur present above: 
for what concern the distribut of the total number of tweet post by each user in the two corpu (cf., 
distribut A, i.e., the solid blue line), we can see that in macronleak the tail of the distribut reach 
roughli 103, indic the presenc of some extrem prolif account (either human or bots); in contrast, 
such distribut character the gener discuss exhibit a small slope and thu peak at around 
102, suggest that onli a minor of user post more than one hundr tweet in the entir corpus. thi 
be in line with the intuit that bot-driven discuss exhibit a fatter tail in the characterist activity-rel 
distribut (e.g., number of post tweet per user). 

distribut B (i.e., the dash red line) and C (i.e., dash orang line) be veri similar one anoth in 
both corpora. these distribut reflect the frequenc of occurr of word terms, whose gener and 
interpret have be extens discuss abov in refer to tabl 6 and tabl 7, which report 
exampl of word token appear in the tweet and in the users’ profil descriptions, respectively. onc 
again, the slope of the curv rel to macronleak be larg than that of the gener discussion, 
suggest the presenc of more promin word that appear more frequent in the tweet a well a in 
the profil of user in macronleaks. thi be consist with the exampl show in tabl 6 and tabl 7, 
which nice illustr two byproduct effect of thi phenomenon: 

1. the most frequent word in both rank appear about 25% more in macronleak than in the 
gener discussion: “macron” appear 133k time in macronleaks, but onli 109k time in the 
gener discussion; similarly, “maga” (top rank in tabl 7: right column) appear nearli 18k 
time in macronleaks’ user descriptions, a oppos to “france” (top rank in tabl 7: left 
column) that appear about 13k time in the profil of gener discuss users. 

2. As one scroll down the ranking, give a posit in the ranking, term in macronleak corpu tent 
to have high frequenc of occurr of equal rank term in the gener election. for 
example, the tenth term in tabl 6 be fait, which appear 11,023 time in the gener election- 
relat discussion, and fake that appear 12,404 in macronleaks. similarly, the twentieth term in 
tabl 7 be droite, which appear 3,871 time in the gener discussion, and countri that appear 
5,272 time in macronleaks. the same appli to nearli all entri in the rest of the rankings. 

these result corrobor our intuit that fatter distribut tail suggest less divers in the tweet corpus, 
or in the profil of the user therein appearing. In macronleak thi indic the emerg of popular 
word strongli evoc of the corpus’ narr and promin featur by a rel larg number 
of user with respect to the gener election-rel discussion. 

yet in figur 6, distribut D provid a view into the divers of languag featur in each corpus. 
intuitively, a more divers convers that be more inclus of a varieti of groups, a well a that attract 
intern attention, would featur a larg number of languages. macronleak onc again show a fatter 
tail suggest that the convers be less divers in term of languag give that mani tweet appear in 
one extrem popular language. further analysi reveal an interest fact: in macronleaks, most tweet 



(n=177,695) be in english, while french be onli second (n=135,397); in stark difference, in the equal- 
size random sampl of gener conversation, french emerg by far a the most promin languag 
(n=242,422), while english come second with a larg gap (n=73,409). thi suggest that the main 
particip to macronleak be not in the french-speak community, but rather in the english- 
speak american user base. thi may be one explan associ with the scarc success of the 
disinform campaign to affect french voters. 

our analysi conclud with a summari of interpret of the last three distributions, E, F, and G, which 
indic the number of distinct hashtags, user mentions, and url respectively. for each of these 
distribut it be possibl to observ systemat roughli one order of magnitud differ in favor of 
the macronleak ones, which exhibit fatter tail indic less divers corpu whose tweet be domin 
by fewer, more popular hashtags, mentions, and urls, if contrast with the gener discussion. If one 
consid urls, a an example, the result be reflect in tabl 8 and tabl 9 and a similar analysi 
regard rank and frequenc of the term can be do a for what concern distribut B and tabl 
6 and tabl 7: the top url in macronleak be systemat more frequent than equally-rank url 
in the gener discussion. 

discuss and conclus 
In thi paper, we provid an extens statist analysi of the macronleak disinform campaign 
that occur in the run up to the 2017 french presidenti election. use a mix of state-of-the-art machin 
learn techniqu and cognit heurist for bot detection, in combin with data-driven insights, and 
consid a reconstruct of event a they unfolded, we uncov some characterist of the 
disinform campaign, it main drivers, and it human audience. We contrast these result against the 
gener election-rel convers that we use a baselin to pinpoint to differ and anomalies. 

our result highlight a few interest phenomena: first, we advanc the hypothesi that a black market 
of reusabl polit disinform bot may exist. similar suggest have be advanc by other studi 
(starbird, et al., 2014; nied, et al., 2017); however, our work be the first to identifi the presenc of bot that 
exist dure the 2016 u.s. presidenti elect campaign period to support alt-right narratives, go dark 
after novemb 8, 2016, and come back into use in the run up day to the 2017 french presidenti election. 

In conclusion, our find also demonstr that the prior interest of user engag in macronleak may 
be reveal of the reason of scarc success of the campaign at affect the french vote outcome: most 
of the audienc of macronleak campaign be the english-speak american alt-right community, rather 
than french users; thi be in stark contrast with the baselin gener conversation, which involv 
systemat and significantli more french user (thus, like french voters), which exhibit a clear 
trend in favor of support now-presid emmanuel macron. 

In the future, we will tri to draw similar and differ in the context of comput polit 
propaganda phenomena, focu on a varieti of elect and politics-rel contemporari event to 
understand how onlin social medium can be manipulated, and what be the quantifi consequ of 
success such attempts. 





note 
1. while the exact dynam of event in the context of the 2016 u.s. elect at the time of thi 

write (june 2017) still remain unclear, and be subject of ongo feder investigations, suffici 
evid have be mount to support the idea that foreign governments, a well a organ 
with vest interests, may have meddl with the elect process, either via influenc campaigns, 
or by mean of spear phish attack aim at steal privat inform of voter either for 
retali and blackmail purposes. 

2. see: https://www.cnet.com/news/macron-french-presidential-campaign-says-it-was-hacked/ 
3. see: http://www.bbc.com/news/blogs-trending-39845105 
4. see: http://www.thedailybeast.com/the-twitter-bots-who-tried-to-steal-fr 
5. see: https://www.buzzfeed.com/craigsilverman/partisan-fb-pages-analysi 
6. botomet be publicli avail at: https://botometer.iuni.iu.edu/ 
7. We here use a nomenclatur of tweets’ featur consist with that of the twitter api; see offici 

document a reference: https://dev.twitter.com/overview/api/tweet 
8. twitter account verif process describ at: https://support.twitter.com/articles/119135 
9. about public and protect tweets: https://support.twitter.com/articles/14016 
10. timelin of event lead to the election: http://www.businessinsider.com/france-is-having-one- 

of-its-strangest-presidential-elections-timeline-2017-5 
11. A broader analysi of social bot oper in the entir french elect dataset be left for futur 

work. thi be mostli becaus a thorough valid of the bot classif result requir a 
signific amount of manual investig for qualiti assurance. therefore, scale up the effort 
to veri larg corpu (in our case, 2 million user overall) requir signific addit resources. 

12. twitter can take two differ countermeasur toward suspici accounts: the more radic 
solut be an account suspension, which yield the delet of the account and all tweet ever 
post by that user. A softer solut be the so-cal “quarantine”: the give account be label a 
suspici and user on the platform must go through an extra step of verif to access their 
content. the owner of a quarantin account can also tri appeal to twitter to get reinstated. 

13. see: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/leet 
14. see: http://www.businessinsider.com/twitter-bots-and-fake-accounts-2013-11 

about the author 
dr. emilio ferrara be research assist professor at the univers of southern california, research 
leader at the usc inform scienc institute, and princip investig of the usc machin 
intellig and data scienc (minds). hi research focu on character inform diffus in 
onlin social networks, detect and prevent abus in such systems. He be name 2015 ibm watson 
big data influencer, he be recipi of the 2016 complex system societi junior scientif award, and he 
receiv the 2016 darpa young faculti award. e-mail: emiliofe@usc.edu 

acknowledg 
thi work be support in part by the air forc offic of scientif research. the funder have no role in 
studi design, data collect and analysis, manuscript preparation, or decis to publish. 



refer 
adamic, L. A. (2000). zipf, power-laws, and pareto-a rank tutorial. xerox palo alto research center, 

palo alto, ca, http://ginger.hpl.hp.com/shl/papers/ranking/ranking.html 

allcott, h., & gentzkow, M. (2017). social medium and fake news in the 2016 elect (no. w23089). 
nation bureau of econom research. 

allport, G. w., & postman, L. (1947). the psycholog of rumor. oxford press 

aral, s., & walker, D. (2012). identifi influenti and suscept member of social networks. science, 
337(6092). 

bakshy, e., messing, s., & adamic, L. A. (2015). exposur to ideolog divers news and opinion on 
facebook. science, 348(6239). 

bastos, M. t., da cunha recuero, r., & da silva zago, G. (2014). take tweet to the streets: A spatial 
analysi of the vinegar protest in brazil. first monday, 19(3). 

bessi, a., & ferrara, E. (2016). social bot distort the 2016 US presidenti elect onlin discussion. first 
monday, 21(11). 

bessi, a., coletto, m., davidescu, G. a., scala, a., caldarelli, g., & quattrociocchi, W. (2015). scienc 
v conspiracy: collect narr in the age of misinformation. plo one, 10(2), e0118093. 

bishop, C. M. (2006). pattern recognition. machin learning, 128, 1-58. 

bond, R. m., fariss, C. j., jones, J. j., kramer, A. d., marlow, c., settle, J. e., & fowler, J. H. (2012). A 
61-million-person experi in social influenc and polit mobilization. nature, 489(7415). 

centola, D. (2010). the spread of behavior in an onlin social network experiment. science, 329(5996), 
1194-1197. 

cresci, s., Di pietro, r., petrocchi, m., spognardi, a., & tesconi, M. (2017). the paradigm-shift of social 
spambots: evidence, theories, and tool for the arm race. www '17 companion proceed of the 
26th intern confer on world wide web companion, pp. 963-972. perth, australia 

davis, C. a., varol, o., ferrara, e., flammini, a., & menczer, F. (2016). botornot: A system to evalu 
social bots. In proceed of the 25th intern confer companion on world wide web. 

del vicario, m., bessi, a., zollo, f., petroni, f., scala, a., caldarelli, g., stanley, h.e. & quattrociocchi, 
W. (2016). the spread of misinform online. proceed of the nation academi of sciences, 
113(3), 554-559. 

desigaud, c., howard, P. n., bradshaw, s., kollanyi, b., & bolsover, G. (2017). junk new and bot 
dure the french presidenti election: what are french voter share over twitter in round two?. 
comprop data memo 2017.4. 

dredze, M. (2012). how social medium will chang public health. ieee intellig systems, 27(4), 81-84. 

el-khalili, S. (2013). social medium a a govern propaganda tool in post-revolutionari egypt. first 
monday, 18(3). 

En marche! (2017). communiqué de press - En march a été victim d’une action de piratag massiv et 
coordonnée. https://en-marche.fr/article/communique-presse-piratag 



ferrara, E. (2015). manipul and abus on social media. acm sigweb newsletter, (spring), 4. 

ferrara, e., & yang, Z. (2015a). quantifi the effect of sentiment on inform diffus in social 
media. peerj comput science, 1, e26. 

ferrara, e., & yang, Z. (2015b). measur emot contagion in social media. plo one 10 (11), 
e0142390. 

ferrara, e., varol, o., davis, c., menczer, f., & flammini, A. (2016). the rise of social bots. 
commun of the acm, 59(7), 96-104. 

ferrara, E. (2017). contagion dynam of extremist propaganda in social networks. inform scienc 
(in press). avail at ssrn: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2982259 

forelle, M. c., howard, P. n., monroy-hernández, a., & savage, S. (2015). polit bot and the 
manipul of public opinion in venezuela. 

freitas, c., benevenuto, f., ghosh, s., & veloso, A. (2015). revers engin socialbot infiltr 
strategi in twitter. In proceed of the 2015 ieee/acm intern confer on advanc in 
social network analysi and mining. acm. 

gilani, z., wang, l., crowcroft, j., almeida, m., & farahbakhsh, R. (2016, april). stweeler: A framework 
for twitter bot analysis. In proceed of the 25th intern confer companion on world 
wide web (pp. 37-38). intern world wide web confer steer committee. 

gonzález-bailón, s., borge-holthoefer, j., rivero, a., & moreno, Y. (2011). the dynam of protest 
recruit through an onlin network. scientif report (1). 

gonzález-bailón, s., borge-holthoefer, j., & moreno, Y. (2013). broadcast and hidden influenti in 
onlin protest diffusion. american behavior scientist. 

hwang, t., pearce, i., & nanis, M. (2012). socialbots: voic from the fronts. interactions, 19(2). 

howard, P. N. (2006). new medium campaign and the manag citizen. cambridg univers press. 

howard, P. n., & kollanyi, B. (2016). bots, #strongerin, and #brexit: comput propaganda dure 
the uk-eu referendum. avail at ssrn: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2798311 

howard, P. n., duffy, a., freelon, d., hussain, M. m., mari, w., & maziad, M. (2011). open close 
regimes: what be the role of social medium dure the arab spring?. project on inform technolog 
and polit islam data memo 2011. 

howard, P. n., bradshaw, s., kollanyi, b., desigaud, c., & bolsover, G. (2017). junk new and bot 
dure the french presidenti election: what are french voter share over twitter?. comprop 
data memo 2017.3. 

kollanyi, B. (2016). where Do bot come from? An analysi of bot code share on github. 
intern journal of communication, 10(20). 

kollanyi, b., howard, P. n., & woolley, S. C. (2016). bot and autom over twitter dure the first 
u.s. presidenti debate. data memo 2016.1. oxford, uk: project on comput propaganda. 

korda, h., & itani, Z. (2013). har social medium for health promot and behavior change. health 
promot practice, 14(1), 15-23. 



kramer, A. d., guillory, J. e., & hancock, J. T. (2014). experiment evid of massive-scal emot 
contagion through social networks. proceed of the nation academi of sciences, 111(24), 8788- 
8790. 

marwick, a., & lewis, R. (2017). media manipul and disinform online. data & societi 
research institute. 

mele, n., lazer, d., baum, m., grinberg, n., friedland, l., joseph, k., ... & mattsson, C. (2017). 
combat fake news: An agenda for research and action. 

merchant, R. m., elmer, s., & lurie, N. (2011). integr social medium into emergency-prepared 
efforts. new england journal of medicine, 365(4), 289-291. 

messias, j., schmidt, l., oliveira, r., & benevenuto, F. (2013). you follow my bot! transform robot 
into influenti user in twitter. first monday, 18(7). 

metaxas, P. t., & mustafaraj, E. (2012). social medium and the elections. science, 338(6106). 

mønsted, b., sapieżyński, p., ferrara, e., & lehmann, S. (2017). evid of complex contagion of 
inform in social media: An experi use twitter bots. arxiv preprint arxiv:1703.06027. 

morstatter, f., pfeffer, j., liu, h., & carley, K. M. (2013). Is the sampl good enough? compar data 
from twitter' stream api with twitter' firehose. seventh intern aaai confer on 
weblog and social media. 

nied, A. c., stewart, l., spiro, e., & starbird, K. (2017). altern narr of crisi events: 
commun and social botnet engag on social media. In companion of the 2017 acm 
confer on comput support cooper work and social comput (pp. 263-266). acm. 

paul, M. j., & dredze, M. (2011). you be what you tweet: analyz twitter for public health. 
proceed of the fifth intern aaai confer on weblog and social media, pp. 265-272. 

pedregosa, f., varoquaux, g., gramfort, a., michel, v., thirion, b., grisel, o., ... & vanderplas, J. (2011). 
scikit-learn: machin learn in python. journal of machin learn research, 12(oct), 2825-2830. 

ratkiewicz, j., conover, m., meiss, m., gonçalves, b., flammini, a., & menczer, F. (2011a). detect 
and track polit abus in social media. 5th intern aaai confer on weblog and 
social media. 

ratkiewicz, j., conover, m., meiss, m., gonçalves, b., patil, s., flammini, a., & menczer, F. (2011b). 
truthy: map the spread of astroturf in microblog streams. In proceed of the 20th intern 
confer companion on world wide web. acm. 

sakaki, t., okazaki, m., & matsuo, Y. (2010). earthquak shake twitter users: real-tim event detect 
by social sensors. In proceed of the 19th intern confer on world wide web (pp. 851- 
860). acm. 

savage, s., monroy-hernandez, a., & höllerer, T. (2016). botivist: call volunt to action use 
onlin bots. In proceed of the 19th acm confer on computer-support cooper work 
& social comput (pp. 813-822). acm. 

shirado, h., & christakis, N. A. (2017). local noisi autonom agent improv global human 
coordin in network experiments. nature, 545(7654), 370-374. 



shorey, s., & howard, P. N. (2016). automation, big data and politics: A research review. intern 
journal of communication, 10(24). 

signorini, a., segre, A. m., & polgreen, P. M. (2011). the use of twitter to track level of diseas activ 
and public concern in the US dure the influenza A h1n1 pandemic. plo one, 6(5), e19467. 

starbird, k., maddock, j., orand, m., achterman, p., & mason, R. M. (2014). rumors, fals flags, and 
digit vigilantes: misinform on twitter after the 2013 boston marathon bombing. iconfer 
2014 proceedings. 

suárez-serrato, p., roberts, M. e., davis, c., & menczer, F. (2016). On the influenc of social bot in 
onlin protests. In intern confer on social informat (pp. 269-278). springer intern 
publishing. 

subrahmanian, V. s., azaria, a., durst, s., kagan, v., galstyan, a., lerman, k., zhu, l., ferrara, e., 
flammini, a., menczer, F. (2016). the darpa twitter bot challenge. comput 49, ieee. 

tufekci, z., & wilson, C. (2012). social medium and the decis to particip in polit protest: 
observ from tahrir square. journal of communication, 62(2), 363-379. 

tufekci, Z. (2014). engin the public: big data, surveil and comput politics. first monday, 
19(7). 

varol, o., ferrara, e., davis, c., menczer, f., & flammini, A. (2017). onlin human-bot interactions: 
detection, estimation, and characterization. intern aaai confer on web and social media. 

woolley, S. C. (2016). autom power: social bot interfer in global politics. first monday, 21(4). 

woolley, S. c., & howard, P. N. (2016). polit communication, comput propaganda, and 
autonom agents—introduction. intern journal of communication, 10(9). 

wang, y., li, y., & luo, J. (2017). deciph the 2016 US presidenti campaign in the twitter sphere: 
A comparison of the trumpist and clintonists. intern aaai confer on web and social 
media. 

yang, z., wilson, c., wang, x., gao, t., zhao, B. y., & dai, Y. (2014). uncov social network sybil 
in the wild. acm transact on knowledg discoveri from data (tkdd), 8(1). 








tabl 


france2017 lepen jevotemacron enmarch 

marine2017 Le pen jevot macronpresid 

aunomdupeupl marinelepen presidentielle2017 #franc 

frenchelect frenchpresidentialelect electionfracais @mlp_officiel 

frenchelect jechoisismarin jamaismacron @emmanuelmacron 

macron jevotemarin macron2017 

tabl 1. list of 23 keyword whose stream we continu collect from april 27, 2017 to may 7, 2017. 





hashtag no. tweet hashtag (cont.) no. tweet (cont.) 

#macron 1,521,425 #fn 127,336 

#presidentielle2017 652,563 #jevot 126,075 

#lepen 447,365 #marine2017 119,274 

#franc 378,234 #debat2017 118,069 

#2017ledebat 273,304 #2017ledébat 98,862 

#macronleak 255,491 #macrong 93,235 

#marinelepen 184,442 #jevotemacron 83,081 

#whirlpool 170,347 #macronpresid 72,184 

#enmarch 128,613 #jamaismacron 72,140 

#frenchelect 127,705 #elysee2017 59,421 

tabl 2. list of top 20 hashtag and associ number of tweet produc between april 27, 2017 and 
may 7, 2017 (elect day). 





mention no. tweet mention (cont.) no. tweet (cont.) 

@emmanuelmacron 1,284,627 @hugocl 66,001 

@mlp_officiel 981,219 @enmarchefr 62,468 

@bfmtv 213,421 @hillaryclinton 61,982 

@dupontaignan 178,995 @marion_m_le_pen 61,651 

@prisonplanet 136,874 @sofiakkar 58,074 

@qofficiel 112,423 @v_of_europ 56,998 

@f_philippot 95,696 @jeunesmacron 54,927 

@jlmelenchon 89,334 @flwjrm 50,982 

@jackposobiec 76,419 @youtub 50,631 

@wikileak 69,718 @tf1lejt 50,628 

tabl 3. list of top 20 mention users, and associ number of tweet produc between april 27, 2017 
and may 7, 2017 (elect day). 





usernam tweet follow friend favorit list status* 

vote__marin 737 9 61 85 0 delet 

dontreadonmem 427 24 35 371 1 delet 

brandonjbarb 328 4 135 0 1 delet 

geoff_1337 286 14 13 19 0 suspend 

n********* 252 31 99 270 4 activ 

07_mai_2017 225 169 231 0 3 delet 

gunbuster2020 221 10 87 574 0 suspend 

dixneuf2020 213 15 81 570 0 suspend 

bluecanti2020 204 10 88 575 0 suspend 

shogouki2020 203 13 86 573 0 suspend 

d********* 199 2,515 1,676 77 29 activ 

yhesum 191 9,476 9,599 223 96 suspend 

jerry_1337 152 5 12 0 0 suspend 

subocean 102 26 87 9 3 quarantin 

protegerlepeupl 92 1 62 60 0 quarantin 

tabl 4. list of the top 15 twitter account detect a social bot by our algorithm and sort accord 
to the number of macronleak post they tweet between april 27, 2017 and may 7, 2017 (elect day). 
* the column “status” report whether, a of the date of thi write (end of may 2017), the account be 
activ or be be suspended, deleted, or “quarantined” by twitter. out of the top 15 social bot detect by 
our framework, 4 account have be so far deleted, 7 have be suspended, and 2 have be quarantin 
by twitter. two account be still activ (their usernam be redact to preserv user privacy). 







usernam retweet tweet follow befor follow after status* 

yhesum 291 786 21 9,476 suspend 

lou_justine92 119 213 219 2,297 delet 

trololo451 93 94 7 10 delet 

doubtallthought 43 431 377 1,833 quarantin 

chadashworth 43 5 14,833 15,205 delet 

jewishhotjean 39 422 46 14,033 delet 

sebasqien 38 447 31 6,633 delet 

blufor2 30 3 0 1 delet 

_loup_gar 29 65 2 769 delet 

lerenardfr 25 22 6 16 delet 

tabl 5. ten exampl of social bot frequent retweet by human users. *all these account be 
suspended, deleted, or quarantin by twitter at the time of thi write (earli june 2017). 





gener election-rel discuss macronleak campaign 

token frequenc token frequenc 

macron 109,734 macron 133,708 

pen 80,789 french 28,668 

marin 43,101 franc 27,280 

franc 24,971 campaign 22,585 

emmanuel 15,793 email 19,206 

french 13,463 pen 15,463 

voter 13,094 wikileak 14,493 

vote 11,394 document 14,269 

plu 11,204 tax 12,591 

fait 11,023 fake 12,404 

fair 9,237 elect 12,159 

lepen 8,717 medium 10,053 

elect 7,311 leak 9,643 

françai 6,535 vote 9,641 

tout 6,497 discov 8,927 

débat 5,930 evas 8,854 

tabl 6. top 16 most frequent token term occur in the tweet of user respect activ in the gener 
election-rel discuss or in the macroleak campaign. 





gener election-rel discuss macronleak campaign 

token frequenc token frequenc 

franc 13,204 maga 17,853 

politiqu 7,731 trump 17,796 

love 6,241 franc 15,437 

patriot 5,578 love 12,345 

marine2017 5,576 conserv 10,657 

trump 5,116 marine2017 8,503 

vie 5,104 patriot 8,280 

mond 5,041 marin 7,386 

tweet 4,874 god 7,297 

fan 4,713 proud 6,931 

françai 4,667 pro 6,880 

news 4,488 american 6,777 

contr 4,359 america 6,774 

anti 4,301 christian 6,110 

gauch 4,247 polit 5,625 

macron 4,187 anti 5,603 

marin 4,105 fan 5,579 

enmarch 3,997 life 5,414 

an 3,944 support 5,332 

droit 3,871 countri 5,272 

tabl 7. top 20 most frequent token term appear in the user account self-report descript of user 
activ respect in the gener elect discussion, or in the macronleak campaign. 





url frequenc 

https://twitter.com/mlp_officiel/status/5968249560764416 1,064 

https://twitter.com/mlp_officiel/status/858932738942021632 470 

https://twitter.com/madamefigaro/status/860134337806835712 417 

https://twitter.com/dupontaignan/status/858033334521409536 411 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d6h0cjin4gw 306 

https://twitter.com/mlp_officiel/status/858932738942021632 259 

https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/may/04/barack-obama-backs-macron-in-last- 
minute-election-intervent 

243 

https://twitter.com/damienrieu/status/858265285991780352 213 

https://twitter.com/anneapplebaum/status/860872956498644992 191 

http://www.lemonde.fr/les-decodeurs/article/2017/05/03/des-intox-du-debat-entre- 
emmanuel-macron-et-marine-le-pen-verifiees_5121846_4355770.html 

171 

tabl 8. top 10 url tweet within the gener elect discuss (baseline). most url be pointer 
to tweet of either presidenti candidate, other promin politician (e.g., nicola dupont-aignan), or 
establish news medium (le figaro, the guardian, Le monde). 



































url frequenc 

http://www.thegatewaypundit.com/2017/05/breaking-wikileaks-confirms-leaked-macron- 
campaign-emails-authentic-macronleaks/ 

3,018 

http://archive.is/eqtrm 2,766 

http://www.zerohedge.com/news/2017-04-25/meet-real-emmanuel-macron-consummate- 
banker-puppet-bizarre-elitist-cr 

2,077 

http://gotnews.com/busted-macronleaks-show-feminist-hypocrite-emmanuelmacron- 
pays-female-campaign-workers-26-less-men/ 

1,943 

https://www.pscp.tv/w/a9nszjf4zutxeedwcnjhalb8mujkefl2bwtwa0rlwi2x5c- 
ahtykbfblql9jlcquaewt8h54orqhulht16_h 

1,780 

http://gotnews.com/emmanuel-macrons-tax-evasion-documents-real/ 1,718 

http://disobedientmedia.com/new-leak-reveals-emails-documents-from-macron-and- 
affiliated-staff-members/ 

1,542 

http://www.thegatewaypundit.com/2017/05/breaking-macron-busted-lied-tax-evasion- 
4chan-pol-posts-images-macrons-off-shore-bank-account/ 

673 

http://disobedientmedia.com/macron-denies-authenticity-of-leak-french-prosecutors- 
open-probe/ 

641 

https://diversitymachtfrei.blogspot.dk/2017/05/macron-leaks-contain-secret-plans- 
for.html 

635 

tabl 9. top 10 url tweet within the macronleak campaign. the list contain a mix of link to hyper- 
partisan news outlet (the gateway pundit, zero hedge, gotnews), leak data dumps, and fake news 
websites. 





figur 




figur 1. timelin of the volum of tweet gener everi minut dure our observ period (april 
27, 2017 through may 7, 2017). the purpl solid line (right axis) show the volum associ with 
macronleaks, while the dash grey line (left axis) show the volum of gener election-rel discussion. 
the presidenti elect occur on may 07, 2017. 





figur 2. boxplot distribut of the metadata featur of to the human user involv in the disinform 
campaign associ with macronleaks. 







figur 3. boxplot distribut of the metadata featur of the social bot detect by our framework and 
associ with the disinform campaign relat to macronleaks. 





figur 4. featur correl heat map for human users’ metadata (top), and social bots’ featur 
(bottom) involv in the disinform campaign associ with macronleaks. 







figur 5. timelin of the volum of tweet gener everi minute, respect by human user (dash 
grey line) and social bot (solid purpl line), between april 27, 2017 and may 7, 2017, and relat to 
macronleaks. spike in bot-gener content often slightli preced spike in human posts, suggest 
that bot can trigger cascad of disinformation. 







figur 6. top: distribut of statist calcul on the macronleak tweet corpu (347k tweets); 
bottom: statist calcul on an equal-s random sampl of tweet relat to the french elect 
post dure the same period (april 27, 2017 through may 7, 2017). the plot show, in thi order: (a) the 
distribut of the number of tweet post by each user; (b) the distribut of number of total word token 
in the tweet corpus, a well a (c) in the user profiles’ descriptions; (d) the distribut of the number of 
tweets’ languages; the distribut of the number of distinct (e) hashtags, (f) user mentions, and final 
(g) urls, appear in the corpus. 




