






































edit brain activ with holographi 


edit brain activ with holographi 

what if we could edit the sensat we feel; past in our brain pictur that we never saw, cut out 
unwant pain or insert non-exist scent into memory? 

UC berkeley neuroscientist be build the equip to do just that, use holograph 
project into the brain to activ or suppress dozen and ultim thousand of neuron at 
once, hundr of time each second, copi real pattern of brain activ to fool the brain into 
think it have felt, see or sens something. 

video show neuron activ in three layer of a small chunk of the somatosensori cortex of a 
mouse’ brain. activ neuron fluoresc green. those neuron that be activ by holograph 
laser light be indic by a purpl arrow. project via a microscop through a window into the 
brain, the holograph system can activ neuron to simul real brain activ and insert fals 
sensations. (uc berkeley video by stephen mcnalli and roxann makasdjian use alan mardinli 
footage) 

the goal be to read neural activ constantli and decide, base on the activity, which set of 
neuron to activ to simul the pattern and rhythm of an actual brain response, so a to 
replac lose sensat after peripher nerv damage, for example, or control a prosthet limb. 

“thi have great potenti for neural prostheses, sinc it have the precis need for the brain to 
interpret the pattern of activation. If you can read and write the languag of the brain, you can 
speak to it in it own languag and it can interpret the messag much better,” say alan mardinly, 
a postdoctor fellow in the UC berkeley lab of hillel adesnik, an assist professor of molecular 
and cell biology. “thi be one of the first step in a long road to develop a technolog that could be a 
virtual brain implant with addit sen or enhanc senses.” 

mardinli be one of three first author of a paper appear onlin april 30 in advanc of 
public in the journal natur neurosci that describ the holograph brain modulator, 
which can activ up to 50 neuron at onc in a three-dimension chunk of brain contain 
sever thousand neurons, and repeat that up to 300 time a second with differ set of 50 
neurons. 

“the abil to talk to the brain have the incred potenti to help compens for neurolog 
damag caus by degen diseas or injury,” say ehud isacoff, a UC berkeley professor of 
molecular and cell biolog and director of the helen will neurosci institute, who be not 
involv in the research project. “bi encod percept into the human cortex, you could allow 
the blind to see or the paralyz to feel touch.” 

holograph project 

each of the 2,000 to 3,000 neuron in the chunk of brain be outfit with a protein that, when 
hit by a flash of light, turn the cell on to creat a brief spike of activity. one of the key 
breakthrough be find a way to target each cell individu without hit all at once. 

edit brain activ with holographi http://news.berkeley.edu/2018/04/30/editing-brain-activity-with-holography/ 

1 sur 3 04-05-18 à 08:30 



A sampl hologram with 50 randomli distribut neuron target span a region 500 micron 
squar and 250 micron deep. 

To focu the light onto just the cell bodi — a target small than the width of a human hair — of 
nearli all cell in a chunk of brain, they turn to comput gener holography, a method of 
bend and focu light to form a three-dimension spatial pattern. the effect be a if a 3D 
imag be float in space. 

In thi case, the holograph imag be project into a thin layer of brain tissu at the surfac of 
the cortex, about a tenth of a millimet thick, though a clear window into the brain. 

“the major advanc be the abil to control neuron precis in space and time,” say postdoc 
nicola pégard, anoth first author who work both in adesnik’ lab and the lab of co-author 
laura waller, an associ professor of electr engin and comput sciences. “in other 
words, to shoot the veri specif set of neuron you want to activ and do it at the characterist 
scale and the speed at which they normal work.” 

the research have alreadi test the prototyp in the touch, vision and motor area of the 
brain of mous a they walk on a treadmil with their head immobilized. while they have not note 
ani behavior chang in the mous when their brain be stimulated, mardinli say that their brain 
activ — which be measur in real-tim with two-photon imag of calcium level in the 
neuron — show pattern similar to a respons to a sensori stimulus. they’r now train mous 
so they can detect behavior chang after stimulation. 

prosthet and brain implant 

the area of the brain cover — now a slice one-half millimet squar and one-tenth of a 
millimet thick — can be scale up to read from and write to more neuron in the brain’ outer 
layer, or cortex, pégard said. and the laser holographi setup could eventu be miniatur to 
fit in a backpack a person could haul around. 

mardinly, pégard and the other first author, postdoc ian oldenburg, construct the holograph 
brain modul by make technolog advanc in a number of areas. mardinli and 
oldenburg, togeth with savitha sridharan, a research associ in the lab, develop good 
optogenet switch to insert into cell to turn them on and off. the switch — light-activ ion 
channel on the cell surfac that open briefli when trigger — turn on strongli and then quickli 
shut off, all in about 3 milliseconds, so they’r readi to be re-stimul up to 50 or more time 
per second, consist with normal fire rate in the cortex. 

edit brain activ with holographi http://news.berkeley.edu/2018/04/30/editing-brain-activity-with-holography/ 

2 sur 3 04-05-18 à 08:30 



pégard develop the holograph project system use a liquid crystal screen that act like a 
holograph neg to sculpt the light from 40w laser into the desir 3D pattern. the laser 
be puls in 300 femtosecond-long burst everi microsecond. he, mardinly, oldenburg and their 
colleagu publish a paper last year describ the device, which they call 3d-shot, for three- 
dimension scanless holograph optogenet with tempor focusing. 

“thi be the culmin of technolog that research have be work on for a while, but 
have be imposs to put together,” mardinli said. “we solv numer technic problem at 
the same time to bring it all togeth and final realiz the potenti of thi technology.” 

As they improv their technology, they plan to start captur real pattern of activ in the cortex 
in order to learn how to reproduc sensat and percept to play back through their 
holograph system. 

other UC berkeley co-author be graduat student evan lyall, undergradu kiril chesnov and 
stephen brohawn, an assist professor of molecular and cell biology. the work be support by 
the new york stem cell foundation, arnold and mabel beckman foundation, nation institut 
of neurolog diseas and stroke, mcknight foundation, simon’ foundat collabor for 
the global brain, david and lucil packard foundat and defens advanc research project 
agency. 

relat inform 

precis multimod optic control of neural ensembl activ (natur neuroscience) 
three-dimension scanless holograph optogenet with tempor focu (3d- 
shot) (2017 natur communications) 
hillel adesnik’ lab websit 
laura waller’ lab websit 

edit brain activ with holographi http://news.berkeley.edu/2018/04/30/editing-brain-activity-with-holography/ 

3 sur 3 04-05-18 à 08:30 


