






































exabyt in a test tube: the case for dna data storag - ieee spectrum 


with the right coding, the doubl helix could archiv our entir civil 

illustration: anatomi blue 

a man 

die in the alps. it’ possibl he die 

from a blow to the head, or he may 

have bleed to death after be shot in 

the shoulder with an arrow. there’ a 

lot we don’t know about 

(name for the ötztal alps, 

where he be discovered), despit the 

fact that research have spent almost 

30 year studi him. 

five thousand year ago, 

ötzi 

(http://www.iceman.it/en/the- 

iceman/) 

On the other hand, we know rather a 

lot about ötzi’ physiolog trait and 

even hi clothes. We know he have 

brown eye and a predisposit for 

cardiovascular diseases. He have type 

and be 

the coat he be wear 

be patch togeth use the leather of 

, and hi hat be 

make from a brown bear’ hide. all of thi inform come from sequenc the dna of both ötzi and the 

cloth he wore. 

O 

posit blood 

(https://www.nature.com 

/news/iceman-s-dna-reveals-health- 

risks-and-relations-1.10130) 

lactos intolerant. 

(https://www.nytimes.com/2012/03 

/06/science/iceman-had-brown-eyes-and-hair-and-was-lactose-intolerant.html) 

multipl sheep and goat (https://news.nationalgeographic.com 

/2016/08/otzi-iceman-european-alps-mummy-clothing-dna-leather-fur-archaeology/) 

exabyt in a test tube: the case for dna data storag - ieee spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/semiconductors/devices/exabytes-in-a-test-tube... 

1 sur 9 18-05-18 à 19:24 



dna can store remark amount of genet inform and, a ötzi demonstrates, can do so for 

thousand of years. the dna molecul be a double-helix staircas of billion of molecular blocks, call base 

pairs, whose arrang determin much of what make each of u unique. onli recent have we 

contempl use dna to store electronic, digit data. and while dna isn’t current a viabl altern 

to memori stick or hard-disk drives, it might be one of our best option to cope with the increasingli vast 

quantiti of data we’ll creat a data mining, analytics, and other big-data applic proliferate. 

It be back in 2003 when some researchers, notabl a group at the univers of arizona, becom intrigu 

with the idea of use dna to store data. but there be plenti of skeptics: convent mass-storag 

system be do the job cheapli and reliably. there be no compel reason to seek out new options. 

the situat have chang drastic over the last 15 years. We face an unpreced data delug in 

medicine, physics, astronomy, biology, and other sciences. the sloan digit ski survey, for example, 

produc about 73,000 gigabyt of data annually. At the european organ for nuclear research 

(cern), the larg hadron collid gener 50 million GB of data per year a it record the result of 

experi involving, typically, 600 million particl collis per second. these cern result churn 

through a distribut comput grid compris over 130,000 cpus, 230 million GB of magnet tape 

storage, and 300 million GB of onlin disk storage. 

use primer to replic dna 

illustration: mark montgomeri 

primer be short strand of base that match, base for base, the end of dna strands. 

primer kick-start the polymeras chain reaction in order to replic a particular dna 

strand, make it easi to pick out at random from a soup of dna strands. 

In the life sciences, dna sequenc alon gener 

of data per year. research predict that within a decad we will be swamp with 40 

(10 ) GB of genom data. all of that data will have to be store for decad due to govern regul in 

the unit states, europe, and elsewhere. 

million of gigabyt (/biomedical/devices/the-dna- 

data-deluge) billion 
9 

exabyt in a test tube: the case for dna data storag - ieee spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/semiconductors/devices/exabytes-in-a-test-tube... 

2 sur 9 18-05-18 à 19:24 



yet even a our data storag need surge, tradit mass-storag technolog be start to approach their 

limits. with hard-disk drives, we’r encount a limit of 1 terabyte—1,000 gb—per squar inch. past that 

point, temperatur fluctuat can induc the magnet charg materi of the disk to flip, corrupt 

the data it holds. We could tri to use a more heat-resist material, but we would have to drastic alter 

the technolog we use to read and write on hard-disk drives, which would requir huge new investments. the 

storag industri need to look elsewhere. 

have come a long way sinc the earli 2000s, when the technolog for read dna, 

let alon write it, be still in their infancy. In those days, the human genom project have onli recent 

complet a draft of the human genome, at a mind-boggl cost exceed US $2.7 billion, which work out 

to about $1 to read each base pair. 

dna-bas storag 

By the end of 2015, the cost for obtain a highli accur readout of an entir human genom have fall 

below $1,500, accord to the nation human genom research institute. and today, roughli $1,000 be 

enough for you to get your entir genom sequenced. the cost of dna sequenc be one three-millionth 

what it be 10 year ago. 

our abil to sequence, synthesize, and edit dna have advanc at a previous inconceiv speed. far from 

be expens and impractical, these dna technolog be the most disrupt in all of biotechnology. it’ 

now possibl to write custom dna strand for penni per base pair, at least for short strands. two 

companies, genscript biotech corp. and integr dna technologies, provid dna synthesi for 11 and 37 

cent per base pair, respectively, for strand no longer than sever hundr base pairs. biotech startup 

compani buy their servic and use the synthes dna to 

or creat yeast that produc unusu 

beer. 

repair organ (/video/biomedical/devic 

/repairing-organs-with-the-touch-of-a-nanochip) flavor to use in 

brew (/the-human-os/biomedical/devices/launched-a-factory-for-making-weird-new-organisms) 

dna-bas storag 
system be new 
and unchart 
territori for cod 
theorist 

for compani purchas synthet dna, the cost depend on the 

length of the sequenc be synthesized, becaus it be usual much 

more difficult to creat long dna strands. there be a hand of 

special effort to synthes longer strands—for example, an 

ongo multilab effort be build an 

. even so, 

commerci purchas anyth beyond 10,000 base pair be 

current impossible. (for reference, your genom have about 3.08 

billion base pairs, a slightli small number than that of an african 

claw frog.) 

entir synthet yeast genom 

(/the-human-os/biomedical/devices/with-synthetic-biology-software- 

geneticists-design-living-organisms-from-scratch) 

when read dna, sequenc devic produc fragment rang in length from sever hundr to ten of 

thousand of base pairs, which be then analyz fragment by fragment befor be stitch back togeth 

for a full readout. the whole process of read an entir human genom take less than a day. research 

be now start to sequenc larg quantiti of fragment use nanopor technologies, which feed dna 

through pore a if they be spaghetti noodl slip through a large-hol strainer. As dna pass 

through a pore, it can be read base by base. 

exabyt in a test tube: the case for dna data storag - ieee spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/semiconductors/devices/exabytes-in-a-test-tube... 

3 sur 9 18-05-18 à 19:24 



In addition, dna may be replic exponenti at a low cost use the polymeras chain reaction, which 

duplic a strand of dna by split it apart and then build two ident strand by match up the 

correspond base pairs. these advanc in read dna a well a in replic it allow us, for the first 

time, to serious consid dna a a data-record medium. 

It still may not match other data storag option for cost, but dna have advantag that other option can’t 

match. not onli be it easili replicated, it also have an ultrahigh storag density—a much a 100 trillion (10 ) 

GB per gram. while the data repres a human genome, base pair by base pair, can be store digit on 

a CD with room to spare, a cell nucleu store that same amount of data in a space about 1/24,000 a large. 

dna do not have to be power by an extern energi sourc to retain data, a long a it’ store in a 

control environment. and it can last for a long time: dna can surviv in less than ideal condit for 

hundr of thousand of years, although it often becom highli degraded. after all, the alp preserv 

ötzi’ dna for more than 5,000 years. research onc recov dna from the 

that have be preserv in a glacier for about 700,000 years. 

12 

toe bone of a hors 

(https://www.csmonitor.com/science/2013/0626/straight-from-the-horse-s-toe-the-world-s-oldest- 

genome) 

despit these appeal attributes, exploit dna for digit storag involv signific challenges. when it 

come to build a storag system, the first task be to model the system’ structur and operation. To that 

end, two research groups—on at harvard in 2012 and the other at the european bioinformat institute, in 

the unit kingdom, in 2013—propos conceptu simpl design for dna-bas storage. 

encod text or binari code a dna 

illustration: mark montgomeri 

We can take a simpl phrase like “ ” (persian for “in the name of 

god”) and encod it in base 3. We can then convert those number into dna. each 

base-3 digit will be encod a ani of the base A, T, G, and C, depend on the letter in 

the strand that come before. for example, a 0 will be encod a G if the previou base 

be C. thi method complic the encod process, but it prevent creat strand 

with sever repetit of the same base, which can caus error when sequenc the 

strand later. To recov the origin text, the process can be do in reverse. 

Be nam khodavand 

exabyt in a test tube: the case for dna data storag - ieee spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/semiconductors/devices/exabytes-in-a-test-tube... 

4 sur 9 18-05-18 à 19:24 



the basic idea be to convert the data into the dna alphabet—adenin (a), thymin (t), cytosin (c), and 

guanin (g)—and store it in short string with larg amount of overlap. the overlap would ensur that the 

data could be stitch back togeth accurately. for example, if the inform be store in string that 

be 100 base pair long, the last 75 base pair from the previou string could be use a the first 75 base 

pair for the next, with the next 25 base pair tack onto the end. with thi strategy, the estim cost of 

encod 1 megabyt of data be over $12,000 for synthes the dna and anoth $220 for retriev it— 

rather prohibit expens at the moment. 

encod data into a singl long strand of 

dna be ask for troubl when it come time 

to recov the data. A safer process encod 

the data in shorter strands. We then construct 

the first part of the next strand use the same 

data found at the end of the previou strand. 

thi way we have multipl copi of the data 

for comparison. 

damerau distanc codes, which in natural- 

languag process be use to catch error 

like misspel (for example, “smort” instead 

of “smart”), can identifi the spot in binari 

code where 1 and 0 have like be 

substitut by mistak dure copi or 

transcription. 

sinc then, research group have demonstr the long- 

term reliabl of dna-bas data storage, the feasibl of 

use some tradit cod techniques, and even store 

small amount of data within the genom of live 

bacteria. our work, at the univers of illinoi at urbana- 

champaign, in collabor with the lab of jian Ma and 

huimin zhao, pioneer random-access storag in dna. 

We have be focu on solv the problem of random 

access, rewriting, and error-fre data recoveri for data that 

be read from dna sequenc devices. random access (the 

abil to directli access ani inform you want) and 

address (which tell you where to find that information) 

be key to ani effect data storag method. 

our interest in dna-bas data storag emerg from our 

background in cod theory. code theori have make 

modern storag system possibl by enabl the proper 

data format for specif systems, the convers of data 

from one format to another, and the correct of 

inevit errors. 

dna-bas storag system be a tantal challeng for 

cod theorists. We be initi drawn to the challeng 

of identifi the sourc of error from both write and 

read dna, and of develop cod techniqu to 

correct or mitig such errors. code improv the 

reliabl of ultim fallibl storag devic and the 

feasibl of use cheaper options. but dna-bas storag 

system be new and unchart territori for cod 

theorists. 

exabyt in a test tube: the case for dna data storag - ieee spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/semiconductors/devices/exabytes-in-a-test-tube... 

5 sur 9 18-05-18 à 19:24 



(/image/mza0nzc4ng.jpeg) 
damerau distanc code can also be use to 

address the error that occur in dna, even 

though they’r more complex than binari 

errors. sometim base be inadvert 

deleted, and sometim two will swap 

positions, error that do not often occur in 

binari code. 
illustrations: mark montgomeri 

challeng present by dna, 

first consid a compact disc. the data be nice organ 

into tracks, and we can easili access that data with the 

readili avail hardware. dna isn’t so simple. it’ 

inher unordered; there be no track to follow to 

access the data. 

To understand the cod 

A complet storag system would encompass mani dna 

molecules, so how would you even locat and select the 

specif molecul carri the data you want? It would be 

like tri to fish a specif noodl out of a bowl of chicken 

noodl soup. it’ highli unlik you’d grab the right noodl 

at random, but if you could replic that specif noodl 

again and again, until you fill the bowl, ani noodl you 

nab would like be the right one. 

our idea for dna data access be to synthes each encod 

strand with an addit sequenc that act a an address. 

care design sequenc of the bases, call primers, would match that address sequenc and begin the 

process of replic the dna of interest. In thi way, we could exponenti reproduc dna strand 

carri the data of interest use the polymeras chain reaction, make it easi to find a copi of the right 

strand. 

Of course, with dna, it’ not quit so simpl a pluck the right noodl out of your soup. think of a primer 

a a sticki tape that bind to a specif set of rungs, or “complements,” on the dna “ladder.” A primer should 

bind onli to the specif address sequenc it’ look for. To make matter more difficult, not all primer be 

creat equal: G and C base pair typic bind more tightli than A and T, mean that a primer 

construct with too mani A and T base may not bind a strongly. poorli design primer can caus a lot 

of problems. 

“shotgun-style” sequenc break copi of 

the long, unwieldi dna strand into fragment 

of vari lengths. after those shorter 

segment be read, they can be compar 

with differ fragment to reconstruct the 

entir sequence, although thi method can 

introduc uncertainti about the placement of 

individu fragments. 

we’r encount intrigu cod question in figur 

out how to construct primer that will not onli bind tightli 

but to the right targets. for example, becaus each primer 

will bind with it complement—a to T, G to C, and vice 

versa—how can we ensur that each address sequenc 

doesn’t appear anywher in the encod data except a the 

address of the dna strand you’r look for? otherwise, 

the primer may bind to the wrong locat and replic 

unwant dna. 

exabyt in a test tube: the case for dna data storag - ieee spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/semiconductors/devices/exabytes-in-a-test-tube... 

6 sur 9 18-05-18 à 19:24 



fortunately, cod theorist have be solv similar 

problem for tradit storag medium for decades. other 

challenges, for example, like those that emerg in 

connect with read the dna, aren’t typic 

encount in convent mass-storag systems. there 

be plenti of devic on the market that sequenc dna: 

illumina’ hiseq 2500 system, pacbio’ RS II and sequel 

systems, and oxford nanopor technologies’ minion be 

just three examples. all such sequenc be prone to 

introduc differ type of readout error a they 

determin the exact sequenc of as, cs, gs, and Ts that 

make up a dna sample. illumina devices, for example, 

sometim substitut the wrong base when read the 

strand—say, an A instead of a C. these error becom more 

frequent the further into the strand you get. the accident 

delet of entir block be also a concern, and nanopor 

sequenc often insert the wrong base pair into readout 

or omit base pair entirely. 

differ sequenc all requir differ code to 

compens for their flaws. for illumina sequencers, for 

example, we’v propos a cod scheme that add 

redund to the sequenc to elimin the substitut 

error that aris from the devices’ “shotgun-style” approach 

to sequencing. it’ tricki to rebuild a genom after break 

it apart to read individu sequenc without occasion 

insert the wrong segment in the wrong location. 

redund sequenc will improv the odd of recov 

data even if a segment be corrupt a a result of be 

reassembl incorrectly. 

for nanopor sequencers, we develop code to address 

differ type of substitut error that aris from 

sequenc the strand too quickly. In tradit data 

storage, it’ just a like that a 0 could be chang to a 1 a 

it be that a 1 could be chang to a 0. it’ not so simpl with 

dna, where an A could be rewrit a a T, C, or G, and the 

substitut don’t happen with equal frequency. we’v 

write code to account for that fact, a well a code to 

handl the base-pair delet and swap that natur 

occur a dna ages. 

exabyt in a test tube: the case for dna data storag - ieee spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/semiconductors/devices/exabytes-in-a-test-tube... 

7 sur 9 18-05-18 à 19:24 



when read binari data from a tradit 

storag medium, there’ alway a small 

chanc that a 1 could be read a a 0 by 

mistake, or that a 0 could be read a a 1. 

becaus we’r deal with a simpl two-stat 

system, we can expect that each situat will 

occur with equal frequency. 
illustrations: mark montgomeri 

nanopore-sequenc transcript error in dna 

illustration: mark montgomeri 

nanopor sequenc read long string of dna base one by one, and becaus of the 

speed at which they do so, they will occasion misread a particular base. unlik the 

simpl misread of 1 and 0s, however, the odd of base be mistaken for one 

anoth varies, due to their complex molecular structur and even the orient the 

strand be in a it pass through the nanopore. 

dna-bas storage, like ani other data storag system, 

requir random access and effici reading. but the 

big challeng be write data inexpensively. 

synthes dna be still expensive, partli becaus of the 

molecule’ sheer complex and partli becaus the market 

be not drive the develop of cheaper methods. one 

possibl approach to reduc cost be to prevent error in the 

first place. By place redund in the dna sequenc 

that store data, you can skip expens after-the-fact 

corrections. thi be common practic in everi data storag 

method, but synthes compani current aren’t equip to pursu this—their product process be 

so autom it would be prohibit expens to adjust them to produc these type of redund strands. 

make dna-bas storag a practic realiti will requir cooper among research on the frontier of 

synthet biolog and cod theory. we’v make big stride toward realiz a dna-bas storag system, 

but we need to develop system to effici access the inform encod into dna. We need to design 

cod scheme that guard against both synthesi and sequenc errors. and we need to figur out how to 

do these thing cheaply. 

If we can solv these problems, nature’ incred storag medium—dna—might also store our music, our 

literature, and our scientif advances. the veri same medium that liter specifi who we be a 

individu might also store our art, our culture, and our histori a a species. 

exabyt in a test tube: the case for dna data storag - ieee spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/semiconductors/devices/exabytes-in-a-test-tube... 

8 sur 9 18-05-18 à 19:24 



be a professor of electr and comput 

engin at the univers of illinois. be a 

scientist with the u.s. navy’ 

in san diego and a postdoc at illinois. be a 

lectur at nanyang technolog univers in singapor and a former postdoc at illinois. 

be a ph.d. student work with 

milenkovic. 

olgica milenkov (http://publish.illinois.edu/milenkovic/) 

ryan gabri (https://sites.google.com/view/ryangabrys/home) 

spawar (http://www.public.navy.mil/spawar/pacific/pages/about-ssc- 

pac.aspx) han mao kiah (http://www.ntu.edu.sg/home/hmkiah/) 

s.m. hossein 

tabatabaei yazdi (http://web.engr.illinois.edu/~tbtbyzd2/about.php) 

exabyt in a test tube: the case for dna data storag - ieee spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/semiconductors/devices/exabytes-in-a-test-tube... 

9 sur 9 18-05-18 à 19:24 


