






































expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center 


numbers, fact and trend shape your world about | follow US 

internet, scienc & tech 

menu research area 

februari 8, 2017 

code-dependent: pro and con of the 
algorithm age 

BY lee raini (http://www.pewresearch.org/staff/lee-rainie/) and janna anderson (http://www.pewinternet.org 

/author/janderson/) 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

1 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



algorithm be instruct for solv a problem (https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/jul/01/how-algorithms- 

rule-world-nsa) or complet a task. recip be algorithms, a be math equations. comput code be algorithmic. 

the internet run on algorithm and all onlin search be accomplish through them. email know where to go 

thank to algorithms. smartphon app be noth but algorithms. comput and video game be algorithm 

storytelling. onlin date and book-recommend and travel websit would not function without algorithms. 

gp map system get peopl from point A to point B via algorithms. artifici intellig (ai) be naught but 

algorithms. the materi peopl see on social medium be brought to them by algorithms. In fact, everyth peopl 

see and do on the web be a product of algorithms. everi time someon sort a column in a spreadsheet, algorithm 

be at play, and most financi transact today be accomplish by algorithms. algorithm help gadget 

respond to voic commands, recogn faces, sort photo and build and drive cars. hacking, cyberattack and 

cryptograph code-break exploit algorithms. self-learn and self-program algorithm 

(https://erc.europa.eu/projects-and-results/erc-stories/self-learning-ai-emulates-human-brain) be now emerging, so it be 

possibl that in the futur algorithm will write mani if not most algorithms. 

algorithm be often eleg and incred use tool use to accomplish tasks. they be mostli invis aids, 

augment human life in increasingli incred ways. however, sometim the applic of algorithm 

creat with good intent lead to unintend consequences. recent news item tie to these concerns: 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

2 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



the british pound drop 6.1% in valu in second on oct. 7, 2016, partli becaus of currenc trade 

trigger by algorithms. 

microsoft engin creat a twitter bot name “tay” thi past spring in an attempt to chat with 

millenni by respond to their prompts, but within hour it be spout racist, sexist, holocaust- 

deni tweet base on algorithm that have it “learning” how to respond to other base on what be 

tweet at it. 

facebook tri to creat a featur to highlight trend topic from around the site in people’ feeds. first, 

it have a team of human edit the feature, but controversi erupt when some accus the platform of be 

bia against conservatives. so, facebook then turn the job over to algorithm onli to find that they 

could not discern real news from fake news. 

cathi o’neil, author of weapon of math destruction: how big data increas inequ and threaten 

democracy, point out that predict analyt base on algorithm tend to punish the poor, use 

algorithm hire practic a an example. 

well-intent algorithm can be sabotag by bad actors. An internet slowdown swept the east coast of 

the u.s. on oct. 21, 2016, after hacker bombard dyn dns, an internet traffic handler, with inform 

that overload it circuits, usher in a new era of internet attack power by internet-connect devices. 

thi after internet secur expert bruce schneier warn in septemb that “someon Is learn how to 

take down the internet.” and the abus of facebook’ new feed algorithm and gener promulg of 

fake news onlin becom controversi a the 2016 u.s. presidenti elect proceeded. 

research andrew tutt call for an “fda for algorithms,” noting, “the rise of increasingli complex 

algorithm call for critic thought about how to best prevent, deter and compens for the harm that they 

caus …. algorithm regul will requir feder uniformity, expert judgment, polit independ 

and pre-market review to prevent – without stifl innov – the introduct of unaccept 

danger algorithm into the market.” 

the white hous releas two report in octob 2016 detail the advanc of algorithm and artifici 

intellig and plan to address issu tie to it, and it issu a decemb report outlin some of the 

potenti effect of ai-driven autom on the u.s. job market and economy. 

On januari 17, 2017, the futur of life institut publish a list of 23 principl for benefici artifici 

intelligence, creat by a gather of concern research at a confer at asimolar, in pacif grove, 

california. the more than 1,600 signatori includ steven hawking, elon musk, ray kurzweil and 

hundr of the world’ foremost AI researchers. 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

3 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



the use of algorithm be spread (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/list_of_algorithms) a massiv amount of data be 

be created, captur and analyz by busi and governments. some be call thi the age of algorithm 

(https://newrepublic.com/article/133472/life-age-algorithms) and predict that the futur of algorithm 

(http://news.stanford.edu/2016/09/01/ai-might-affect-urban-life-2030/) be tie to machin learn and deep learn 

(https://blogs.nvidia.com/blog/2016/07/29/whats-difference-artificial-intelligence-machine-learning-deep-learning-ai/) 

that will get good and good at an ever-fast pace. 

while mani of the 2016 u.s. presidenti elect post-mortem note the revolutionari impact of web-bas 

tool in influenc it outcome, xprize foundat ceo peter diamandi predict that “five big tech trend will 

make thi elect look tame (http://singularityhub.com/2016/11/07/5-big-tech-trends-that-will-make-this-election- 

look-tame/) .” He say advanc in quantum comput and the rapid evolut of AI and AI agent emb in 

system and devic in the internet of thing will lead to hyper-stalking, influenc and shape of voters, and 

hyper-person ads, and will creat new way to misrepres realiti and perpetu falsehoods. 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

4 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



analyst like aneesh aneesh of stanford univers forese algorithm take over public and privat activ in 

a new era of “algocrat governance” (http://web.stanford.edu/class/sts175/newfiles/algocratic%20governance.pdf) 

that supplant “bureaucrat hierarchies.” others, like harvard’ shoshana zuboff, describ the emerg of 

“surveil capitalism” (https://cryptome.org/2015/07/big-other.pdf) that organ econom behavior in an 

“inform civilization.” 

To illumin current attitud about the potenti impact of algorithm in the next decade, pew research center 

and elon university’ imagin the internet center conduct a large-scal canvass of technolog experts, 

scholars, corpor practition and govern leaders. some 1,302 respond to thi question about what will 

happen in the next decade: 

will the net overal effect of algorithm be posit for individu and societi or neg for individu 

and society? 

the non-scientif canvass found that 38% of these particular respond predict that the posit impact 

of algorithm will outweigh neg for individu and societi in general, while 37% say neg will 

outweigh positives; 25% say the overal impact of algorithm will be about 50-50, positive-negative. [see “about 

thi canvass of expert (http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/algorithms-about-this-canvassing-of-experts/) ” for 

further detail about the limit of thi sample.] 

particip be ask to explain their answers, and most write detail elabor that provid insight 

about hope and concern trends. respond be allow to respond anonymously; these constitut a 

slight major of the write elaborations. these find do not repres all the point of view that be possibl 

to a question like this, but they do reveal a wide rang of valuabl observ base on current trends. 

In the next section we offer a brief outlin of seven key theme found among the write elaborations. follow 

that introductori section there be a much more in-depth look at respondents’ thought (http://www.pewinternet.org 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

5 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



/2017/02/08/theme-1-algorithms-will-continue-to-spread-everywhere/) tie to each of the themes. all respons be 

lightli edit for style. 

theme 1: algorithm will continu to spread everywher 

there be fairli uniform agreement among these respond that algorithm be gener invis to the public 

and there will be an exponenti rise in their influenc in the next decade. 

A repres statement of thi view come from barri chudakov, founder and princip at sertain research 

and streamfuzion corp. He replied: 

“‘if everi algorithm suddenli stop working, it would be the end of the world a we know it.’ (pedro 

domingo’ the master algorithm (https://www.amazon.com/master-algorithm-ultimate-learning-machin 

/dp/0465065708) ). fact: We have alreadi turn our world over to machin learn and algorithms. the 

question now is, how to good understand and manag what we have done? 

“algorithm be a use artifact to begin discuss the larg issu of the effect of technology-en 

assist in our lives. namely, how can we see them at work? consid and ass their assumptions? and 

most importantli for those who don’t creat algorithm for a live – how do we educ ourselv about the 

way they work, where they be in operation, what assumpt and bia be inher in them, and how to 

keep them transparent? like fish in a tank, we can see them swim around and keep an eye on them. 

“algorithm be the new arbit of human 

decision-mak in almost ani area we can 

imagine, from watch a movi (affectiva 

emot recognition) to buy a hous 

(zillow.com) to self-driv car (google). 

deloitt global predict more than 80 of the 

world’ 100 larg enterpris softwar 

compani will have cognit technolog – 

mediat by algorithm – integr into their 

product by the end of 2016. As brian christian 

and tom griffith write in algorithm to live 

by, (https://www.amazon.com/algorithms- 

live-computer-science-decisions/dp/1627790365/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=utf8&qid=1476814852&sr=1-1& 

keywords=algorithms+to+live+by) algorithm provid ‘a good standard against which to compar human 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

6 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



cognit itself.’ they be also a goad to consid that same cognition: how be we think and what do it 

mean to think through algorithm to mediat our world? 

“the main posit result of thi be good understand of how to make ration decisions, and in thi 

measur a good understand of ourselves. after all, algorithm be gener by trial and error, by 

testing, by observing, and come to certain mathemat formula regard choic that have be make 

again and again – and thi can be use for difficult choic and problems, especi when intuit we 

cannot readili see an answer or a way to resolv the problem. the 37% rule (https://en.wikipedia.org 

/wiki/secretary_problem) , optim stop and other algorithm conclus be evidence-bas guid 

that enabl u to use wisdom and mathemat verifi step to make good decisions. 

“the secondari posit result be connectivity. In a technolog recapitul of what spiritu teacher 

have be say for centuries, our thing be demonstr that everyth be – or can be – connect to 

everyth else. algorithm with the persist and ubiqu of insect will autom process that use to 

requir human manipul and thinking. these can now manag basic process of monitoring, 

measuring, count or even seeing. our car can tell u to slow down. our televis can suggest movi to 

watch. A groceri can suggest a healthi combin of meat and veget for dinner. siri remind you it’ 

your anniversary. 

“the main neg chang come down to a simpl but now quit difficult question: how can we see, and 

fulli understand the implic of, the algorithm program into everyday action and decisions? the 

rub be this: whose intellig be it, anyway? … our system do not have, and we need to build in, what 

david gelernt call ‘topsight,’ (http://www.peachpit.com/articles/article.aspx?p=29658&seqnum=3) the abil 

to not onli creat technolog solut but also see and explor their consequ befor we build 

busi models, compani and market on their strengths, and especi on their limitations.” 

chudakov add that thi be especi necessari becaus in the next decad and beyond, “bi expand 

collect and analysi of data and the result applic of thi information, a layer of intellig or 

think manipul be add to process and object that previous do not have that layer. So 

predict possibl follow u around like a pet. the result: As inform tool and predict dynam 

be more wide adopted, our life will be increasingli affect by their inher conclus and the 

narr they spawn.” 

“the overal impact of ubiquit algorithm be present incalcul becaus the presenc of algorithm in 

everyday process and transact be now so great, and be mostli hidden from public view. all of our 

extend think system (algorithm fuel the softwar and connect that creat extend think 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

7 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



systems) demand more think – not less – and a more global perspect than we have previous 

managed. the expand collect and analysi of data and the result applic of thi inform 

can cure diseases, decreas poverty, bring time solut to peopl and place where need be greatest, and 

dispel millennium of prejudice, ill-found conclusions, inhuman practic and ignor of all kinds. our 

algorithm be now redefin what we think, how we think and what we know. We need to ask them to 

think about their think – to look out for pitfal and inher bia befor those be bake in and harder 

to remove. 

“to creat oversight that would ass the impact of algorithms, first we need to see and understand them in 

the context for which they be developed. that, by itself, be a tall order that requir imparti expert 

backtrack through the technolog develop process to find the model and formula that origin 

the algorithms. then, keep all that learn at hand, the expert need to soberli ass the benefit and 

deficit or risk the algorithm create. who be prepar to do this? who have the time, the budget and 

resourc to investig and recommend use cours of action? thi be a 21st-centuri job descript – 

and market nich – in search of real peopl and companies. In order to make algorithm more transparent, 

product and product inform circular might includ an outlin of algorithm assumptions, akin to the 

nutrit sidebar now found on mani packag food products, that would inform user of how algorithm 

drive intellig in a give product and a reason outlin of the implic inher in those 

assumptions.” 

theme 2: good thing lie ahead 

A number of respond note the mani way in which algorithm will help make sens of massiv amount of 

data, note that thi will spark breakthrough in science, new conveni and human capac in everyday 

life, and an ever-bett capac to link peopl to the inform that will help them. they perform seemingli 

miracul task human cannot and they will continu to greatli augment human intellig and assist in 

accomplish great things. A repres propon of thi view be stephen downes, a research at the 

nation research council of canada, who list the follow a posit changes: 

“some examples: 

banks. today bank provid loan base on veri incomplet data. It be true that mani peopl who today 

qualifi for loan would not get them in the future. however, mani peopl – and arguabl mani more peopl 

– will be abl to obtain loan in the future, a bank turn away from use such factor a race, socio- 

econom background, postal code and the like to ass fit. moreover, with more data (and with a more 

interact relationship between bank and client) bank can reduc their risk, thu provid more loans, 

while at the same time provid a rang of servic individu direct to actual help a person’ 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

8 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



financi state. 

“health care providers. health care be a signific and grow expens not becaus peopl be becom 

less healthi (in fact, society-wide, the opposit be true) but becaus of the signific overhead requir to 

support increasingli complex systems, includ prescriptions, insurance, facil and more. new 

technolog will enabl health provid to shift a signific percentag of that load to the individual, who 

will (with the aid of person support systems) manag their health better, coordin and manag their own 

care, and creat less of a burden on the system. As the overal cost of health care declines, it becom 

increasingli feasibl to provid single-pay health insur for the entir population, which have know 

benefici health outcom and efficiencies. 

“governments. A signific proport of govern be base on regul and monitoring, which will no 

longer be requir with the deploy of autom product and transport systems, along with 

sensor networks. thi includ mani of the daili (and often unpleasant) interact we have with 

govern today, from traffic offenses, manifest of civil discontent, unfair treatment in commerci 

and legal processes, and the like. A simpl example: one of the most persist polit problem in the 

unit state be the gerrymand of polit boundari to benefit incumbents. elector divis 

creat by an algorithm to a larg degre elimin gerrymand (and when open and debatable, can be 

modifi to improv on that result).” 

A sampl of addit answers, from anonym respondents: 

“algorithm find knowledg in an autom 

way much faster than tradit feasible.” 

“algorithm can crunch databas quickli 

enough to allevi some of the red tape and 

bureaucraci that current slow progress 

down.” 

“we will see less pollution, improv human health, less econom waste.” 

“algorithm have the potenti to equal access to information.” 

“the effici of algorithm will lead to more creativ and self-expression.” 

“algorithm can diminish transport issues; they can identifi congest and altern time and 

paths.” 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

9 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



“self-driv car could dramat reduc the number of accid we have per year, a well a improv 

qualiti of life for most people.” 

“better-target deliveri of news, servic and advertising.” 

“more evidence-bas social scienc use algorithm to collect data from social medium and click trails.” 

“improv and more proactiv polic work, target area where crime can be prevented.” 

“fewer underdevelop area and more intern commerci exchanges.” 

“algorithm eas the friction in decision-making, purchasing, transport and a larg number of other 

behaviors.” 

“bot will follow order to buy your stocks. digit agent will find the materi you need.” 

“ani error could be corrected. thi will mean the algorithm onli becom more effici to humanity’ 

desir a time progresses.” 

theme illumin concern and challeng 

particip in thi studi be in substanti agreement that the abund posit of acceler 

code-depend will continu to drive the spread of algorithms; however, a with all great technolog 

revolutions, thi trend have a dark side. most respond point out concerns, chief among them the final five 

overarch theme of thi report; all have subthemes. 

theme 3: human and human judgment be lose when data and predict model becom 

paramount 

advanc in algorithm be allow technolog corpor and govern to gather, store, sort and analyz 

massiv data sets. expert in thi canvass note that these algorithm be primarili write to optim 

effici and profit without much thought about the possibl societ impact of the data model and 

analysis. these respond argu that human be consid to be an “input” to the process and they be not 

see a real, thinking, feeling, chang beings. they say thi be creat a flawed, logic-driven societi and that a 

the process evolv – that is, a algorithm begin to write the algorithm – human may get left out of the loop, 

let “the robot decide.” repres of thi view: 

bart knijnenburg, assist professor in human-cent comput at clemson university, replied, 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

10 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



“algorithm will capit on conveni and profit, therebi discrimin [against] certain populations, but 

also erod the experi of everyon else. the goal of algorithm be to fit some of our preferences, but not 

necessarili all of them: they essenti present a caricatur of our tast and preferences. My big fear be that, 

unless we tune our algorithm for self-actualization, it will be simpli too conveni for peopl to follow the 

advic of an algorithm (or, too difficult to go beyond such advice), turn these algorithm into self-fulfil 

prophecies, and user into zombi who exclus consum easy-to-consum items.” 

An anonym futurist said, “thi have be go on sinc the begin of the industri revolution. everi time 

you design a human system optim for effici or profit you dehuman the workforce. that 

dehuman have now spread to our health care and social services. when you remov the human from a 

system where peopl be included, they becom victims.” 

anoth anonym respond wrote, “we simpli can’t captur everi data element that repres the vast 

of a person and that person’ needs, wants, hopes, desires. who be collect what data points? Do the human 

be the data point reflect even know or do they just agre to the term of servic becaus they have no real 

choice? who be make money from the data? how be anyon to know how his/her data be be massag and for 

what purpos to justifi what ends? there be no transparency, and oversight be a farce. it’ all hidden from view. I 

will alway remain convinc the data will be use to enrich and/or protect other and not the individual. it’ the 

basic natur of the econom system in which we live.” 

A sampl of excerpt tie to thi theme from other respond (for details, read the fuller version 

(http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/theme-1-algorithms-will-continue-to-spread-everywhere/) in the full report): 

“the potenti for good be huge, but the potenti 

for misus and abus – intentional, and 

inadvert – may be greater.” 

“compani seek to maxim profit, not 

maxim societ good. worse, they repackag 

profit-seek a a societ good. We be near 

the crest of a wave, the trough side of which be a 

new ethic of manipulation, marketing, nearli 

complet lack of privacy.” 

“what we see alreadi today be that, in practice, stuff like ‘differenti pricing’ do not help the consumer; it 

help the compani that be sell things, etc.” 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

11 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



“individu human be will be herd around like cattle, with predict destruct result on rule of 

law, social justic and economics.” 

“there be an incent onli to further obfusc the presenc and oper of algorithm shape of 

commun processes.” 

“algorithm be … amplifi the neg impact of data gap and exclusions.” 

“algorithm have the capabl to shape individuals’ decis without them even know it, give those 

who have control of the algorithm an unfair posit of power.” 

“the fact the internet can, through algorithms, be use to almost read our mind mean [that] those who 

have access to the algorithm and their databas have a vast opportun to manipul larg popul 

groups.” 

“the lack of account and complet opac be frightening.” 

“bi utilitarian metrics, algorithm decision-mak have no downside; the fact that it result in perpetu 

injustic toward the veri minor class it creat will be ignored. the common good have becom a 

discredited, obsolet relic of the past.” 

“in an economi increasingli domin by a tiny, veri privileg and insul portion of the population, it 

will larg reproduc inequ for their benefit. critic will be belittl and dismiss becaus of the 

veneer of digit ‘logic’ over the process.” 

“algorithm be the new gold, and it’ hard to explain whi the averag ‘good’ be at odd with the individu 

‘good.’” 

“we will interpret the neg individu impact a the necessari collater damag of ‘progress.’” 

“thi will kill local intelligence, local skills, minor languages, local entrepreneurship becaus most of the 

avail resourc will be drain out by the global competitors.” 

“algorithm in the past have be creat by a programmer. In the futur they will like be evolv by 

intelligent/learn machin …. human will lose their agenc in the world.” 

“it will onli get bad becaus there’ no ‘crisis’ to respond to, and hence, not onli no motiv to change, 

but everi reason to keep it go – especi by the power interest involved. We be head for a 

nightmare.” 

“web 2.0 provid more conveni for citizen who need to get a ride home, but at the same time – and 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

12 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



it’ naiv to think thi be a coincid – it’ also a monetized, corporatized, disempowering, cannib 

harbing of the end times. (I exagger for effect. but not by much.)” 

theme 4: bias exist in algorithmically-organ system 

two strand of think tie togeth here. one be that the algorithm creator (code writers), even if they strive for 

inclusiveness, object and neutrality, build into their creation their own perspect and values. the other be 

that the dataset to which algorithm be appli have their own limit and deficiencies. even dataset with 

billion of piec of inform do not captur the full of people’ life and the divers of their experiences. 

moreover, the dataset themselv be imperfect becaus they do not contain input from everyon or a 

repres sampl of everyone. the two theme be advanc in these answers: 

justin reich, execut director at the mit teach system lab, observed, “the algorithm will be primarili 

design by white and asian men – with data select by these same privileg actor – for the benefit of 

consum like themselves. most peopl in posit of privileg will find these new tool convenient, safe and 

useful. the harm of new technolog will be most experienc by those alreadi disadvantag in society, where 

advertis algorithm offer bail bondsman ad that assum reader be criminals, loan applic that penal 

peopl for proxi so correl with race that they effect penal peopl base on race, and similar issues.” 

dudley irish, a softwar engineer, observed, “all, let me repeat that, all of the train data contain biases. 

much of it either racial- or class-related, with a fair sprinkl of simpli punish peopl for not use a standard 

dialect of english. To paraphras immanuel kant, out of the crook timber of these dataset no straight thing 

be ever made.” 

A sampl of quot excerpt tie to thi theme from other respond (for details, read the fuller version 

(http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/theme-1-algorithms-will-continue-to-spread-everywhere/) in the full report): 

“algorithm are, by definition, imperson and 

base on gross data and gener 

assumptions. the peopl write algorithms, 

even those ground in data, be a 

non-repres subset of the population.” 

“if you start at a place of inequ and you use 

algorithm to decid what be a like outcom for 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

13 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



a person/system, you inevit reinforc 

inequalities.” 

“we will all be mistreat a more homogen 

than we are.” 

“the result could be the institution of bia and damag decis with the excus of, ‘the 

comput make the decision, so we have to accept it.’” 

“the algorithm will reflect the bia think of people. garbag in, garbag out. mani dimens of life 

will be affected, but few will be helped. oversight will be veri difficult or impossible.” 

“algorithm valu effici over correct or fairness, and over time their evolut will continu the 

same prioriti that initi formul them.” 

“one of the great challeng of the next era will be balanc protect of intellectu properti in 

algorithm with protect the subject of those algorithm from unfair discrimin and social 

engineering.” 

“algorithm purport to be fair, ration and unbias but just enforc prejudic with no recourse.” 

“unless the algorithm be essenti open sourc and a such can be modifi by user feedback in some 

fair fashion, the power that like algorithm-produc (corpor and governments) have to make 

choic favor to themselves, whether in internet term of servic or adhes contract or polit 

biases, will inject both consciou and unconsci bia into algorithms.” 

theme 5: algorithm categor deepen divid 

two connect idea about societ divis be evid in mani respondents’ answers. first, they predict 

that an algorithm-assist futur will widen the gap between the digit savvi (predominantli the most well-off, 

who be the most desir demograph in the new inform ecosystem) and those who be not nearli a 

connect or abl to participate. second, they say social and polit divis will be abet by algorithms, a 

algorithm-driven categor and classif steer peopl into echo chamber of repeat and reinforc 

medium and polit content. two illustr answers: 

ryan hayes, owner of fit to tweet, commented, “twenti year ago we talk about the ‘digit divide’ be 

peopl who have access to a comput at home vs. those that didn’t, or those who have access to the internet vs. 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

14 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



those who didn’t …. ten year from now, though, the life of someon whose capabl and percept of the 

world be augment by sensor and process with power AI and connect to vast amount of data be go to 

be vastli differ from that of those who don’t have access to those tool or knowledg of how to util them. 

and that divid will be self-perpetuating, where those with few capabl will be more vulner in mani 

way to those with more.” 

adam gismondi, a visit scholar at boston college, wrote, “I be fear that a user be quarantin into 

distinct ideolog areas, human capac for empathi may suffer. brush up against contrast viewpoint 

challeng us, and if we be abl to (activ or passively) avoid other with differ perspectives, it will 

neg impact our society. It will be tell to see what featur our major social medium compani add in 

come years, a they will have tremend power over the structur of inform flow.” 

A sampl of quot excerpt tie to thi theme from other respond (for details, read the fuller version 

(http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/theme-1-algorithms-will-continue-to-spread-everywhere/) in the full report): 

“if the current econom order remain in place, 

then I do not see the growth of data-driven 

algorithm provid much benefit to anyon 

outsid of the richest in society.” 

“social inequ will presum becom 

reified.” 

“the major risk be that less-regular users, 

especi those who cluster on one or two site 

or platforms, won’t develop that navig 

and select facil and will be at a 

disadvantage.” 

“algorithm make discrimin more effici and sanitized. posit impact will be increas profit for 

organ abl to avoid risk and costs. neg impact will be carri by all deem by algorithm to be 

riski or less profitable.” 

“societi will be stratifi by which trust/ident provid one can afford/qualifi to go with. the level of 

privaci and protect will vary. loi mcmaster [bujold]’ jackson’ whole suddenli seem a littl more 

chillingli realistic.” 

“we have radic diverg set of values, polit and other, and algo be alway root in the valu 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

15 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



system of their creators. So the scenario be one of a vast open of opportun – econom and otherwis – 

under the control of either the like of zuckerberg or the grey-hair mover of global capit or ….” 

“the overal effect will be posit for some individuals. It will be neg for the poor and the uneducated. 

As a result, the digit divid and wealth dispar will grow. It will be a net neg for society.” 

“racial exclus in consum targeting. gender exclus in consum targeting. class exclus in 

consum target …. nationalist exclus in consum targeting.” 

“if the algorithm direct news flow suppress contradictori inform – inform that challeng the 

assumpt and valu of individu – we may see increas extrem of separ in worldview among 

rapidli diverg subpopulations.” 

“we may be head for lowest-common-denomin inform flows.” 

“effici and the pleasant and serotonin that come from prescript order be highli overrated. 

keep some chao in our life be important.” 

A number of particip in thi canvass express concern over the chang in the public’ inform diets, 

the “atom of media,” an over-emphasi of the extreme, ugly, weird news, and the favor of “truthiness” 

over more-factu materi that may be vital to understand how to be a respons citizen of the world. 

theme 6: unemploy will rise 

the spread of artifici intellig (ai) have the potenti to creat major unemploy and all the fallout from 

that. 

An anonym ceo said, “if a task can be effect repres by an algorithm, then it can be easili perform 

by a machine. the neg trend I see here be that – with the rise of the algorithm – human will be replac by 

machines/comput for mani jobs/tasks. what will then be the fate of man?” 

A sampl of quot excerpt tie to thi theme from other respond (for details, read the fuller version 

(http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/theme-1-algorithms-will-continue-to-spread-everywhere/) in the full report): 

“ai and robot be like to disrupt the 

workforc to a potenti 100% human 

unemployment. they will be smarter more 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

16 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



effici and product and cost less, so it 

make sens for corpor and busi to 

move in thi direction.” 

“the massiv boost in product due to autom will increas the dispar between worker and 

owner of capital.” 

“modern western societi be built on a societ model wherebi capit be exchang for labour to provid 

econom growth. If labour be no longer part of that exchange, the ramif will be immense.” 

“no jobs, grow popul and less need for the averag person to function autonomously. which part of 

thi be warm and fuzzy?” 

“I forese algorithm replac almost all worker with no real option for the replac humans.” 

“in the long run, it could be a good thing for individu by do away with low-valu repetit task and 

motiv them to perform one that creat high value.” 

“hopefully, countri will have respond by implement form of minim guarante live wage and 

free educ past k-12; otherwis the brightest will use onlin resourc to rapidli surpass averag 

individu and the wealthi will use their econom power to gain more polit advantages.” 

theme 7: the need grow for algorithm literacy, transpar and oversight 

the respond to thi canvass offer a varieti of idea about how individu and the broader cultur might 

respond to the algorithm- of life. they argu for public educ to instil literaci about how algorithm 

function in the gener public. they also note that those who creat and evolv algorithm be not held 

account to societi and argu there should be some method by which they are. repres comments: 

susan etlinger, industri analyst at altimet group, said, “much like the way we increasingli wish to know the 

place and under what condit our food and cloth be made, we should question how our data and decis 

be make a well. what be the suppli chain for that information? Is there clear stewardship and an audit trail? 

were the assumpt base on partial information, flaw sourc or irrelev benchmarks? did we train our 

data sufficiently? were the right stakehold involved, and do we learn from our mistakes? the upshot of all of 

thi be that our entir way of manag organ will be upend in the next decade. the power to creat and 

chang realiti will resid in technolog that onli a few truli understand. So to ensur that we use algorithm 

successfully, whether for financi or human benefit or both, we need to have govern and account 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

17 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



structur in place. easier say than done, but if there be ever a time to bring the smartest mind in industri 

togeth with the smartest mind in academia to solv thi problem, thi be the time.” 

chri kutarna, author of age of discoveri and fellow at the oxford martin school, wrote, “algorithm be an 

explicit form of heuristic, a way of routin certain choic and decis so that we be not constantli drink 

from a fire hydrant of sensori inputs. that cop strategi have alway be co-evolv with humanity, and with 

the complex of our social system and data environments. becom explicitli awar of our simplifi 

assumpt and heurist be an import site at which our intellect and influenc mature. what be differ 

now be the increas power to program these heurist explicitly, to perform the simplif outsid of the 

human mind and within the machin and platform that deliv data to billion of individu lives. It will take u 

some time to develop the wisdom and the ethic to understand and direct thi power. In the meantime, we 

honestli don’t know how well or safe it be be applied. the first and most import step be to develop good 

social awar of who, how, and where it be be applied.” 

A sampl of quot excerpt tie to thi theme from other respond (for details, read the fuller version 

(http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/theme-1-algorithms-will-continue-to-spread-everywhere/) in the full report): 

“who guard the guardians? and, in particular, 

which ‘guardians’ be do what, to whom, 

use the vast collect of information?” 

“there be no incent in capit to fight 

filter bubbles, profiling, and the neg effects, 

and governmental/intern govern be 

virtual powerless.” 

“oversight mechan might includ stricter access protocols; sign off on ethic code for digit 

manag and name steward of information; onlin track of an individual’ reus of information; 

opt-out functions; set timelin on access; no third-parti sale without consent.” 

“unless there be an increas effort to make true inform literaci a part of basic education, there will be 

a class of peopl who can use algorithm and a class use by algorithms.” 

“consum have to be informed, educated, and, indeed, activist in their orient toward someth 

subtle. thi be what comput literaci be about in the 21st century.” 

“find a framework to allow for transpar and ass outcom will be crucial. also a need to have a 

broad understand of the algorithm ‘valu chain’ and that data be the key driver and a valuabl a the 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

18 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



algorithm which it trains.” 

“algorithm account be a big-tent project, requir the skill of theorist and practitioners, lawyers, 

social scientists, journalists, and others. it’ an urgent, global caus with commit and mobil expert 

look for support.” 

“eventually, softwar liabil law will be recogn to be in need of reform, sinc right now, literally, coder 

can get away with murder.” 

“the law of unintend consequ indic that the increas layer of societ and technic 

complex encod in algorithm ensur that unforeseen catastroph event will occur – probabl not the 

one we be worri about.” 

“eventu we will evolv mechan to give consum great control that should result in great 

understand and trust …. the pushback will be inevit but necessari and will, in the long run, result in 

balanc that be more benefici for all of us.” 

“we need some kind of rainbow coalit to come up with rule to avoid allow inbuilt bia and 

groupthink to effect the outcomes.” 

“algorithm be too complic to ever be transpar or to ever be complet safe. these factor will 

continu to influenc the direct of our culture.” 

“I expect meta-algorithm will be develop to tri to counter the neg of algorithms.” 

anonym respond share these one-lin on the topic: 

“the golden rule: He who own the gold make the rules.” 

“the bad guy appear to be way ahead of the good guys.” 

“resist be futile.” 

“algorithm be defin by peopl who want to sell you someth (goods, services, ideologies) and will 

twist the result to favor do so.” 

“algorithm be sure help but like insuffici unless combin with human knowledg and polit 

will.” 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

19 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



finally, thi predict from an anonym particip who see the like endpoint to be one of two extremes: 

“the overal impact will be utopia or the end of the human race; there be no middl ground foreseeable. I suspect 

utopia give that we have surviv at least one existenti crisi (nuclear) in the past and that our track record 

toward peace, although slow, be solid.” 

key experts’ think about the futur impact of algorithm 

follow be a brief collect of comment by sever of the mani top analyst who particip in thi 

canvassing: 

‘steer peopl to use information’ 

vinton cerf, internet hall of fame member and vice presid and chief internet evangelist at google: 

“algorithm be mostli intend to steer peopl to use inform and I see thi a a net positive.” 

bewar ‘unverified, untracked, unrefin models’ 

cori doctorow, writer, comput scienc activist-in-resid at mit media lab and co-own of bo boing, 

responded, “the choic in thi question be too limited. the right answer is, ‘if we use machin learn model 

rigorously, they will make thing better; if we use them to paper over injustic with the veneer of machin 

empiricism, it will be worse.’ amazon us machin learn to optim it sale strategies. when they make a 

change, they make a predict about it like outcom on sales, then they use sale data from that predict to 

refin the model. predict sentenc score contractor to america’ prison system use machin learn to 

optim sentenc recommendation. their model also make predict about like outcom (on 

reoffending), but there be no track of whether their model make good predictions, and no refinement. thi 

free them to make terribl predict without consequence. thi characterist of unverified, untracked, 

unrefin model be present in mani places: terrorist watchlists; drone-kil profil models; modern 

redlining/jim crow system that limit credit; predict polic algorithms; etc. If we mandate, or establish 

norm limits, on practic that correct thi sleazi conduct, then we can use empiric to correct for bia and 

improv the fair and imparti of firm and the state (and public/priv partnerships). if, on the other 

hand, the practic continu a is, it termin with a kind of kafkaesqu nightmar where we do thing ‘becaus 

the comput say so’ and we call them fair ‘becaus the comput say so.’” 

‘A gener trend toward posit outcom will prevail’ 

jonathan grudin, princip research at microsoft, said, “we be final reach a state of symbiosi or 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

20 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



partnership with technology. the algorithm be not in control; peopl creat and adjust them. however, posit 

effect for one person can be neg for another, and trace caus and effect can be difficult, so we will have 

to continu work to understand and adjust the balance. ultimately, most key decis will be political, and i’m 

optimist that a gener trend toward posit outcom will prevail, give the tremend potenti upsid to 

technolog use. i’m less worri about bad actor prevail than I be about unintend and unnot neg 

consequ sneak up on us.” 

‘faceless system more interest in surveil and advertis than actual service’ 

doc searls, journalist, speaker and director of project vrm at harvard university’ berkman center, wrote, “the 

big issu with algorithm today be the black-box natur of some of the larg and most consequenti ones. 

An exampl be the one use by dun & bradstreet to decid credit worthiness. the method behind the decis it 

make be complet opaque, not onli to those whose credit be judged, but to most of the peopl run the 

algorithm a well. onli the programm be in a posit to know for sure what the algorithm does, and even 

they might not be clear about what’ go on. In some case there be no way to tell exactli whi or how a decis 

by an algorithm be reached. and even if the respons parti do know exactli how the algorithm works, they 

will call it a trade secret and keep it hidden. there be alreadi pushback against the opac of algorithms, and the 

sometim vast system behind them. mani lawmak and regul also want to see, for example, google’ and 

facebook’ vast server farm more deepli know and understood. these thing have the size, scale, and in some 

way the import of nuclear power plant and oil refineries, yet enjoy almost no regulatori oversight. thi will 

change. At the same time, so will the size of the entiti use algorithms. they will get small and more 

numerous, a more respons over individu life move away from faceless system more interest in 

surveil and advertis than actual service.” 

A call for #algorithmictranspar 

marc rotenberg, execut director of the electron privaci inform center, observed, “the core problem 

with algorithmic-bas decision-mak be the lack of accountability. machin have liter becom black box 

– even the develop and oper do not fulli understand how output be produced. the problem be further 

exacerb by ‘digit scientism’ (mi phrase) – an unwav faith in the reliabl of big data. ‘algorithm 

transparency’ should be establish a a fundament requir for all ai-bas decision-making. there be a 

larg problem with the increas of algorithm-bas outcom beyond the risk of error or discrimin – the 

increas opac of decision-mak and the grow lack of human accountability. We need to confront the 

realiti that power and author be move from peopl to machines. that be whi #algorithmictranspar be 

one of the great challeng of our era.” 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

21 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



the data ‘will be misus in variou ways’ 

richard stallman, internet hall of fame member and presid of the free softwar foundation, said, “peopl 

will be pressur to hand over all the person data that the algorithm would judge. the data, onc accumulated, 

will be misus in variou way – by the compani that collect them, by rogu employees, by cracker that steal 

the data from the company’ site, and by the state via nation secur letters. I have heard that peopl who 

refus to be use by facebook be discrimin against in some ways. perhap soon they will be deni entri to 

the u.s., for instance. even if the u.s. doesn’t actual do that, peopl will fear that it will. compar thi with 

china’ social obedi score for internet users.” 

peopl must live with outcom of algorithm ‘even though they be fear of the risks’ 

david clark, internet hall of fame member and senior research scientist at mit, replied, “I see the posit 

outcom outweigh the negative, but the issu will be that certain peopl will suffer neg consequences, 

perhap veri serious, and societi will have to decid how to deal with these outcomes. these outcom will 

probabl differ in character, and in our abil to understand whi they happened, and thi realiti will make some 

peopl fearful. but a we see today, peopl feel that they must use the internet to be a part of society. even if they 

be fear of the consequences, peopl will accept that they must live with the outcom of these algorithms, even 

though they be fear of the risks.” 

‘everi area of life will be affected. every. single. one.’ 

baratund thurston, director’ fellow at mit media lab, fast compani columnist, and former digit director 

of the onion, wrote: “main posit changes: 1) the excus of not know thing will be reduc greatli a 

inform becom even more connect and complete. 2) mistak that result from error in human 

judgment, ‘knowledge,’ or reaction time will be greatli reduced. let’ call thi the ‘robot drive good than people’ 

principle. today’ driver will whine, but in 50 year no one will want to drive when they can use that 

transport time to experi a reality-indistinguish immers virtual environ fill with a bunch of 

beyoncé bots. 

“3) corrupt that exist today a a result of human decept will declin significantly—bribes, graft, 

nepotism. If the algorithm be built well and robustly, the opportun to insert thi ineffici (e.g., hire 

some idiot becaus he’ your cousin) should go down. 4) In general, we should achiev a much more 

effici distribut of resources, includ expens (in dollar or environment cost) resourc like 

fossil fuels. basically, algorithm insight will start to affect the design of our homes, cities, transport 

networks, manufactur levels, wast manag processing, and more. there’ a lot of redund in a 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

22 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



world where everi american have a car she never uses. We should becom far more energi effici onc we 

reduc the redund of human-draft processes. 

“but there will be neg changes: 1) there will be an increas speed of interact and volum of 

inform processed—everyth will get faster. none of the effici gain brought about by technolog 

have ever lead to more leisur or rest or happiness. We will simpli shop more, work more, decid more thing 

becaus our capac to do all those will have increased. it’ like add lane to the highway a a traffic 

manag solution. when you do that, you just encourag more peopl to drive. the real trick be to not 

add more car lane but build a world in which few peopl need or want to drive. 

“2) there will be algorithm and data-centr oppression. given that these system will be design by 

demonstr imperfect and bia human beings, we be like to creat new and far less visibl form of 

discrimin and oppression. the maker of these algorithm and the collector of the data use to test 

and prime them have nowher near a comprehens understand of culture, values, and diversity. they 

will forget to test their imag recognit on dark skin or their medic diagnost tool on asian woman or 

their transport model dure major sport event under heavi fog. We will assum the machin be 

smarter, but we will realiz they be just a dumb a we be but good at hide it. 

“3) entir group of peopl will be exclud and they most like won’t know about the parallel realiti they 

don’t experience. everi area of life will be affected. every. single. one.” 

A call for ‘industri reform’ and ‘more savvi regulatori regimes’ 

technologist anil dash said, “the best part of algorithm influenc will make life good for mani people, but 

the bad excess will truli harm the most margin in unpredict ways. we’ll need both industri reform 

within the technolog compani creat these system and far more savvi regulatori regim to handl the 

complex challeng that arise.” 

‘we be a societi that take it life direct from the palm of our hands’ 

john markoff, author of machin of love grace: the quest for common ground between human and 

robot and senior writer at the new york times, observed, “I be most concern about the lack of algorithm 

transparency. increasingli we be a societi that take it life direct from the palm of our hand – our 

smartphones. guidanc on everyth from what be the best korean bbq to who to pick for a spous be 

algorithm generated. there be littl insight, however, into the valu and motif of the design of these 

systems.” 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

23 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



fix the ‘organizational, societ and polit climat we’v constructed’ 

danah boyd, founder of data & society, commented, “an algorithm mean noth by itself. what’ at stake be 

how a ‘model’ be creat and used. A model be compris of a set of data (e.g., train data in a machin learn 

system) alongsid an algorithm. the algorithm be noth without the data. but the model be also noth without 

the use case. the same technolog can be use to empow peopl (e.g., identifi peopl at risk) or harm them. It 

all depend on who be use the inform to what end (e.g., social servic vs. police). becaus of unhealthi 

power dynam in our society, I sadli suspect that the outcom will be far more problemat – mechan to 

limit people’ opportunities, segment and segreg peopl into unequ buckets, and leverag surveil to 

forc peopl into more oppress situations. but it doesn’t have to be that way. what’ at stake have littl to do 

with the technology; it have everyth to do with the organizational, societ and polit climat we’v 

constructed.” 

We have an algorithm problem already: credit score 

hen schulzrinne, internet hall of fame member and professor at columbia university, noted, “we alreadi 

have have earli indic of the difficulti with algorithm decision-making, name credit scores. their 

comput be opaqu and they be then use for all kind of purpos far remov from make loans, such a 

employ decis or segment custom for differ treatment. they leak lot of privat inform and 

be disclosed, by intent or negligence, to entiti that do not act in the best interest of the consumer. correct 

data be difficult and time-consuming, and thu unlik to be avail to individu with limit resources. It be 

unclear how the propos algorithm address these well-known problems, give that they be often subject to no 

regul whatsoever. In mani areas, the input variabl be either crude (and often proxi for race), such a 

home zip code, or extrem invasive, such a monitor drive behavior minute-by-minute. given the absenc 

of privaci laws, in general, there be everi incent for entiti that can observ our behavior, such a advertis 

brokers, to monet behavior information. At minimum, institut that have broad societ impact would 

need to disclos the input variabl used, how they influenc the outcom and be subject to review, not just 

individu record corrections. An honest, verifi cost-benefit analysis, measur improv effici or good 

outcom against the loss of privaci or inadvert discrimination, would avoid the ‘trust us, it will be wonder 

and it’ ai!’ decision-making.” 

algorithm ‘creat valu and cut costs’ and will be improv 

robert atkinson, presid of the inform technolog and innov foundation, said, “like virtual all 

past technologies, algorithm will creat valu and cut costs, far in excess of ani costs. moreover, a organ 

and societi get more experi with use of algorithm there will be natur forc toward improv and 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

24 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



limit ani potenti problems.” 

‘the goal should be to help peopl question authority’ 

judith donath of harvard berkman klein center for internet & society, replied, “data can be incomplete, or 

wrong, and algorithm can emb fals assumptions. the danger in increas relianc on algorithm be that be 

that the decision-mak process becom oracular: opaqu yet unarguable. the solut be design. the process 

should not be a black box into which we feed data and out come an answer, but a transpar process design 

not just to produc a result, but to explain how it come up with that result. the system should be abl to produc 

clear, legibl text and graphic that help the user – readers, editors, doctors, patients, loan applicants, voters, 

etc. – understand how the decis be made. the system should be interactive, so that peopl can examin how 

chang data, assumptions, rule would chang outcomes. the algorithm should not be the new authority; the 

goal should be to help peopl question authority.” 

Do more to train coder with divers world view 

ami webb, futurist and ceo at the futur today institute, wrote, “in order to make our machin think, we 

human need to help them learn. along with other pre-program train datasets, our person data be be 

use to help machin make decisions. however, there be no standard ethic requir or mandat for 

diversity, and a a result we’r alreadi start to see a more dystopian futur unfold in the present. there be too 

mani exampl to cite, but i’ll list a few: would-b borrow turn away from banks, individu with black- 

identifi name see themselv in advertis for crimin background searches, peopl be deni 

insur and health care. most of the time, these problem aris from a limit worldview, not becaus coder 

be inher racist. algorithm have a nasti habit of do exactli what we tell them to do. now, what happen 

when we’v instruct our machin to learn from us? and to begin make decis on their own? the onli way 

to address algorithm discrimin in the futur be to invest in the present. the overwhelm major of 

coder be white and male. corpor must do more than publish transpar report about their staff – they 

must activ invest in woman and peopl of color, who will soon be the next gener of workers. and when the 

day comes, they must choos new hire both for their skill and their worldview. univers must redoubl their 

effort not onli to recruit a divers bodi of student –administr and faculti must support them through to 

graduation. and not just students. univers must diversifi their faculties, to ensur that student see 

themselv reflect in their teachers.” 

the impact in the short term will be negative; in the longer term it will be posit 

jamai cascio, distinguish fellow at the institut for the future, observed, “the impact of algorithm in the 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

25 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



earli transit era will be overal negative, a we (humans, human societi and economy) attempt to learn how to 

integr these technologies. bias, error, corrupt and more will make the implement of algorithm 

system brittle, and make exploit those failur for malice, polit power or lulz (http://knowyourmeme.com 

/memes/i-did-it-for-the-lulz) compar easy. By the time the transit take hold – probabl a good 20 years, 

mayb a bit less – mani of those problem will be overcome, and the ancillari adapt (e.g., potenti rise of 

univers basic income) will start to have an overal benefit. In other words, shorter term (thi decade) negative, 

longer term (next decade) positive.” 

the stori will keep shift 

mike liebhold, senior research and distinguish fellow at the institut for the future, commented, “the 

futur effect of algorithm in our life will shift over time a we master new competencies. the rate of adopt 

and diffus will be highli uneven, base on natur variabl of geographies, the environment, economies, 

infrastructure, policies, sociologies, psychology, and – most importantli – education. the growth of human 

benefit of machin intellig will be most constrain by our collect compet to design and interact 

effect with machines. At an absolut minimum, we need to learn to form effect question and task for 

machines, how to interpret respons and how to simpli detect and repair a machin mistake.” 

make algorithm ‘comprehensible, predict and controllable’ 

ben shneiderman, professor of comput scienc at the univers of maryland, wrote, “when well-designed, 

algorithm amplifi human abilities, but they must be comprehensible, predict and controllable. thi mean 

they must be design to be transpar so that user can understand the impact of their use and they must be 

subject to continu evalu so that critic can ass bia and errors. everi system need a respons 

contact person/organ that maintains/upd the algorithm and a social structur so that the commun 

of user can discu their experiences.” 

In key cases, give the user control 

david weinberger, senior research at the harvard berkman klein center for internet & society, said, 

“algorithm analysi at scale can turn up relationship that be predict and help even if they be beyond the 

human capac to understand them. thi be fine where the stake be low, such a a book recommendation. 

where the stake be high, such a algorithm filter a news feed, we need to be far more careful, especi 

when the incent for the creator be not align with the interest of the individu or of the broader social 

goods. In those latter cases, give more control to the user seem highli advisable.” 

expert on the pro and con of algorithm | pew research center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

26 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 


