






































facebook could help stop diseas outbreak 


facebook could help stop diseas 
outbreak 

By afp more by thi author 

facebook, phone record could help stop diseas 

outbreak 

wednesday januari 3 2018 

facebook account and telephon record can be use to pinpoint the 

best individu to vaccin to stop a diseas outbreak in it tracks, 

research say wednesday. file photo | nation media group 

In summari 

the studi track the digit and physic contact of more than 500 

univers students. 

It conclud that peopl who be central in their digit network be 

also central in their real-lif human networks. 

the goal of vaccin be to reduc the size of the popul at risk of 

facebook could help stop diseas outbreak http://www.nation.co.ke/lifestyle/facebook-could-stop-disease-outbreak... 

1 sur 3 06-01-18 à 13:20 



infection. 

advertis 

pari 

facebook account and telephon record can be use to pinpoint the 

best individu to vaccin to stop a diseas outbreak in it tracks, 

research say wednesday. 

such peopl would be "central" in their social networks, and thu 

likeli to spread disease-caus germ from one group to another. 

assum there be an outbreak, and not enough vaccin for everi 

person in the world, immunis these well-connect individu 

would remov social "bridges" by which germ can spread, expert 

write in the journal of the royal societi interface. 

the study, which track the digit and physic contact of more than 

500 univers students, conclud that peopl who be central in their 

digit network be also central in their real-lif human networks. 

bridg 

"if you be a hub for your friend in the sens that you have mani 

contact via phone call or on facebook, make you a bridg between 

divers communities, chanc be high that you be also like to be a 

bridg to connect those commun in case of an epidemic, such a 

influenza," studi co-author eni mone of the technic univers of 

denmark told afp. 

"bi understand the onlin contacts, we can find individu who be 

such central member of the popul and focu target counter- 

measur on them when there be limit resourc for vaccination." 

use comput modelling, the research then calcul that 

vaccin these "central" individu would be "almost a effici a 

the most optim (existing) vaccin strategies". 

It be also cheaper, a digit activ be easi to trace. 

the goal of vaccin be to reduc the size of the popul at risk of 

infection. 

It achiev someth call "herd immunity", wherebi unvaccin 

peopl be increasingli unlik to come into contact with an infecti 

facebook could help stop diseas outbreak http://www.nation.co.ke/lifestyle/facebook-could-stop-disease-outbreak... 

2 sur 3 06-01-18 à 13:20 



individual. 

facebook could help stop diseas outbreak http://www.nation.co.ke/lifestyle/facebook-could-stop-disease-outbreak... 

3 sur 3 06-01-18 à 13:20 


