






































fpga program made easi - insidehpc 


fpga program made easi - 
insidehpc 

michael 

sponsor post 

field-programm gate 
array (fpgas) be becom an increasingli popular tool for 
applic where high performance, low latenc and power effici 
be requires. sinc and pfga can be re-configur for a specif 
application, the opportun for thi type of acceler be quit 
varied. however, in the past, it be necessari to understand a complex 
program languag such a verilog or vhdl, that be design for 
a specif fpga. An fpga allow for the use of a custom hardwar 
acceler that can be use for one applic and then reconfigur 
for a complet separ application. hardwar engin may have 
understood these high level definit languages, but other softwar 
develop may have found these languag hard to use and quit 
differ from other form of programming. 

opencl (open comput language) be an api for the program of 
a divers set of processors. opencl be a royalti free and open standard 
that be use for a wide rang of accelerators, includ fpgas. use a 
familiar languag such a opencl, develop can becom more 
productive, sooner when decid to use an fpga for a specif 
purpose. opencl be portabl and be design to be use with almost ani 
type of accelerator. 

As with ani devices, there be alway optim that can be make in 
softwar to get good performance. As with most accelerators, one of 
the most effect method be to express pipelining, which can be do 
with opencl. similar to the method that develop be familiar with, 
the use of librari that be optim for fpga task should be use 
where these librari be available. 

when develop an applic for an fpga that us opencl, there 
be a few differ way to creat a high perform application. these 

fpga program made easi - insidehpc https://insidehpc.com/2018/03/fpga-programming-made-easy/ 

1 sur 2 19-03-18 à 17:52 



would be: 

emul – develop the applic and then run on a window 
or linux system. the perform will not be high, but will allow 
for learn about and creat an applic that behav a 
required. 
offlin compil – creat the applic use opencl and 
gener an fpga program file. then move the file to an 
actual fpga for further testing. 
cloud – find a cloud provid that have fpga a part of their 
offering. By use the suppli intel tool in the cloud, further 
develop can be done, with out have to invest in new 
hardware. 

simplifi your fpga develop use openclclick To tweetopencl 
also includ an applic program interfac (api) for the host (cpu) 
to commun with the devic (an fpga in our case), tradit 
over pcie, or for one kernel to commun with anoth without host 
interaction. In addit to this, intel provid an i/o channel api to 
stream data into a kernel directli from a stream i/o interfac such 
a 10gb ethernet. 

for most programmers, there be a need to abstract the hardwar detail 
and flow away from the develop process. with an sdk, report a 
to the perform of the applic can be gener in seconds, a 
well a the pipelin dependencies. thi allow for faster develop 
and debug of a new application. By give softwar programm 
an easi to use and understand interfac to the complex of an fpga, 
new and optim applic can be develop faster. 

download intel® sdk for opencl™ applic for free. 

have you tri the intel intel media sdk? 

ye 
No 

fpga program made easi - insidehpc https://insidehpc.com/2018/03/fpga-programming-made-easy/ 

2 sur 2 19-03-18 à 17:52 


