






































futur robot need no motor hku engin invent worldâ•ž first nickel-hydroxid actuat materi that can be trigger by both light and electr - all new - media 


futur robot need no motor hku 
engin invent world’ first nickel- 
hydroxid actuat materi that can be 
trigger by both light and electr - all 
new - media 

futur robot need no motor hku engin 
invent world’ first nickel-hydroxid actuat 
materi that can be trigger by both light and 
electr 

31 may 2018 

professor alfonso ngan and Dr kwan kin-wa introduc the new actuat materi 
power by light. 

To develop micro- and biomimetic-robots, artifici muscl and medic devices, 
actuat materi that can revers chang their volum under variou stimulu be 
research in the past thirti year to replac tradit bulki and heavi actuat 
includ motor and pneumat actuators. 

A mechan engin team lead by professor alfonso ngan hing-wan, chair 
professor in materi scienc and engineering, and kingboard professor in materi 
engineering, faculti of engineering, the univers of hong kong (hku) publish 
an articl in scienc robot on 30 may 2018 (est) that introduc a novel actuat 

futur robot need no motor hku engin invent world’ first nick... https://www.hku.hk/press/news_detail_17948.html 

1 sur 4 06-06-18 à 19:40 



materi – nickel hydroxide-oxyhydroxid – that can be power by visibl (vis) light, 
electricity, and other stimuli. the materi actuat can be instantan trigger 
by vi light to produc a fast deform and exert a forc equival to 3000 time 
of it own weight. the materi cost of a typic actuat be a low a hkd 4 per cm2 

and can be easili fabric within three hours. 

among variou stimuli, light-induc actuat materi be highli desir becaus 
they enabl wireless oper of robots. however, veri few light driven materi be 
avail in the past, and their materi and product cost be high, which hinder 
their develop in actual applic such a artifici muscl for robot and 
human assist device, and minim invas surgic and diagnost tools. 

develop actuat materi be identifi a the top of the 10 challeng in “the 
grand challeng of scienc robotics”1. research in actuat materi can radic 
chang the concept of robot which be now mainli motor-driven. therefore, 
materi that can be actuat by wireless stimulu includ a chang in temperature, 
humidity, magnet field and light be one of the main research focu in recent years. 
In particular, a materi that can be actuat by vi light and produc strong, quick 
and stabl actuat have never be achieved. the novel actuat materi system – 
nickel hydroxide-oxyhydroxid that can be actuat by vi light at rel low 
intens to produc high stress and speed compar to mammalian skelet 
muscl have be develop in thi research initi by engin in hku. 

In addit to it vi light actuat properties, thi novel materi system can also be 
actuat by electricity, enabl it to be integr into the present well-develop 
robot technology. It be also respons to heat and humid chang so that they 
might potenti be appli in autonom machin that har the tini energi 
chang in the environment. becaus the major compon be nickel, the materi cost 
be low. the fabric onli involv electrodeposit which be a simpl process, and 
the time requir for the fabric be around three hours, therefor the materi can 
be easili scale up and manufactur in industry. 

the newli invent nickel hydroxide-oxyhydroxid respons to light almost 
instantan and produc a forc correspond to about 3000 time of it own 
weight (figur 1). 

1 yang, guang-zhong, et al. "the grand challeng of scienc robotics." scienc 
robot 3.14 (2018): eaar7650. 

figur 1 actuat forc of a 0.3-mg nickel hydroxide-oxyhydroxid actuat of 
under period light can reach about 1000-mg. 

when integr into a well-design structure, a “mini arm” make by two hing of 
actuat materi can easili lift an object 50 time of it weight (figur 2). similarly, 
by util a light blocker, a mini walking-bot in which onli the “front leg” bent and 

futur robot need no motor hku engin invent world’ first nick... https://www.hku.hk/press/news_detail_17948.html 

2 sur 4 06-06-18 à 19:40 



straighten altern and therefor move under illumin be make so that it 
can walk toward the light sourc (figur 3). these demonstr that futur 
applic in micro-robot includ rescu robot be possible. 

figur 2 A mini arm with two actuat hing lift a weight 50 time heavier than 
itself under light. 

figur 3 A mini walking-bot with the “front leg” straighten under light, while the 
light blocker block the light illumin on the “back leg” and therefor it remain 
curled. therefore, the walking-bot walk toward the light source. 

the evid abov reveal that thi nickel hydroxide-oxyhydroxid actuat 
materi can have differ applic in the future, includ rescu robot or other 
mini-robots. the intrins actuat properti of the materi obtain from our 
research show that by scale up the fabrication, artifici muscl compar to that 
of mammalian skelet muscl can be achieved, and appli it in robotics, human 
assist devic and medic devic be possible. 

from a scientif point of view, thi nickel hydroxide-oxyhydroxid actuat materi 
be the world’ first materi system that can be actuat directli by vi light and 
electr without ani addit fabric procedures. thi also open up a new 
research field on light-induc actuat behaviour for thi materi type (hydroxide- 
oxyhydroxides) becaus it have never be report before. 

the research team member be all from the depart of mechan engin 
at hku faculti of engineering, lead by professor alfonso ngan’ group in 
collabor with Dr Li wen-di. ’s group on light actuat experi and Dr feng 
shien-ping’ group on electrodeposit experiment. the research have be publish 
in the prestigi journal scienc robot on 30 may 2018 with a titl of “light- 

futur robot need no motor hku engin invent world’ first nick... https://www.hku.hk/press/news_detail_17948.html 

3 sur 4 06-06-18 à 19:40 



stimul actuat base on nickel hydroxide-oxyhydroxide”. the first author of 
thi paper be Dr kwan kin-wa who be current a post-doctor fellow in prof. ngan’ 
group. the correspond author be prof. ngan. the complet author list be a below: 
k-w. kwan, s-j. li, n-y. hau, w-d. li, s-p. feng, a.h.w. ngan. thi research be 
fund by the research grant council, hong kong. 

for the journal paper, pleas click: http://robotics.sciencemag.org/cont 
/3/18/eaat4051.ful 

for the powerpoint slide about thi research, pleas click here, and for video clips, 
pleas click here. (pleas credit “the univers of hong kong” if adopt the imag in 
the powerpoint and videos.) 

media enquiry: 
faculti of engineering: 
Dr kwan kin-wa (email: kkwkwan@connect.hku.hk) 
professor alfonso ngan (tel: 39177900; email: hwngan@hku.hk) 
Ms rhea leung (tel: 3917-8519/ 9022-7446; email: rhea.leung@hku.hk) 
commun and public affair office: 
Ms trinni choy (tel: 2859 2606/ email: pychoy@hku.hk) 
Ms rashida suffiad (tel: 2857 8555/ email: rsuffiad@hku.hk) 

futur robot need no motor hku engin invent world’ first nick... https://www.hku.hk/press/news_detail_17948.html 

4 sur 4 06-06-18 à 19:40 


