












































5419/16 av/nt/sr 
dgd 2 EN 





council of the 
european union 







brussels, 6 april 2016 
(or. en) 


5419/16 




dataprotect 2 
jai 38 
MI 25 
digit 21 
dapix 9 
fremp 4 
codec 52 





interinstitut file: 
2012/0011 (cod) 





legisl act and other instrument 
subject: posit of the council at first read with a view to the adopt of a 

regul OF the european parliament and OF the 
council on the protect of natur person with regard to the 
process of person data and on the free movement of such data, and 
repeal direct 95/46/ec (gener data protect regulation) 









5419/16 av/nt/sr 1 
dgd 2 EN 


regul (eu) 2016/… 

OF the european parliament and OF the council 

of 

on the protect of natur person 

with regard to the process of person data 

and on the free movement of such data, 

and repeal direct 95/46/ec 

(gener data protect regulation) 

(text with eea relevance) 

the european parliament and the council OF the european union, 

have regard to the treati on the function of the european union, and in particular articl 16 

thereof, 

have regard to the propos from the european commission, 

after transmiss of the draft legisl act to the nation parliaments, 

have regard to the opinion of the european econom and social committee1, 

have regard to the opinion of the committe of the regions2, 

act in accord with the ordinari legisl procedure3, 


1 OJ C 229, 31.7.2012, p. 90. 
2 OJ C 391, 18.12.2012, p. 127. 
3 posit of the european parliament of 12 march 2014 (oj …) and posit of the council 

of …. posit of the european parliament of ... and decis of the council of .... 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 2 
dgd 2 EN 


whereas: 

(1) the protect of natur person in relat to the process of person data be a 

fundament right. articl 8(1) of the charter of fundament right of the european 

union (the 'charter') and articl 16(1) of the treati on the function of the european 

union (tfeu) provid that everyon have the right to the protect of person data 

concern him or her. 

(2) the principl of, and rule on the protect of natur person with regard to the 

process of their person data should, whatev their nation or residence, respect 

their fundament right and freedoms, in particular their right to the protect of person 

data. thi regul be intend to contribut to the accomplish of an area of 

freedom, secur and justic and of an econom union, to econom and social progress, 

to the strengthen and the converg of the economi within the intern market, and 

to the well-b of natur persons. 

(3) direct 95/46/ec of the european parliament and of the council1 seek to harmonis the 

protect of fundament right and freedom of natur person in respect of process 

activ and to ensur the free flow of person data between member states. 


1 direct 95/46/ec of the european parliament and of the council of 24 octob 1995 on 

the protect of individu with regard to the process of person data and on the free 
movement of such data (oj L 281, 23.11.1995, p. 31). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 3 
dgd 2 EN 


(4) the process of person data should be design to serv mankind. the right to the 

protect of person data be not an absolut right; it must be consid in relat to it 

function in societi and be balanc against other fundament rights, in accord with 

the principl of proportionality. thi regul respect all fundament right and 

observ the freedom and principl recognis in the charter a enshrin in the treaties, 

in particular the respect for privat and famili life, home and communications,th 

protect of person data, freedom of thought, conscienc and religion, freedom of 

express and information, freedom to conduct a business, the right to an effect 

remedi and to a fair trial, and cultural, religi and linguist diversity. 

(5) the econom and social integr result from the function of the intern market 

have lead to a substanti increas in cross-bord flow of person data. the exchang of 

person data between public and privat actors, includ natur persons, associ 

and undertak across the union have increased. nation author in the 

member state be be call upon by union law to cooper and exchang person 

data so a to be abl to perform their duti or carri out task on behalf of an author in 

anoth member state. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 4 
dgd 2 EN 


(6) rapid technolog develop and globalis have brought new challeng for the 

protect of person data. the scale of the collect and share of person data have 

increas significantly. technolog allow both privat compani and public author 

to make use of person data on an unpreced scale in order to pursu their activities. 

natur person increasingli make person inform avail publicli and globally. 

technolog have transform both the economi and social life, and should further facilit 

the free flow of person data within the union and the transfer to third countri and 

intern organisations, while ensur a high level of the protect of person data. 

(7) those develop requir a strong and more coher data protect framework in the 

union, back by strong enforcement, give the import of creat the trust that will 

allow the digit economi to develop across the intern market. natur person should 

have control of their own person data. legal and practic certainti for natur persons, 

econom oper and public author should be enhanced. 

(8) where thi regul provid for specif or restrict of it rule by 

member state law, member state may, a far a necessari for coher and for make 

the nation provis comprehens to the person to whom they apply, incorpor 

element of thi regul into their nation law. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 5 
dgd 2 EN 


(9) the object and principl of direct 95/46/ec remain sound, but it have not prevent 

fragment in the implement of data protect across the union, legal uncertainti 

or a widespread public percept that there be signific risk to the protect of natur 

persons, in particular with regard to onlin activity. differ in the level of protect of 

the right and freedom of natur persons, in particular the right to the protect of 

person data, with regard to the process of person data in the member state may 

prevent the free flow of person data throughout the union. those differ may 

therefor constitut an obstacl to the pursuit of econom activ at the level of the 

union, distort competit and imped author in the discharg of their respons 

under union law. such a differ in level of protect be due to the exist of 

differ in the implement and applic of direct 95/46/ec. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 6 
dgd 2 EN 


(10) In order to ensur a consist and high level of protect of natur person and to 

remov the obstacl to flow of person data within the union, the level of protect of 

the right and freedom of natur person with regard to the process of such data 

should be equival in all member states. consist and homogen applic of the 

rule for the protect of the fundament right and freedom of natur person with 

regard to the process of person data should be ensur throughout the union. 

regard the process of person data for complianc with a legal obligation, for the 

perform of a task carri out in the public interest or in the exercis of offici 

author vest in the controller, member state should be allow to maintain or 

introduc nation provis to further specifi the applic of the rule of thi 

regulation. In conjunct with the gener and horizont law on data protect 

implement direct 95/46/ec, member state have sever sector-specif law in 

area that need more specif provisions. thi regul also provid a margin of 

manoeuvr for member state to specifi it rules, includ for the process of special 

categori of person data ('sensit data'). To that extent, thi regul do not 

exclud member state law that set out the circumst for specif process 

situations, includ determin more precis the condit under which the process 

of person data be lawful. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 7 
dgd 2 EN 


(11) effect protect of person data throughout the union requir the strengthen and 

set out in detail of the right of data subject and the oblig of those who process 

and determin the process of person data, a well a equival power for monitor 

and ensur complianc with the rule for the protect of person data and equival 

sanction for infring in the member states. 

(12) articl 16(2) tfeu mandat the european parliament and the council to lay down the 

rule relat to the protect of natur person with regard to the process of person 

data and the rule relat to the free movement of person data. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 8 
dgd 2 EN 


(13) In order to ensur a consist level of protect for natur person throughout the union 

and to prevent diverg hamper the free movement of person data within the 

intern market, a regul be necessari to provid legal certainti and transpar for 

econom operators, includ micro, small and medium-s enterprises, and to provid 

natur person in all member state with the same level of legal enforc right and 

oblig and respons for control and processors, to ensur consist 

monitor of the process of person data, and equival sanction in all 

member state a well a effect cooper between the supervisori author of 

differ member states. the proper function of the intern market requir that the 

free movement of person data within the union be not restrict or prohibit for reason 

connect with the protect of natur person with regard to the process of person 

data. To take account of the specif situat of micro, small and medium-s 

enterprises, thi regul includ a derog for organis with few than 250 

employe with regard to record-keeping. In addition, the union institut and bodies, 

and member state and their supervisori authorities, be encourag to take account of the 

specif need of micro, small and medium-s enterpris in the applic of thi 

regulation. the notion of micro, small and medium-s enterpris should draw from 

articl 2 of the annex to commiss recommend 2003/361/ec1. 


1 commiss recommend of 6 may 2003 concern the definit of micro, small and 

medium-s enterpris (c(2003) 1422) (oj L 124, 20.5.2003, p. 36). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 9 
dgd 2 EN 


(14) the protect afford by thi regul should appli to natur persons, whatev their 

nation or place of residence, in relat to the process of their person data. thi 

regul do not cover the process of person data which concern legal person 

and in particular undertak establish a legal persons, includ the name and the 

form of the legal person and the contact detail of the legal person. 

(15) In order to prevent creat a seriou risk of circumvention, the protect of natur 

person should be technolog neutral and should not depend on the techniqu used. 

the protect of natur person should appli to the process of person data by 

autom means, a well a to manual processing, if the person data be contain or be 

intend to be contain in a file system. file or set of files, a well a their cover 

pages, which be not structur accord to specif criterion should not fall within the 

scope of thi regulation. 

(16) thi regul do not appli to issu of protect of fundament right and freedom 

or the free flow of person data relat to activ which fall outsid the scope of union 

law, such a activ concern nation security. thi regul do not appli to the 

process of person data by the member state when carri out activ in relat 

to the common foreign and secur polici of the union. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 10 
dgd 2 EN 


(17) regul (ec) No 45/2001 of the european parliament and of the council1 appli to the 

process of person data by the union institutions, bodies, offic and agencies. 

regul (ec) No 45/2001 and other union legal act applic to such process of 

person data should be adapt to the principl and rule establish in thi regul 

and appli in the light of thi regulation. In order to provid a strong and coher data 

protect framework in the union, the necessari adapt of regul (ec) 

No 45/2001 should follow after the adopt of thi regulation, in order to allow 

applic at the same time a thi regulation. 

(18) thi regul do not appli to the process of person data by a natur person in the 

cours of a pure person or household activ and thu with no connect to a 

profession or commerci activity. person or household activ could includ 

correspond and the hold of addresses, or social network and onlin activ 

undertaken within the context of such activities. however, thi regul appli to 

control or processor which provid the mean for process person data for such 

person or household activities. 


1 regul (ec) No 45/2001 of the european parliament and of the council of 

18 decemb 2000 on the protect of individu with regard to the process of person 
data by the commun institut and bodi and on the free movement of such data 
(oj L 8, 12.1.2001, p. 1). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 11 
dgd 2 EN 


(19) the protect of natur person with regard to the process of person data by 

compet author for the purpos of the prevention, investigation, detect or 

prosecut of crimin offenc or the execut of crimin penalties, includ the 

safeguard against and the prevent of threat to public secur and the free movement 

of such data, be the subject of a specif union legal act. thi regul should not, 

therefore, appli to process activ for those purposes. however, person data 

process by public author under thi regul should, when use for those 

purposes, be govern by a more specif union legal act, name direct (eu) 2016/… 

of the european parliament and of the council1*. member state may entrust compet 

author within the mean of direct (eu) 2016/…** with task which be not 

necessarili carri out for the purpos of the prevention, investigation, detect or 

prosecut of crimin offenc or the execut of crimin penalties, includ the 

safeguard against and prevent of threat to public security, so that the process of 

person data for those other purposes, in so far a it be within the scope of union law, fall 

within the scope of thi regulation. 


1 direct (eu) 2016/… of the european parliament and of the council on the protect of 

natur person with regard to the process of person data by compet author for 
the purpos of prevention, investigation, detect or prosecut of crimin offenc or 
the execut of crimin penalties, and the free movement of such data and repeal 
council framework decis 2008/977/jha (oj L …). 

* oj: pleas insert the number of the direct in doc. st 5418/16 and the public 
reference. 

** oj: pleas insert the number of the direct in doc. st 5418/16. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 12 
dgd 2 EN 


with regard to the process of person data by those compet author for purpos 

fall within scope of thi regulation, member state should be abl to maintain or 

introduc more specif provis to adapt the applic of the rule of thi regulation. 

such provis may determin more precis specif requir for the process of 

person data by those compet author for those other purposes, take into account 

the constitutional, organis and administr structur of the respect member 

state. when the process of person data by privat bodi fall within the scope of thi 

regulation, thi regul should provid for the possibl for member state under 

specif condit to restrict by law certain oblig and right when such a restrict 

constitut a necessari and proportion measur in a democrat societi to safeguard 

specif import interest includ public secur and the prevention, investigation, 

detect or prosecut of crimin offenc or the execut of crimin penalties, 

includ the safeguard against and the prevent of threat to public security. thi be 

relev for instanc in the framework of anti-money launder or the activ of 

forens laboratories. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 13 
dgd 2 EN 


(20) while thi regul applies, inter alia, to the activ of court and other judici 

authorities, union or member state law could specifi the process oper and 

process procedur in relat to the process of person data by court and other 

judici authorities. the compet of the supervisori author should not cover the 

process of person data when court be act in their judici capacity, in order to 

safeguard the independ of the judiciari in the perform of it judici tasks, 

includ decision-making. It should be possibl to entrust supervis of such data 

process oper to specif bodi within the judici system of the member state, 

which should, in particular ensur complianc with the rule of thi regulation, enhanc 

awar among member of the judiciari of their oblig under thi regul and 

handl complaint in relat to such data process operations. 

(21) thi regul be without prejudic to the applic of direct 2000/31/ec of the 

european parliament and of the council1, in particular of the liabil rule of intermediari 

servic provid in articl 12 to 15 of that directive. that direct seek to contribut 

to the proper function of the intern market by ensur the free movement of 

inform societi servic between member states. 


1 direct 2000/31/ec of the european parliament and of the council of 8 june 2000 on 

certain legal aspect of inform societi services, in particular electron commerce, in 
the intern market ('direct on electron commerce') (oj L 178, 17.7.2000, p. 1). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 14 
dgd 2 EN 


(22) ani process of person data in the context of the activ of an establish of a 

control or a processor in the union should be carri out in accord with thi 

regulation, regardless of whether the process itself take place within the union. 

establish impli the effect and real exercis of activ through stabl 

arrangements. the legal form of such arrangements, whether through a branch or a 

subsidiari with a legal personality, be not the determin factor in that respect. 

(23) In order to ensur that natur person be not depriv of the protect to which they be 

entitl under thi regulation, the process of person data of data subject who be in 

the union by a control or a processor not establish in the union should be subject to 

thi regul where the process activ be relat to offer good or servic to 

such data subject irrespect of whether connect to a payment. In order to determin 

whether such a control or processor be offer good or servic to data subject who 

be in the union, it should be ascertain whether it be appar that the control or 

processor envisag offer servic to data subject in one or more member state in the 

union. wherea the mere access of the controller's, processor' or an intermediary' 

websit in the union, of an email address or of other contact details, or the use of a 

languag gener use in the third countri where the control be established, be 

insuffici to ascertain such intention, factor such a the use of a languag or a currenc 

gener use in one or more member state with the possibl of order good and 

servic in that other language, or the mention of custom or user who be in the 

union, may make it appar that the control envisag offer good or servic to 

data subject in the union. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 15 
dgd 2 EN 


(24) the process of person data of data subject who be in the union by a control or 

processor not establish in the union should also be subject to thi regul when it be 

relat to the monitor of the behaviour of such data subject in so far a their behaviour 

take place within the union. In order to determin whether a process activ can be 

consid to monitor the behaviour of data subjects, it should be ascertain whether 

natur person be track on the internet includ potenti subsequ use of person 

data process techniqu which consist of profil a natur person, particularli in order 

to take decis concern her or him or for analys or predict her or hi person 

preferences, behaviour and attitudes. 

(25) where member state law appli by virtu of public intern law, thi regul 

should also appli to a control not establish in the union, such a in a member state' 

diplomat mission or consular post. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 16 
dgd 2 EN 


(26) the principl of data protect should appli to ani inform concern an identifi 

or identifi natur person. person data which have undergon pseudonymisation, 

which could be attribut to a natur person by the use of addit inform should be 

consid to be inform on an identifi natur person. To determin whether a 

natur person be identifiable, account should be take of all the mean reason like to 

be used, such a singl out, either by the control or by anoth person to identifi the 

natur person directli or indirectly. To ascertain whether mean be reason like to 

be use to identifi the natur person, account should be take of all object factors, such 

a the cost of and the amount of time requir for identification, take into consider 

the avail technolog at the time of the process and technolog developments. the 

principl of data protect should therefor not appli to anonym information, name 

inform which do not relat to an identifi or identifi natur person or to 

person data render anonym in such a manner that the data subject be not or no 

longer identifiable. thi regul do not therefor concern the process of such 

anonym information, includ for statist or research purposes. 

(27) thi regul do not appli to the person data of deceas persons. member state 

may provid for rule regard the process of person data of deceas persons. 

(28) the applic of pseudonymis to person data can reduc the risk to the data 

subject concern and help control and processor to meet their data-protect 

obligations. the explicit introduct of 'pseudonymisation' in thi regul be not 

intend to preclud ani other measur of data protection. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 17 
dgd 2 EN 


(29) In order to creat incent to appli pseudonymis when process person data, 

measur of pseudonymis should, whilst allow gener analysis, be possibl within 

the same control when that control have take technic and organis measur 

necessari to ensure, for the process concerned, that thi regul be implemented, and 

that addit inform for attribut the person data to a specif data subject be kept 

separately. the control process the person data should indic the authoris 

person within the same controller. 

(30) natur person may be associ with onlin identifi provid by their devices, 

applications, tool and protocols, such a internet protocol addresses, cooki identifi or 

other identifi such a radio frequenc identif tags. thi may leav trace which, 

in particular when combin with uniqu identifi and other inform receiv by the 

servers, may be use to creat profil of the natur person and identifi them. 

(31) public author to which person data be disclos in accord with a legal 

oblig for the exercis of their offici mission, such a tax and custom authorities, 

financi investig units, independ administr authorities, or financi market 

author respons for the regul and supervis of secur market should not 

be regard a recipi if they receiv person data which be necessari to carri out a 

particular inquiri in the gener interest, in accord with union or member state law. 

the request for disclosur sent by the public author should alway be in writing, 

reason and occasion and should not concern the entireti of a file system or lead to 

the interconnect of file systems. the process of person data by those public 

author should compli with the applic data-protect rule accord to the 

purpos of the processing. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 18 
dgd 2 EN 


(32) consent should be give by a clear affirm act establish a freeli given, specific, 

inform and unambigu indic of the data subject' agreement to the process of 

person data relat to him or her, such a by a write statement, includ by electron 

means, or an oral statement. thi could includ tick a box when visit an internet 

website, choos technic set for inform societi servic or anoth statement 

or conduct which clearli indic in thi context the data subject' accept of the 

propos process of hi or her person data. silence, pre-tick box or inact 

should not therefor constitut consent. consent should cover all process activ 

carri out for the same purpos or purposes. when the process have multipl purposes, 

consent should be give for all of them. If the data subject' consent be to be give 

follow a request by electron means, the request must be clear, concis and not 

unnecessarili disrupt to the use of the servic for which it be provided. 

(33) It be often not possibl to fulli identifi the purpos of person data process for 

scientif research purpos at the time of data collection. therefore, data subject should 

be allow to give their consent to certain area of scientif research when in keep with 

recognis ethic standard for scientif research. data subject should have the 

opportun to give their consent onli to certain area of research or part of research 

project to the extent allow by the intend purpose. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 19 
dgd 2 EN 


(34) genet data should be defin a person data relat to the inherit or acquir genet 

characterist of a natur person which result from the analysi of a biolog sampl 

from the natur person in question, in particular chromosomal, deoxyribonucl acid 

(dna) or ribonucl acid (rna) analysis, or from the analysi of anoth element 

enabl equival inform to be obtained. 

(35) person data concern health should includ all data pertain to the health statu of a 

data subject which reveal inform relat to the past, current or futur physic or 

mental health statu of the data subject. thi includ inform about the natur person 

collect in the cours of the registr for, or the provis of, health care servic a 

refer to in direct 2011/24/eu of the european parliament and of the council1 to that 

natur person; a number, symbol or particular assign to a natur person to uniqu 

identifi the natur person for health purposes; inform deriv from the test or 

examin of a bodi part or bodili substance, includ from genet data and biolog 

samples; and ani inform on, for example, a disease, disability, diseas risk, medic 

history, clinic treatment or the physiolog or biomed state of the data subject 

independ of it source, for exampl from a physician or other health professional, a 

hospital, a medic devic or an in vitro diagnost test. 


1 direct 2011/24/eu of the european parliament and of the council of 9 march 2011 on 

the applic of patients' right in cross-bord healthcar (oj L 88, 4.4.2011, p. 45). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 20 
dgd 2 EN 


(36) the main establish of a control in the union should be the place of it central 

administr in the union, unless the decis on the purpos and mean of the 

process of person data be take in anoth establish of the control in the 

union, in which case that other establish should be consid to be the main 

establishment. the main establish of a control in the union should be determin 

accord to object criterion and should impli the effect and real exercis of 

manag activ determin the main decis a to the purpos and mean of 

process through stabl arrangements. that criterion should not depend on whether the 

process of person data be carri out at that location. the presenc and use of technic 

mean and technolog for process person data or process activ do not, in 

themselves, constitut a main establish and be therefor not determin criterion for a 

main establishment. the main establish of the processor should be the place of it 

central administr in the union or, if it have no central administr in the union, the 

place where the main process activ take place in the union. In case involv both 

the control and the processor, the compet lead supervisori author should remain 

the supervisori author of the member state where the control have it main 

establishment, but the supervisori author of the processor should be consid to be a 

supervisori author concern and that supervisori author should particip in the 

cooper procedur provid for by thi regulation. In ani case, the supervisori 

author of the member state or member state where the processor have one or more 

establish should not be consid to be supervisori author concern where the 

draft decis concern onli the controller. where the process be carri out by a group 

of undertakings, the main establish of the control undertak should be 

consid to be the main establish of the group of undertakings, except where the 

purpos and mean of process be determin by anoth undertaking. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 21 
dgd 2 EN 


(37) A group of undertak should cover a control undertak and it control 

undertakings, wherebi the control undertak should be the undertak which can 

exert a domin influenc over the other undertak by virtue, for example, of 

ownership, financi particip or the rule which govern it or the power to have 

person data protect rule implemented. An undertak which control the process 

of person data in undertak affili to it should be regarded, togeth with those 

undertakings, a a group of undertakings. 

(38) children merit specif protect with regard to their person data, a they may be less 

awar of the risks, consequ and safeguard concern and their right in relat to 

the process of person data. such specif protect should, in particular, appli to the 

use of person data of child for the purpos of market or creat person or 

user profil and the collect of person data with regard to child when use 

servic offer directli to a child. the consent of the holder of parent respons 

should not be necessari in the context of prevent or counsel servic offer 

directli to a child. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 22 
dgd 2 EN 


(39) ani process of person data should be law and fair. It should be transpar to 

natur person that person data concern them be collected, used, consult or 

otherwis process and to what extent the person data be or will be processed. the 

principl of transpar requir that ani inform and commun relat to the 

process of those person data be easili access and easi to understand, and that 

clear and plain languag be used. that principl concerns, in particular, inform to the 

data subject on the ident of the control and the purpos of the process and further 

inform to ensur fair and transpar process in respect of the natur person 

concern and their right to obtain confirm and commun of person data 

concern them which be be processed. natur person should be make awar of 

risks, rules, safeguard and right in relat to the process of person data and how to 

exercis their right in relat to such processing. In particular, the specif purpos for 

which person data be process should be explicit and legitim and determin at the 

time of the collect of the person data. the person data should be adequate, relev 

and limit to what be necessari for the purpos for which they be processed. thi 

requires, in particular, ensur that the period for which the person data be store be 

limit to a strict minimum. person data should be process onli if the purpos of the 

process could not reason be fulfil by other means. In order to ensur that the 

person data be not kept longer than necessary, time limit should be establish by the 

control for erasur or for a period review. everi reason step should be take to 

ensur that person data which be inaccur be rectifi or deleted. person data should 

be process in a manner that ensur appropri secur and confidenti of the 

person data, includ for prevent unauthoris access to or use of person data and 

the equip use for the processing. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 23 
dgd 2 EN 


(40) In order for process to be lawful, person data should be process on the basi of the 

consent of the data subject concern or some other legitim basis, laid down by law, 

either in thi regul or in other union or member state law a refer to in thi 

regulation, includ the necess for complianc with the legal oblig to which the 

control be subject or the necess for the perform of a contract to which the data 

subject be parti or in order to take step at the request of the data subject prior to enter 

into a contract. 

(41) where thi regul refer to a legal basi or a legisl measur , thi do not 

necessarili requir a legisl act adopt by a parliament, without prejudic to 

requir pursuant to the constitut order of the member state concerned. 

however, such a legal basi or legisl measur should be clear and precis and it 

applic should be forese to person subject to it, in accord with the case-law 

of the court of justic of the european union ('court of justice') and the european court 

of human rights. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 24 
dgd 2 EN 


(42) where process be base on the data subject' consent, the control should be abl to 

demonstr that the data subject have give consent to the process operation. In 

particular in the context of a write declar on anoth matter, safeguard should 

ensur that the data subject be awar of the fact that and the extent to which consent be 

given. In accord with council direct 93/13/eec1 a declar of consent 

pre-formul by the control should be provid in an intellig and easili access 

form, use clear and plain languag and it should not contain unfair terms. for consent to 

be informed, the data subject should be awar at least of the ident of the control and 

the purpos of the process for which the person data be intended. consent should 

not be regard a freeli give if the data subject have no genuin or free choic or be unabl 

to refus or withdraw consent without detriment. 

(43) In order to ensur that consent be freeli given, consent should not provid a valid legal 

ground for the process of person data in a specif case where there be a clear 

imbal between the data subject and the controller, in particular where the control be 

a public author and it be therefor unlik that consent be freeli give in all the 

circumst of that specif situation. consent be presum not to be freeli give if it 

do not allow separ consent to be give to differ person data process oper 

despit it be appropri in the individu case, or if the perform of a contract, 

includ the provis of a service, be depend on the consent despit such consent not 

be necessari for such performance. 


1 council direct 93/13/eec of 5 april 1993 on unfair term in consum contract 

(oj L 95, 21.4.1993, p. 29). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 25 
dgd 2 EN 


(44) process should be law where it be necessari in the context of a contract or the 

intent to enter into a contract. 

(45) where process be carri out in accord with a legal oblig to which the 

control be subject or where process be necessari for the perform of a task carri 

out in the public interest or in the exercis of offici authority, the process should have 

a basi in union or member state law. thi regul do not requir a specif law for 

each individu processing. A law a a basi for sever process oper base on a 

legal oblig to which the control be subject or where process be necessari for the 

perform of a task carri out in the public interest or in the exercis of an offici 

author may be sufficient. It should also be for union or member state law to determin 

the purpos of processing. furthermore, that law could specifi the gener condit of 

thi regul govern the law of person data processing, establish 

specif for determin the controller, the type of person data which be subject to 

the processing, the data subject concerned, the entiti to which the person data may be 

disclosed, the purpos limitations, the storag period and other measur to ensur law 

and fair processing. It should also be for union or member state law to determin whether 

the control perform a task carri out in the public interest or in the exercis of 

offici author should be a public author or anoth natur or legal person govern 

by public law, or, where it be in the public interest to do so, includ for health purpos 

such a public health and social protect and the manag of health care services, by 

privat law, such a a profession association. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 26 
dgd 2 EN 


(46) the process of person data should also be regard to be law where it be necessari 

to protect an interest which be essenti for the life of the data subject or that of anoth 

natur person. process of person data base on the vital interest of anoth natur 

person should in principl take place onli where the process cannot be manifestli base 

on anoth legal basis. some type of process may serv both import ground of 

public interest and the vital interest of the data subject a for instanc when process be 

necessari for humanitarian purposes, includ for monitor epidem and their spread 

or in situat of humanitarian emergencies, in particular in situat of natur and 

man-mad disasters. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 27 
dgd 2 EN 


(47) the legitim interest of a controller, includ those of a control to which the 

person data may be disclosed, or of a third party, may provid a legal basi for 

processing, provid that the interest or the fundament right and freedom of the data 

subject be not overriding, take into consider the reason expect of data 

subject base on their relationship with the controller. such legitim interest could exist 

for exampl where there be a relev and appropri relationship between the data subject 

and the control in situat such a where the data subject be a client or in the servic of 

the controller. At ani rate the exist of a legitim interest would need care 

assess includ whether a data subject can reason expect at the time and in the 

context of the collect of the person data that process for that purpos may take 

place. the interest and fundament right of the data subject could in particular overrid 

the interest of the data control where person data be process in circumst where 

data subject do not reason expect further processing. given that it be for the legisl 

to provid by law for the legal basi for public author to process person data, that 

legal basi should not appli to the process by public author in the perform of 

their tasks. the process of person data strictli necessari for the purpos of 

prevent fraud also constitut a legitim interest of the data control concerned. the 

process of person data for direct market purpos may be regard a carri out 

for a legitim interest. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 28 
dgd 2 EN 


(48) control that be part of a group of undertak or institut affili to a central 

bodi may have a legitim interest in transmit person data within the group of 

undertak for intern administr purposes, includ the process of clients' or 

employees' person data. the gener principl for the transfer of person data, within a 

group of undertakings, to an undertak locat in a third countri remain unaffected. 

(49) the process of person data to the extent strictli necessari and proportion for the 

purpos of ensur network and inform security, i.e. the abil of a network or an 

inform system to resist, at a give level of confidence, accident event or unlaw 

or malici action that compromis the availability, authenticity, integr and 

confidenti of store or transmit person data, and the secur of the relat 

servic offer by, or access via, those network and systems, by public authorities, by 

comput emerg respons team (certs), comput secur incid respons team 

(csirts), by provid of electron commun network and servic and by 

provid of secur technolog and services, constitut a legitim interest of the data 

control concerned. thi could, for example, includ prevent unauthoris access to 

electron commun network and malici code distribut and stop 'denial 

of service' attack and damag to comput and electron commun systems. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 29 
dgd 2 EN 


(50) the process of person data for purpos other than those for which the person data 

be initi collect should be allow onli where the process be compat with the 

purpos for which the person data be initi collected. In such a case, no legal basi 

separ from that which allow the collect of the person data be required. If the 

process be necessari for the perform of a task carri out in the public interest or in 

the exercis of offici author vest in the controller, union or member state law may 

determin and specifi the task and purpos for which the further process should be 

regard a compat and lawful. further process for archiv purpos in the public 

interest, scientif or histor research purpos or statist purpos should be 

consid to be compat law process operations. the legal basi provid by 

union or member state law for the process of person data may also provid a legal 

basi for further processing. In order to ascertain whether a purpos of further process be 

compat with the purpos for which the person data be initi collected, the 

controller, after have met all the requir for the law of the origin 

processing, should take into account, inter alia: ani link between those purpos and the 

purpos of the intend further processing; the context in which the person data have 

be collected, in particular the reason expect of data subject base on their 

relationship with the control a to their further use; the natur of the person data; the 

consequ of the intend further process for data subjects; and the exist of 

appropri safeguard in both the origin and intend further process operations. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 30 
dgd 2 EN 


where the data subject have give consent or the process be base on union or member 

state law which constitut a necessari and proportion measur in a democrat societi 

to safeguard, in particular, import object of gener public interest, the control 

should be allow to further process the person data irrespect of the compat of 

the purposes. In ani case, the applic of the principl set out in thi regul and in 

particular the inform of the data subject on those other purpos and on hi or her 

right includ the right to object, should be ensured. indic possibl crimin act or 

threat to public secur by the control and transmit the relev person data in 

individu case or in sever case relat to the same crimin act or threat to public 

secur to a compet author should be regard a be in the legitim interest 

pursu by the controller. however, such transmiss in the legitim interest of the 

control or further process of person data should be prohibit if the process be 

not compat with a legal, profession or other bind oblig of secrecy. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 31 
dgd 2 EN 


(51) person data which are, by their nature, particularli sensit in relat to fundament 

right and freedom merit specif protect a the context of their process could creat 

signific risk to the fundament right and freedoms. those person data should 

includ person data reveal racial or ethnic origin, wherebi the use of the term 'racial 

origin' in thi regul do not impli an accept by the union of theori which 

attempt to determin the exist of separ human races. the process of photograph 

should not systemat be consid to be process of special categori of person 

data a they be cover by the definit of biometr data onli when process through a 

specif technic mean allow the uniqu identif or authent of a natur 

person. such person data should not be processed, unless process be allow in 

specif case set out in thi regulation, take into account that member state law may 

lay down specif provis on data protect in order to adapt the applic of the 

rule of thi regul for complianc with a legal oblig or for the perform of a 

task carri out in the public interest or in the exercis of offici author vest in the 

controller. In addit to the specif requir for such processing, the gener 

principl and other rule of thi regul should apply, in particular a regard the 

condit for law processing. derog from the gener prohibit for process 

such special categori of person data should be explicitli provided, inter alia, where the 

data subject give hi or her explicit consent or in respect of specif need in particular 

where the process be carri out in the cours of legitim activ by certain 

associ or foundat the purpos of which be to permit the exercis of fundament 

freedoms. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 32 
dgd 2 EN 


(52) derog from the prohibit on process special categori of person data should 

also be allow when provid for in union or member state law and subject to suitabl 

safeguards, so a to protect person data and other fundament rights, where it be in the 

public interest to do so, in particular process person data in the field of employ 

law, social protect law includ pension and for health security, monitor and alert 

purposes, the prevent or control of communic diseas and other seriou threat to 

health. such a derog may be make for health purposes, includ public health and the 

manag of health-car services, especi in order to ensur the qualiti and 

cost-effect of the procedur use for settl claim for benefit and servic in the 

health insur system, or for archiv purpos in the public interest, scientif or 

histor research purpos or statist purposes. A derog should also allow the 

process of such person data where necessari for the establishment, exercis or 

defenc of legal claims, whether in court proceed or in an administr or 

out-of-court procedure. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 33 
dgd 2 EN 


(53) special categori of person data which merit high protect should be process for 

health-rel purpos onli where necessari to achiev those purpos for the benefit of 

natur person and societi a a whole, in particular in the context of the manag of 

health or social care servic and systems, includ process by the manag and 

central nation health author of such data for the purpos of qualiti control, 

manag inform and the gener nation and local supervis of the health or 

social care system, and ensur continu of health or social care and cross-bord 

healthcar or health security, monitor and alert purposes, or for archiv purpos in 

the public interest, scientif or histor research purpos or statist purposes, base 

on union or member state law which have to meet an object of public interest, a well a 

for studi conduct in the public interest in the area of public health. therefore, thi 

regul should provid for harmonis condit for the process of special 

categori of person data concern health, in respect of specif needs, in particular 

where the process of such data be carri out for certain health-rel purpos by 

person subject to a legal oblig of profession secrecy. union or member state law 

should provid for specif and suitabl measur so a to protect the fundament right 

and the person data of natur persons. member state should be allow to maintain or 

introduc further conditions, includ limitations, with regard to the process of genet 

data, biometr data or data concern health. however, thi should not hamper the free 

flow of person data within the union when those condit appli to cross-bord 

process of such data. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 34 
dgd 2 EN 


(54) the process of special categori of person data may be necessari for reason of 

public interest in the area of public health without consent of the data subject. such 

process should be subject to suitabl and specif measur so a to protect the right 

and freedom of natur persons. In that context, 'public health' should be interpret a 

defin in regul (ec) No 1338/2008 of the european parliament and of the council1, 

name all element relat to health, name health status, includ morbid and 

disability, the determin have an effect on that health status, health care needs, 

resourc alloc to health care, the provis of, and univers access to, health care a 

well a health care expenditur and financing, and the caus of mortality. such process 

of data concern health for reason of public interest should not result in person data 

be process for other purpos by third parti such a employ or insur and 

bank companies. 

(55) moreover, the process of person data by offici author for the purpos of 

achiev the aims, laid down in constitut law or intern public law, of offici 

recognis religi associations, be carri out on ground of public interest. 

(56) where in the cours of elector activities, the oper of the democrat system in a 

member state requir that polit parti compil person data on people' polit 

opinions, the process of such data may be permit for reason of public interest, 

provid that appropri safeguard be established. 


1 regul (ec) No 1338/2008 of the european parliament and of the council of 

16 decemb 2008 on commun statist on public health and health and safeti at work 
(oj L 354, 31.12.2008, p. 70). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 35 
dgd 2 EN 


(57) If the person data process by a control do not permit the control to identifi a 

natur person, the data control should not be oblig to acquir addit inform 

in order to identifi the data subject for the sole purpos of compli with ani provis of 

thi regulation. however, the control should not refus to take addit inform 

provid by the data subject in order to support the exercis of hi or her rights. 

identif should includ the digit identif of a data subject, for exampl 

through authent mechan such a the same credentials, use by the data subject to 

log-in to the on-lin servic offer by the data controller. 

(58) the principl of transpar requir that ani inform address to the public or to 

the data subject be concise, easili access and easi to understand, and that clear and 

plain languag and, additionally, where appropriate, visualis be used. such 

inform could be provid in electron form, for example, when address to the 

public, through a website. thi be of particular relev in situat where the 

prolifer of actor and the technolog complex of practic make it difficult for the 

data subject to know and understand whether, by whom and for what purpos person data 

relat to him or her be be collected, such a in the case of onlin advertising. given 

that child merit specif protection, ani inform and communication, where 

process be address to a child, should be in such a clear and plain languag that the 

child can easili understand. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 36 
dgd 2 EN 


(59) modal should be provid for facilit the exercis of the data subject' right under 

thi regulation, includ mechan to request and, if applicable, obtain, free of charge, 

in particular, access to and rectif or erasur of person data and the exercis of the 

right to object. the control should also provid mean for request to be make 

electronically, especi where person data be process by electron means. the 

control should be oblig to respond to request from the data subject without undu 

delay and at the late within one month and to give reason where the control do not 

intend to compli with ani such requests. 

(60) the principl of fair and transpar process requir that the data subject be inform 

of the exist of the process oper and it purposes. the control should provid 

the data subject with ani further inform necessari to ensur fair and transpar 

process take into account the specif circumst and context in which the 

person data be processed. furthermore, the data subject should be inform of the 

exist of profil and the consequ of such profiling. where the person data be 

collect from the data subject, the data subject should also be inform whether he or she 

be oblig to provid the person data and of the consequences, where he or she do not 

provid such data. that inform may be provid in combin with standardis 

icon in order to give in an easili visible, intellig and clearli legibl manner, a 

meaning overview of the intend processing. where the icon be present 

electronically, they should be machine-readable. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 37 
dgd 2 EN 


(61) the inform in relat to the process of person data relat to the data subject 

should be give to him or her at the time of collect from the data subject, or, where the 

person data be obtain from anoth source, within a reason period, depend on 

the circumst of the case. where person data can be legitim disclos to anoth 

recipient, the data subject should be inform when the person data be first disclos to 

the recipient. where the control intend to process the person data for a purpos other 

than that for which they be collected, the control should provid the data subject prior 

to that further process with inform on that other purpos and other necessari 

information. where the origin of the person data cannot be provid to the data subject 

becaus variou sourc have be used, gener inform should be provided. 

(62) however, it be not necessari to impos the oblig to provid inform where the 

data subject alreadi poss the information, where the record or disclosur of the 

person data be expressli laid down by law or where the provis of inform to the 

data subject prof to be imposs or would involv a disproportion effort. the latter 

could in particular be the case where process be carri out for archiv purpos in the 

public interest, scientif or histor research purpos or statist purposes. In that 

regard, the number of data subjects, the age of the data and ani appropri safeguard 

adopt should be take into consideration. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 38 
dgd 2 EN 


(63) A data subject should have the right of access to person data which have be collect 

concern him or her, and to exercis that right easili and at reason intervals, in order 

to be awar of, and verify, the law of the processing. thi includ the right for data 

subject to have access to data concern their health, for exampl the data in their 

medic record contain inform such a diagnoses, examin results, 

assess by treat physician and ani treatment or intervent provided. everi data 

subject should therefor have the right to know and obtain commun in particular 

with regard to the purpos for which the person data be processed, where possibl the 

period for which the person data be processed, the recipi of the person data, the 

logic involv in ani automat person data process and, at least when base on 

profiling, the consequ of such processing. where possible, the control should be 

abl to provid remot access to a secur system which would provid the data subject 

with direct access to hi or her person data. that right should not advers affect the 

right or freedom of others, includ trade secret or intellectu properti and in 

particular the copyright protect the software. however, the result of those 

consider should not be a refus to provid all inform to the data subject. where 

the control process a larg quantiti of inform concern the data subject, the 

control should be abl to request that, befor the inform be delivered, the data 

subject specifi the inform or process activ to which the request relates. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 39 
dgd 2 EN 


(64) the control should use all reason measur to verifi the ident of a data subject 

who request access, in particular in the context of onlin servic and onlin identifiers. A 

control should not retain person data for the sole purpos of be abl to react to 

potenti requests. 

(65) A data subject should have the right to have person data concern him or her rectifi 

and a 'right to be forgotten' where the retent of such data infring thi regul or 

union or member state law to which the control be subject. In particular, a data subject 

should have the right to have hi or her person data eras and no longer process where 

the person data be no longer necessari in relat to the purpos for which they be 

collect or otherwis processed, where a data subject have withdrawn hi or her consent or 

object to the process of person data concern him or her, or where the process 

of hi or her person data do not otherwis compli with thi regulation. that right be 

relev in particular where the data subject have give hi or her consent a a child and be 

not fulli awar of the risk involv by the processing, and late want to remov such 

person data, especi on the internet. the data subject should be abl to exercis that 

right notwithstand the fact that he or she be no longer a child. however, the further 

retent of the person data should be law where it be necessary, for exercis the 

right of freedom of express and information, for complianc with a legal obligation, for 

the perform of a task carri out in the public interest or in the exercis of offici 

author vest in the controller, on the ground of public interest in the area of public 

health, for archiv purpos in the public interest, scientif or histor research 

purpos or statist purposes, or for the establishment, exercis or defenc of legal 

claims. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 40 
dgd 2 EN 


(66) To strengthen the right to be forgotten in the onlin environment, the right to erasur 

should also be extend in such a way that a control who have make the person data 

public should be oblig to inform the control which be process such person data 

to eras ani link to, or copi or replic of those person data. In do so, that 

control should take reason steps, take into account avail technolog and the 

mean avail to the controller, includ technic measures, to inform the control 

which be process the person data of the data subject' request. 

(67) method by which to restrict the process of person data could include, inter alia, 

temporarili move the select data to anoth process system, make the select 

person data unavail to users, or temporarili remov publish data from a website. 

In autom file systems, the restrict of process should in principl be ensur by 

technic mean in such a manner that the person data be not subject to further 

process oper and cannot be changed. the fact that the process of person data 

be restrict should be clearli indic in the system. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 41 
dgd 2 EN 


(68) To further strengthen the control over hi or her own data, where the process of 

person data be carri out by autom means, the data subject should also be allow to 

receiv person data concern him or her which he or she have provid to a control in 

a structured, commonli used, machine-read and interoper format, and to transmit it 

to anoth controller. data control should be encourag to develop interoper 

format that enabl data portability. that right should appli where the data subject 

provid the person data on the basi of hi or her consent or the process be necessari 

for the perform of a contract. It should not appli where process be base on a legal 

ground other than consent or contract. By it veri nature, that right should not be exercis 

against control process person data in the exercis of their public duties. It should 

therefor not appli where the process of the person data be necessari for complianc 

with a legal oblig to which the control be subject or for the perform of a task 

carri out in the public interest or in the exercis of an offici author vest in the 

controller. the data subject' right to transmit or receiv person data concern him or 

her should not creat an oblig for the control to adopt or maintain process 

system which be technic compatible. where, in a certain set of person data, more 

than one data subject be concerned, the right to receiv the person data should be without 

prejudic to the right and freedom of other data subject in accord with thi 

regulation. furthermore, that right should not prejudic the right of the data subject to 

obtain the erasur of person data and the limit of that right a set out in thi 

regul and should, in particular, not impli the erasur of person data concern the 

data subject which have be provid by him or her for the perform of a contract to 

the extent that and for a long a the person data be necessari for the perform of 

that contract. where technic feasible, the data subject should have the right to have the 

person data transmit directli from one control to another. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 42 
dgd 2 EN 


(69) where person data might law be process becaus process be necessari for the 

perform of a task carri out in the public interest or in the exercis of offici 

author vest in the controller, or on ground of the legitim interest of a control or 

a third party, a data subject should, nevertheless, be entitl to object to the process of 

ani person data relat to hi or her particular situation. It should be for the control to 

demonstr that it compel legitim interest overrid the interest or the 

fundament right and freedom of the data subject. 

(70) where person data be process for the purpos of direct marketing, the data subject 

should have the right to object to such processing, includ profil to the extent that it be 

relat to such direct marketing, whether with regard to initi or further processing, at ani 

time and free of charge. that right should be explicitli brought to the attent of the data 

subject and present clearli and separ from ani other information. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 43 
dgd 2 EN 


(71) the data subject should have the right not to be subject to a decision, which may includ a 

measure, evalu person aspect relat to him or her which be base sole on 

autom process and which produc legal effect concern him or her or similarli 

significantli affect him or her, such a automat refus of an onlin credit applic or 

e-recruit practic without ani human intervention. such process includ 'profiling' 

that consist of ani form of autom process of person data evalu the person 

aspect relat to a natur person, in particular to analys or predict aspect concern 

the data subject' perform at work, econom situation, health, person prefer or 

interests, reliabl or behaviour, locat or movements, where it produc legal effect 

concern him or her or similarli significantli affect him or her. however, 

decision-mak base on such processing, includ profiling, should be allow where 

expressli authoris by union or member state law to which the control be subject, 

includ for fraud and tax-evas monitor and prevent purpos conduct in 

accord with the regulations, standard and recommend of union institut or 

nation oversight bodi and to ensur the secur and reliabl of a servic provid by 

the controller, or necessari for the enter or perform of a contract between the data 

subject and a controller, or when the data subject have give hi or her explicit consent. In 

ani case, such process should be subject to suitabl safeguards, which should includ 

specif inform to the data subject and the right to obtain human intervention, to 

express hi or her point of view, to obtain an explan of the decis reach after such 

assess and to challeng the decision. such measur should not concern a child. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 44 
dgd 2 EN 


In order to ensur fair and transpar process in respect of the data subject, take into 

account the specif circumst and context in which the person data be processed, 

the control should use appropri mathemat or statist procedur for the 

profiling, implement technic and organis measur appropri to ensure, in 

particular, that factor which result in inaccuraci in person data be correct and the 

risk of error be minimised, secur person data in a manner that take account of the 

potenti risk involv for the interest and right of the data subject and that prevents, 

inter alia, discriminatori effect on natur person on the basi of racial or ethnic origin, 

polit opinion, religion or beliefs, trade union membership, genet or health statu or 

sexual orientation, or that result in measur have such an effect. autom 

decision-mak and profil base on special categori of person data should be 

allow onli under specif conditions. 

(72) profil be subject to the rule of thi regul govern the process of person 

data, such a the legal ground for process or data protect principles. the european 

data protect board establish by thi regul (the 'board') should be abl to issu 

guidanc in that context. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 45 
dgd 2 EN 


(73) restrict concern specif principl and concern the right of information, access 

to and rectif or erasur of person data and on the right to data portability, the right 

to object, decis base on profiling, a well a on the commun of a person data 

breach to a data subject and on certain relat oblig of the control may be 

impos by union or member state law, a far a necessari and proportion in a 

democrat societi to safeguard public security, includ the protect of human life 

especi in respons to natur or man make disasters, the prevention, investig and 

prosecut of crimin offenc or the execut of crimin penalties, includ the 

safeguard against and the prevent of threat to public security, or of breach of 

ethic for regul professions, other import object of gener public interest of the 

union or of a member state, in particular an import econom or financi interest of 

the union or of a member state, the keep of public regist kept for reason of gener 

public interest, further process of archiv person data to provid specif inform 

relat to the polit behaviour under former totalitarian state regim or the protect of 

the data subject or the right and freedom of others, includ social protection, public 

health and humanitarian purposes. those restrict should be in accord with the 

requir set out in the charter and in the european convent for the protect of 

human right and fundament freedoms. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 46 
dgd 2 EN 


(74) the respons and liabil of the control for ani process of person data carri 

out by the control or on the controller' behalf should be established. In particular, the 

control should be oblig to implement appropri and effect measur and be abl 

to demonstr the complianc of process activ with thi regulation, includ the 

effect of the measures. those measur should take into account the nature, scope, 

context and purpos of the process and the risk to the right and freedom of natur 

persons. 

(75) the risk to the right and freedom of natur person , of vari likelihood and severity, 

may result from person data process which could lead to physical, materi or 

non-materi damage, in particular: where the process may give rise to discrimination, 

ident theft or fraud, financi loss, damag to the reputation, loss of confidenti of 

person data protect by profession secrecy, unauthoris revers of 

pseudonymisation, or ani other signific econom or social disadvantage; where data 

subject might be depriv of their right and freedom or prevent from exercis 

control over their person data; where person data be process which reveal racial or 

ethnic origin, polit opinions, religion or philosoph beliefs, trade-union membership, 

and the process of genet data, data concern health or data concern sex life or 

crimin convict and offenc or relat secur measures; where person aspect be 

evaluated, in particular analys or predict aspect concern perform at work, 

econom situation, health, person prefer or interests, reliabl or behaviour, 

locat or movements, in order to creat or use person profiles; where person data of 

vulner natur persons, in particular of children, be processed; or where process 

involv a larg amount of person data and affect a larg number of data subjects. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 47 
dgd 2 EN 


(76) the likelihood and sever of the risk to the right and freedom of the data subject should 

be determin by refer to the nature, scope, context and purpos of the processing. 

risk should be evalu on the basi of an object assessment, by which it be establish 

whether data process oper involv a risk or a high risk. 

(77) guidanc on the implement of appropri measur and on the demonstr of 

complianc by the control or the processor, especi a regard the identif of the 

risk relat to the processing, their assess in term of origin, nature, likelihood and 

severity, and the identif of best practic to mitig the risk, could be provid in 

particular by mean of approv code of conduct, approv certifications, guidelin 

provid by the board or indic provid by a data protect officer. the board may 

also issu guidelin on process oper that be consid to be unlik to result in 

a high risk to the right and freedom of natur person and indic what measur may 

be suffici in such case to address such risk. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 48 
dgd 2 EN 


(78) the protect of the right and freedom of natur person with regard to the process 

of person data requir that appropri technic and organis measur be take to 

ensur that the requir of thi regul be met. In order to be abl to demonstr 

complianc with thi regulation, the control should adopt intern polici and 

implement measur which meet in particular the principl of data protect by design 

and data protect by default. such measur could consist, inter alia, of minimis the 

process of person data, pseudonymis person data a soon a possible, 

transpar with regard to the function and process of person data, enabl the data 

subject to monitor the data processing, enabl the control to creat and improv 

secur features. when developing, designing, select and use applications, servic 

and product that be base on the process of person data or process person data to 

fulfil their task, produc of the products, servic and applic should be encourag 

to take into account the right to data protect when develop and design such 

products, servic and applic and, with due regard to the state of the art, to make sure 

that control and processor be abl to fulfil their data protect obligations.th 

principl of data protect by design and by default should also be take into 

consider in the context of public tenders. 

(79) the protect of the right and freedom of data subject a well a the respons and 

liabil of control and processors, also in relat to the monitor by and measur of 

supervisori authorities, requir a clear alloc of the respons under thi 

regulation, includ where a control determin the purpos and mean of the 

process jointli with other control or where a process oper be carri out on 

behalf of a controller. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 49 
dgd 2 EN 


(80) where a control or a processor not establish in the union be process person data 

of data subject who be in the union whose process activ be relat to the offer 

of good or services, irrespect of whether a payment of the data subject be required, to 

such data subject in the union, or to the monitor of their behaviour a far a their 

behaviour take place within the union, the control or the processor should design a 

representative, unless the process be occasional, do not includ processing, on a larg 

scale, of special categori of person data or the process of person data relat to 

crimin convict and offences, and be unlik to result in a risk to the right and 

freedom of natur persons, take into account the nature, context, scope and purpos of 

the process or if the control be a public author or body. the repres should 

act on behalf of the control or the processor and may be address by ani supervisori 

authority. the repres should be explicitli design by a write mandat of the 

control or the processor to act on it behalf with regard to their oblig under thi 

regulation. the design of such repres do not affect the respons and 

liabil of the control or the processor under thi regulation. such repres should 

perform it task accord to the mandat receiv from the control or processor, 

includ to cooper with the compet supervisori author on ani action take in 

ensur complianc with thi regulation. the design repres should be subject 

to enforc proceed in the event of non-compli by the control or processor. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 50 
dgd 2 EN 


(81) To ensur complianc with the requir of thi regul in respect of the process 

to be carri out by the processor on behalf of the controller, when entrust a processor 

with process activities, the control should use onli processor provid suffici 

guarantees, in particular in term of expert knowledge, reliabl and resources, to 

implement technic and organis measur which will meet the requir of thi 

regulation, includ for the secur of processing. the adher of the processor to an 

approv code of conduct or an approv certif mechan may be use a an 

element to demonstr complianc with the oblig of the controller. the carrying-out 

of process by a processor should be govern by a contract or other legal act under 

union or member state law, bind the processor to the controller, set out the 

subject-matt and durat of the processing, the natur and purpos of the processing, 

the type of person data and categori of data subjects, take into account the specif 

task and respons of the processor in the context of the process to be carri out 

and the risk to the right and freedom of the data subject. the control and processor 

may choos to use an individu contract or standard contractu claus which be adopt 

either directli by the commiss or by a supervisori author in accord with the 

consist mechan and then adopt by the commission. after the complet of the 

process on behalf of the controller, the processor should, at the choic of the controller, 

return or delet the person data, unless there be a requir to store the person data 

under union or member state law to which the processor be subject. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 51 
dgd 2 EN 


(82) In order to demonstr complianc with thi regulation, the control or processor should 

maintain record of process activ under it responsibility. each control and 

processor should be oblig to cooper with the supervisori author and make those 

records, on request, avail to it, so that it might serv for monitor those process 

operations. 

(83) In order to maintain secur and to prevent process in infring of thi regulation, 

the control or processor should evalu the risk inher in the process and 

implement measur to mitig those risks, such a encryption. those measur should 

ensur an appropri level of security, includ confidentiality, take into account the 

stateof the art and the cost of implement in relat to the risk and the natur of the 

person data to be protected. In assess data secur risk, consider should be give 

to the risk that be present by person data processing, such a accident or unlaw 

destruction, loss, alteration, unauthoris disclosur of, or access to, person data 

transmitted, store or otherwis process which may in particular lead to physical, 

materi or non-materi damage. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 52 
dgd 2 EN 


(84) In order to enhanc complianc with thi regul where process oper be like 

to result in a high risk to the right and freedom of natur persons, the control should 

be respons for the carrying-out of a data protect impact assess to evaluate, in 

particular, the origin, nature, particular and sever of that risk. the outcom of the 

assess should be take into account when determin the appropri measur to be 

take in order to demonstr that the process of person data compli with thi 

regulation. where a data-protect impact assess indic that process 

oper involv a high risk which the control cannot mitig by appropri 

measur in term of avail technolog and cost of implementation, a consult of 

the supervisori author should take place prior to the processing. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 53 
dgd 2 EN 


(85) A person data breach may, if not address in an appropri and time manner, result in 

physical, materi or non-materi damag to natur person such a loss of control over 

their person data or limit of their rights, discrimination, ident theft or fraud, 

financi loss, unauthoris revers of pseudonymisation, damag to reputation, loss of 

confidenti of person data protect by profession secreci or ani other signific 

econom or social disadvantag to the natur person concerned. therefore, a soon a the 

control becom awar that a person data breach have occurred, the control should 

notifi the person data breach to the supervisori author without undu delay and, 

where feasible, not late than 72 hour after have becom awar of it, unless the 

control be abl to demonstrate, in accord with the account principle, that the 

person data breach be unlik to result in a risk to the right and freedom of natur 

persons. where such notif cannot be achiev within 72 hours, the reason for the 

delay should accompani the notif and inform may be provid in phase 

without undu further delay. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 54 
dgd 2 EN 


(86) the control should commun to the data subject a person data breach, without 

undu delay, where that person data breach be like to result in a high risk to the right 

and freedom of the natur person in order to allow him or her to take the necessari 

precautions. the commun should describ the natur of the person data breach a 

well a recommend for the natur person concern to mitig potenti advers 

effects. such commun to data subject should be make a soon a reason 

feasibl and in close cooper with the supervisori authority, respect guidanc 

provid by it or by other relev author such a law-enforc authorities. for 

example, the need to mitig an immedi risk of damag would call for prompt 

commun with data subject wherea the need to implement appropri measur 

against continu or similar person data breach may justifi more time for 

communication. 

(87) It should be ascertain whether all appropri technolog protect and organis 

measur have be implement to establish immedi whether a person data breach 

have take place and to inform promptli the supervisori author and the data subject. the 

fact that the notif be make without undu delay should be establish take into 

account in particular the natur and graviti of the person data breach and it 

consequ and advers effect for the data subject. such notif may result in an 

intervent of the supervisori author in accord with it task and power laid down 

in thi regulation. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 55 
dgd 2 EN 


(88) In set detail rule concern the format and procedur applic to the notif 

of person data breaches, due consider should be give to the circumst of that 

breach, includ whether or not person data have be protect by appropri technic 

protect measures, effect limit the likelihood of ident fraud or other form of 

misuse. moreover, such rule and procedur should take into account the legitim 

interest of law-enforc author where earli disclosur could unnecessarili hamper 

the investig of the circumst of a person data breach. 

(89) direct 95/46/ec provid for a gener oblig to notifi the process of person 

data to the supervisori authorities. while that oblig produc administr and 

financi burdens, it do not in all case contribut to improv the protect of person 

data. such indiscrimin gener notif oblig should therefor be abolished, 

and replac by effect procedur and mechan which focu instead on those type 

of process oper which be like to result in a high risk to the right and freedom 

of natur person by virtu of their nature, scope, context and purposes. such type of 

process oper may be those which in, particular, involv use new technologies, 

or be of a new kind and where no data protect impact assess have be carri out 

befor by the controller, or where they becom necessari in the light of the time that have 

elaps sinc the initi processing. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 56 
dgd 2 EN 


(90) In such cases, a data protect impact assess should be carri out by the control 

prior to the process in order to ass the particular likelihood and sever of the high 

risk, take into account the nature, scope, context and purpos of the process and the 

sourc of the risk. that impact assess should include, in particular, the measures, 

safeguard and mechan envisag for mitig that risk, ensur the protect of 

person data and demonstr complianc with thi regulation. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 57 
dgd 2 EN 


(91) thi should in particular appli to large-scal process oper which aim to process a 

consider amount of person data at regional, nation or supran level and which 

could affect a larg number of data subject and which be like to result in a high risk, for 

example, on account of their sensitivity, where in accord with the achiev state of 

technolog knowledg a new technolog be use on a larg scale a well a to other 

process oper which result in a high risk to the right and freedom of data 

subjects, in particular where those oper render it more difficult for data subject to 

exercis their rights. A data protect impact assess should also be make where 

person data be process for take decis regard specif natur person 

follow ani systemat and extens evalu of person aspect relat to natur 

person base on profil those data or follow the process of special categori of 

person data, biometr data, or data on crimin convict and offenc or relat 

secur measures. A data protect impact assess be equal requir for monitor 

publicli access area on a larg scale, especi when use optic-electron devic or 

for ani other oper where the compet supervisori author consid that the 

process be like to result in a high risk to the right and freedom of data subjects, in 

particular becaus they prevent data subject from exercis a right or use a servic or a 

contract, or becaus they be carri out systemat on a larg scale. the process of 

person data should not be consid to be on a larg scale if the process concern 

person data from patient or client by an individu physician, other health care 

profession or lawyer. In such cases, a data protect impact assess should not be 

mandatory. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 58 
dgd 2 EN 


(92) there be circumst under which it may be reason and econom for the subject 

of a data protect impact assess to be broader than a singl project, for exampl 

where public author or bodi intend to establish a common applic or process 

platform or where sever control plan to introduc a common applic or process 

environ across an industri sector or segment or for a wide use horizont activity. 

(93) In the context of the adopt of the member state law on which the perform of the 

task of the public author or public bodi be base and which regul the specif 

process oper or set of oper in question, member state may deem it 

necessari to carri out such assess prior to the process activities. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 59 
dgd 2 EN 


(94) where a data protect impact assess indic that the process would, in the 

absenc of safeguards, secur measur and mechan to mitig the risk, result in a 

high risk to the right and freedom of natur person and the control be of the opinion 

that the risk cannot be mitig by reason mean in term of avail technolog 

and cost of implementation, the supervisori author should be consult prior to the 

start of process activities. such high risk be like to result from certain type of 

process and the extent and frequenc of processing, which may result also in a 

realis of damag or interfer with the right and freedom of the natur person. 

the supervisori author should respond to the request for consult within a specifi 

period. however, the absenc of a reaction of the supervisori author within that period 

should be without prejudic to ani intervent of the supervisori author in accord 

with it task and power laid down in thi regulation, includ the power to prohibit 

process operations. As part of that consult process, the outcom of a data 

protect impact assess carri out with regard to the process at issu may be 

submit to the supervisori authority, in particular the measur envisag to mitig the 

risk to the right and freedom of natur persons. 

(95) the processor should assist the controller, where necessari and upon request, in ensur 

complianc with the oblig deriv from the carri out of data protect impact 

assess and from prior consult of the supervisori authority. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 60 
dgd 2 EN 


(96) A consult of the supervisori author should also take place in the cours of the 

prepar of a legisl or regulatori measur which provid for the process of 

person data, in order to ensur complianc of the intend process with thi 

regul and in particular to mitig the risk involv for the data subject. 

(97) where the process be carri out by a public authority, except for court or independ 

judici author when act in their judici capacity, where, in the privat sector, 

process be carri out by a control whose core activ consist of process 

oper that requir regular and systemat monitor of the data subject on a larg 

scale, or where the core activ of the control or the processor consist of process on 

a larg scale of special categori of person data and data relat to crimin convict 

and offences, a person with expert knowledg of data protect law and practic should 

assist the control or processor to monitor intern complianc with thi regulation. In 

the privat sector, the core activ of a control relat to it primari activ and do 

not relat to the process of person data a ancillari activities. the necessari level of 

expert knowledg should be determin in particular accord to the data process 

oper carri out and the protect requir for the person data process by the 

control or the processor. such data protect officers, whether or not they be an 

employe of the controller, should be in a posit to perform their duti and task in an 

independ manner. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 61 
dgd 2 EN 


(98) associ or other bodi repres categori of control or processor should be 

encourag to draw up code of conduct, within the limit of thi regulation, so a to 

facilit the effect applic of thi regulation, take account of the specif 

characterist of the process carri out in certain sector and the specif need of 

micro, small and medium enterprises. In particular, such code of conduct could calibr 

the oblig of control and processors, take into account the risk like to result 

from the process for the right and freedom of natur persons. 

(99) when draw up a code of conduct, or when amend or extend such a code, 

associ and other bodi repres categori of control or processor should 

consult relev stakeholders, includ data subject where feasible, and have regard to 

submiss receiv and view express in respons to such consultations. 

(100) In order to enhanc transpar and complianc with thi regulation, the establish of 

certif mechan and data protect seal and mark should be encouraged, 

allow data subject to quickli ass the level of data protect of relev product 

and services. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 62 
dgd 2 EN 


(101) flow of person data to and from countri outsid the union and intern 

organis be necessari for the expans of intern trade and intern 

cooperation. the increas in such flow have rais new challeng and concern with 

regard to the protect of person data. however, when person data be transfer 

from the union to controllers, processor or other recipi in third countri or to 

intern organisations, the level of protect of natur person ensur in the union 

by thi regul should not be undermined, includ in case of onward transfer of 

person data from the third countri or intern organis to controllers, processor 

in the same or anoth third countri or intern organisation. In ani event, transfer to 

third countri and intern organis may onli be carri out in full complianc 

with thi regulation. A transfer could take place onli if, subject to the other provis of 

thi regulation, the condit laid down in the provis of thi regul relat to the 

transfer of person data to third countri or intern organis be compli with 

by the control or processor. 

(102) thi regul be without prejudic to intern agreement conclud between the 

union and third countri regul the transfer of person data includ appropri 

safeguard for the data subjects. member state may conclud intern agreement 

which involv the transfer of person data to third countri or intern organisations, 

a far a such agreement do not affect thi regul or ani other provis of union 

law and includ an appropri level of protect for the fundament right of the data 

subjects. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 63 
dgd 2 EN 


(103) the commiss may decid with effect for the entir union that a third country, a 

territori or specifi sector within a third country, or an intern organisation, offer 

an adequ level of data protection, thu provid legal certainti and uniform 

throughout the union a regard the third countri or intern organis which be 

consid to provid such level of protection. In such cases, transfer of person data to 

that third countri or intern organis may take place without the need to obtain 

ani further authorisation. the commiss may also decide, have give notic and a full 

statement set out the reason to the third countri or intern organisation, to 

revok such a decision. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 64 
dgd 2 EN 


(104) In line with the fundament valu on which the union be founded, in particular the 

protect of human rights, the commiss should, in it assess of the third country, 

or of a territori or specifi sector within a third country, take into account how a 

particular third countri respect the rule of law, access to justic a well a intern 

human right norm and standard and it gener and sector law, includ legisl 

concern public security, defenc and nation secur a well a public order and 

crimin law. the adopt of an adequaci decis with regard to a territori or a specifi 

sector in a third countri should take into account clear and object criteria, such a 

specif process activ and the scope of applic legal standard and legisl in 

forc in the third country. the third countri should offer guarante ensur an adequ 

level of protect essenti equival to that ensur within the union, in particular 

where person data be process in one or sever specif sectors. In particular, the third 

countri should ensur effect independ data protect supervis and should 

provid for cooper mechan with the member states' data protect authorities, 

and the data subject should be provid with effect and enforc right and effect 

administr and judici redress. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 65 
dgd 2 EN 


(105) apart from the intern commit the third countri or intern organis 

have enter into, the commiss should take account of oblig aris from the third 

country' or intern organisation' particip in multilater or region system in 

particular in relat to the protect of person data, a well a the implement of 

such obligations. In particular, the third country' access to the council of europ 

convent of 28 januari 1981 for the protect of individu with regard to the 

automat process of person data and it addit protocol should be take into 

account. the commiss should consult the board when assess the level of protect 

in third countri or intern organisations. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 66 
dgd 2 EN 


(106) the commiss should monitor the function of decis on the level of protect in a 

third country, a territori or specifi sector within a third country, or an intern 

organisation, and monitor the function of decis adopt on the basi of articl 25(6) 

or articl 26(4) of direct 95/46/ec. In it adequaci decisions, the commiss should 

provid for a period review mechan of their functioning. that period review should 

be conduct in consult with the third countri or intern organis in 

question and take into account all relev develop in the third countri or 

intern organisation. for the purpos of monitor and of carri out the period 

reviews, the commiss should take into consider the view and find of the 

european parliament and of the council a well a of other relev bodi and sources. 

the commiss should evaluate, within a reason time, the function of the latter 

decis and report ani relev find to the committe within the mean of 

regul (eu) No 182/2011 of the european parliament and of the council1 a 

establish under thi regulation, to the european parliament and to the council. 


1 regul (eu) No 182/2011 of the european parliament and of the council of 

16 februari 2011 lay down the rule and gener principl concern mechan for 
control by member state of the commission' exercis of implement power (oj L 55, 
28.2.2011, p. 13). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 67 
dgd 2 EN 


(107) the commiss may recognis that a third country, a territori or a specifi sector within 

a third country, or an intern organis no longer ensur an adequ level of data 

protection. consequ the transfer of person data to that third countri or intern 

organis should be prohibited, unless the requir in thi regul relat to 

transfer subject to appropri safeguards, includ bind corpor rules, and 

derog for specif situat be fulfilled. In that case, provis should be make for 

consult between the commiss and such third countri or intern 

organisations. the commiss should, in a time manner, inform the third countri or 

intern organis of the reason and enter into consult with it in order to 

remedi the situation. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 68 
dgd 2 EN 


(108) In the absenc of an adequaci decision, the control or processor should take measur to 

compens for the lack of data protect in a third countri by way of appropri 

safeguard for the data subject. such appropri safeguard may consist of make use of 

bind corpor rules, standard data protect claus adopt by the commission, 

standard data protect claus adopt by a supervisori author or contractu claus 

authoris by a supervisori authority. those safeguard should ensur complianc with 

data protect requir and the right of the data subject appropri to process 

within the union, includ the avail of enforc data subject right and of 

effect legal remedies, includ to obtain effect administr or judici redress and 

to claim compensation, in the union or in a third country. they should relat in particular 

to complianc with the gener principl relat to person data processing, the 

principl of data protect by design and by default. transfer may also be carri out by 

public author or bodi with public author or bodi in third countri or with 

intern organis with correspond duti or functions, includ on the basi 

of provis to be insert into administr arrangements, such a a memorandum of 

understanding, provid for enforc and effect right for data subjects. 

authoris by the compet supervisori author should be obtain when the 

safeguard be provid for in administr arrang that be not legal binding. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 69 
dgd 2 EN 


(109) the possibl for the control or processor to use standard data-protect claus 

adopt by the commiss or by a supervisori author should prevent control or 

processor neither from includ the standard data-protect claus in a wider contract, 

such a a contract between the processor and anoth processor, nor from add other 

claus or addit safeguard provid that they do not contradict, directli or indirectly, 

the standard contractu claus adopt by the commiss or by a supervisori author 

or prejudic the fundament right or freedom of the data subjects. control and 

processor should be encourag to provid addit safeguard via contractu 

commit that supplement standard protect clauses. 

(110) A group of undertakings, or a group of enterpris engag in a joint econom activity, 

should be abl to make use of approv bind corpor rule for it intern 

transfer from the union to organis within the same group of undertakings, or group 

of enterpris engag in a joint econom activity, provid that such corpor rule 

includ all essenti principl and enforc right to ensur appropri safeguard for 

transfer or categori of transfer of person data. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 70 
dgd 2 EN 


(111) provis should be make for the possibl for transfer in certain circumst where 

the data subject have give hi or her explicit consent, where the transfer be occasion and 

necessari in relat to a contract or a legal claim, regardless of whether in a judici 

procedur or whether in an administr or ani out-of-court procedure, includ 

procedur befor regulatori bodies. provis should also be make for the possibl for 

transfer where import ground of public interest laid down by union or member state 

law so requir or where the transfer be make from a regist establish by law and 

intend for consult by the public or person have a legitim interest. In the latter 

case, such a transfer should not involv the entireti of the person data or entir categori 

of the data contain in the regist and, when the regist be intend for consult by 

person have a legitim interest, the transfer should be make onli at the request of 

those person or, if they be to be the recipients, take into full account the interest and 

fundament right of the data subject. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 71 
dgd 2 EN 


(112) those derog should in particular appli to data transfer requir and necessari for 

import reason of public interest, for exampl in case of intern data exchang 

between competit authorities, tax or custom administrations, between financi 

supervisori authorities, between servic compet for social secur matters, or for 

public health, for exampl in the case of contact trace for contagi diseas or in order 

to reduc and/or elimin dope in sport. A transfer of person data should also be 

regard a law where it be necessari to protect an interest which be essenti for the data 

subject' or anoth person' vital interests, includ physic integr or life, if the data 

subject be incap of give consent. In the absenc of an adequaci decision, union or 

member state law may, for import reason of public interest, expressli set limit to the 

transfer of specif categori of data to a third countri or an intern organisation. 

member state should notifi such provis to the commission. ani transfer to an 

intern humanitarian organis of person data of a data subject who be physic 

or legal incap of give consent, with a view to accomplish a task incumb 

under the geneva convent or to compli with intern humanitarian law 

applic in arm conflicts, could be consid to be necessari for an import reason 

of public interest or becaus it be in the vital interest of the data subject. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 72 
dgd 2 EN 


(113) transfer which can be qualifi a not repetit and that onli concern a limit number 

of data subjects, could also be possibl for the purpos of the compel legitim 

interest pursu by the controller, when those interest be not overridden by the interest 

or right and freedom of the data subject and when the control have assess all the 

circumst surround the data transfer. the control should give particular 

consider to the natur of the person data, the purpos and durat of the propos 

process oper or operations, a well a the situat in the countri of origin, the 

third countri and the countri of final destination, and should provid suitabl safeguard to 

protect fundament right and freedom of natur person with regard to the process of 

their person data. such transfer should be possibl onli in residu case where none of 

the other ground for transfer be applicable. for scientif or histor research purpos 

or statist purposes, the legitim expect of societi for an increas of knowledg 

should be take into consideration. the control should inform the supervisori author 

and the data subject about the transfer. 

(114) In ani case, where the commiss have take no decis on the adequ level of data 

protect in a third country, the control or processor should make use of solut that 

provid data subject with enforc and effect right a regard the process of 

their data in the union onc those data have be transfer so that that they will continu 

to benefit from fundament right and safeguards. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 73 
dgd 2 EN 


(115) some third countri adopt laws, regul and other legal act which purport to directli 

regul the process activ of natur and legal person under the jurisdict of the 

member states. thi may includ judgment of court or tribun or decis of 

administr author in third countri requir a control or processor to transfer or 

disclos person data, and which be not base on an intern agreement, such a a 

mutual legal assist treaty, in forc between the request third countri and the union 

or a member state. the extraterritori applic of those laws, regul and other 

legal act may be in breach of intern law and may imped the attain of the 

protect of natur person ensur in the union by thi regulation. transfer should 

onli be allow where the condit of thi regul for a transfer to third countri be 

met. thi may inter alia be the case where the disclosur be necessari for an import 

ground of public interest recognis in union or member state law to which the control 

be subject. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 74 
dgd 2 EN 


(116) when person data move across border outsid the union it may put at increas risk 

the abil of natur person to exercis data protect right in particular to protect 

themselv from the unlaw use or disclosur of that information. At the same time, 

supervisori author may find that they be unabl to pursu complaint or conduct 

investig relat to the activ outsid their borders. their effort to work togeth 

in the cross-bord context may also be hamper by insuffici prevent or remedi 

powers, inconsist legal regimes, and practic obstacl like resourc constraints. 

therefore, there be a need to promot closer cooper among data protect supervisori 

author to help them exchang inform and carri out investig with their 

intern counterparts. for the purpos of develop intern cooper 

mechan to facilit and provid intern mutual assist for the enforc of 

legisl for the protect of person data, the commiss and the supervisori 

author should exchang inform and cooper in activ relat to the exercis 

of their power with compet author in third countries, base on reciproc and in 

accord with thi regulation. 

(117) the establish of supervisori author in member states, empow to perform 

their task and exercis their power with complet independence, be an essenti 

compon of the protect of natur person with regard to the process of their 

person data. member state should be abl to establish more than one supervisori 

authority, to reflect their constitutional, organis and administr structure. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 75 
dgd 2 EN 


(118) the independ of supervisori author should not mean that the supervisori 

author cannot be subject to control or monitor mechan regard their financi 

expenditur or to judici review. 

(119) where a member state establish sever supervisori authorities, it should establish by 

law mechan for ensur the effect particip of those supervisori author in 

the consist mechanism. that member state should in particular design the 

supervisori author which function a a singl contact point for the effect 

particip of those author in the mechanism, to ensur swift and smooth cooper 

with other supervisori authorities, the board and the commission. 

(120) each supervisori author should be provid with the financi and human resources, 

premis and infrastructur necessari for the effect perform of their tasks, 

includ those relat to mutual assist and cooper with other supervisori 

author throughout the union. each supervisori author should have a separate, 

public annual budget, which may be part of the overal state or nation budget. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 76 
dgd 2 EN 


(121) the gener condit for the member or member of the supervisori author should be 

laid down by law in each member state and should in particular provid that those 

member be to be appointed, by mean of a transpar procedure, either by the 

parliament, govern or the head of state of the member state on the basi of a propos 

from the government, a member of the government, the parliament or a chamber of the 

parliament, or by an independ bodi entrust under member state law. In order to 

ensur the independ of the supervisori authority, the member or member should act 

with integrity, refrain from ani action that be incompat with their duti and should not, 

dure their term of office, engag in ani incompat occupation, whether gain or not. 

the supervisori author should have it own staff, chosen by the supervisori author or 

an independ bodi establish by member state law, which should be subject to the 

exclus direct of the member or member of the supervisori authority. 

(122) each supervisori author should be compet on the territori of it own member state 

to exercis the power and to perform the task confer on it in accord with thi 

regulation. thi should cover in particular the process in the context of the activ of 

an establish of the control or processor on the territori of it own member state, 

the process of person data carri out by public author or privat bodi act in 

the public interest, process affect data subject on it territori or process carri 

out by a control or processor not establish in the union when target data subject 

resid on it territory. thi should includ handl complaint lodg by a data subject, 

conduct investig on the applic of thi regul and promot public 

awar of the risks, rules, safeguard and right in relat to the process of person 

data. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 77 
dgd 2 EN 


(123) the supervisori author should monitor the applic of the provis pursuant to 

thi regul and contribut to it consist applic throughout the union, in order 

to protect natur person in relat to the process of their person data and to 

facilit the free flow of person data within the intern market. for that purpose, the 

supervisori author should cooper with each other and with the commission, 

without the need for ani agreement between member state on the provis of mutual 

assist or on such cooperation. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 78 
dgd 2 EN 


(124) where the process of person data take place in the context of the activ of an 

establish of a control or a processor in the union and the control or processor be 

establish in more than one member state, or where process take place in the 

context of the activ of a singl establish of a control or processor in the union 

substanti affect or be like to substanti affect data subject in more than one 

member state, the supervisori author for the main establish of the control or 

processor or for the singl establish of the control or processor should act a lead 

authority. It should cooper with the other author concerned, becaus the control 

or processor have an establish on the territori of their member state, becaus data 

subject resid on their territori be substanti affected, or becaus a complaint have 

be lodg with them. also where a data subject not resid in that member state have 

lodg a complaint, the supervisori author with which such complaint have be lodg 

should also be a supervisori author concerned. within it task to issu guidelin on 

ani question cover the applic of thi regulation, the board should be abl to issu 

guidelin in particular on the criterion to be take into account in order to ascertain whether 

the process in question substanti affect data subject in more than one 

member state and on what constitut a relev and reason objection. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 79 
dgd 2 EN 


(125) the lead author should be compet to adopt bind decis regard measur 

appli the power confer on it in accord with thi regulation. In it capac a 

lead authority, the supervisori author should close involv and coordin the 

supervisori author concern in the decision-mak process. where the decis be to 

reject the complaint by the data subject in whole or in part, that decis should be adopt 

by the supervisori author with which the complaint have be lodged. 

(126) the decis should be agre jointli by the lead supervisori author and the supervisori 

author concern and should be direct toward the main or singl establish of 

the control or processor and be bind on the control and processor. the control 

or processor should take the necessari measur to ensur complianc with thi regul 

and the implement of the decis notifi by the lead supervisori author to the 

main establish of the control or processor a regard the process activ in the 

union. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 80 
dgd 2 EN 


(127) each supervisori author not act a the lead supervisori author should be 

compet to handl local case where the control or processor be establish in more 

than one member state, but the subject matter of the specif process concern onli 

process carri out in a singl member state and involv onli data subject in that 

singl member state, for example, where the subject matter concern the process of 

employees' person data in the specif employ context of a member state. In such 

cases, the supervisori author should inform the lead supervisori author without delay 

about the matter. after be informed, the lead supervisori author should decide, 

whether it will handl the case pursuant to the provis on cooper between the lead 

supervisori author and other supervisori authorit concern ('one-stop-shop 

mechanism'), or whether the supervisori author which inform it should handl the 

case at local level. when decid whether it will handl the case, the lead supervisori 

author should take into account whether there be an establish of the control or 

processor in the member state of the supervisori author which inform it in order to 

ensur effect enforc of a decis vis-à-vi the control or processor. where the 

lead supervisori author decid to handl the case, the supervisori author which 

inform it should have the possibl to submit a draft for a decision, of which the lead 

supervisori author should take utmost account when prepar it draft decis in that 

one-stop-shop mechanism. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 81 
dgd 2 EN 


(128) the rule on the lead supervisori author and the one-stop-shop mechan should not 

appli where the process be carri out by public author or privat bodi in the 

public interest. In such case the onli supervisori author compet to exercis the 

power confer to it in accord with thi regul should be the supervisori 

author of the member state where the public author or privat bodi be established. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 82 
dgd 2 EN 


(129) In order to ensur consist monitor and enforc of thi regul throughout the 

union, the supervisori author should have in each member state the same task and 

effect powers, includ power of investigation, correct power and sanctions, and 

authoris and advisori powers, in particular in case of complaint from natur 

persons, and without prejudic to the power of prosecutori author under 

member state law, to bring infring of thi regul to the attent of the judici 

author and engag in legal proceedings. such power should also includ the power to 

impos a temporari or definit limitation, includ a ban, on processing. member state 

may specifi other task relat to the protect of person data under thi regulation. 

the power of supervisori author should be exercis in accord with appropri 

procedur safeguard set out in union and member state law, impartially, fairli and 

within a reason time. In particular each measur should be appropriate, necessari and 

proportion in view of ensur complianc with thi regulation, take into account the 

circumst of each individu case, respect the right of everi person to be heard befor 

ani individu measur which would affect him or her advers be take and avoid 

superflu cost and excess inconveni for the person concerned. investigatori 

power a regard access to premis should be exercis in accord with specif 

requir in member state procedur law, such a the requir to obtain a prior 

judici authorisation. each legal bind measur of the supervisori author should be 

in writing, be clear and unambiguous, indic the supervisori author which have issu 

the measure, the date of issu of the measure, bear the signatur of the head, or a member 

of the supervisori author authoris by him or her, give the reason for the measure, and 

refer to the right of an effect remedy. thi should not preclud addit requir 

pursuant to member state procedur law. the adopt of a legal bind decis 

impli that it may give rise to judici review in the member state of the supervisori 

author that adopt the decision. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 83 
dgd 2 EN 


(130) where the supervisori author with which the complaint have be lodg be not the lead 

supervisori authority, the lead supervisori author should close cooper with the 

supervisori author with which the complaint have be lodg in accord with the 

provis on cooper and consist laid down in thi regulation. In such cases, the 

lead supervisori author should, when take measur intend to produc legal effects, 

includ the imposit of administr fines, take utmost account of the view of the 

supervisori author with which the complaint have be lodg and which should remain 

compet to carri out ani investig on the territori of it own member state in liaison 

with the compet supervisori authority. 

(131) where anoth supervisori author should act a a lead supervisori author for the 

process activ of the control or processor but the concret subject matter of a 

complaint or the possibl infring concern onli process activ of the control 

or processor in the member state where the complaint have be lodg or the possibl 

infring detect and the matter do not substanti affect or be not like to 

substanti affect data subject in other member states, the supervisori author 

receiv a complaint or detect or be inform otherwis of situat that entail 

possibl infring of thi regul should seek an amic settlement with the 

control and, if thi prof unsuccessful, exercis it full rang of powers. thi should 

include: specif process carri out in the territori of the member state of the 

supervisori author or with regard to data subject on the territori of that member state; 

process that be carri out in the context of an offer of good or servic specif 

aim at data subject in the territori of the member state of the supervisori authority; or 

process that have to be assess take into account relev legal oblig under 

member state law. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 84 
dgd 2 EN 


(132) awareness-rais activ by supervisori author address to the public should 

includ specif measur direct at control and processors, includ micro, small 

and medium-s enterprises, a well a natur person in particular in the educ 

context. 

(133) the supervisori author should assist each other in perform their task and provid 

mutual assistance, so a to ensur the consist applic and enforc of thi 

regul in the intern market. A supervisori author request mutual assist 

may adopt a provision measur if it receiv no respons to a request for mutual 

assist within one month of the receipt of that request by the other supervisori 

authority. 

(134) each supervisori author should, where appropriate, particip in joint oper with 

other supervisori authorities. the request supervisori author should be oblig to 

respond to the request within a specifi time period. 

(135) In order to ensur the consist applic of thi regul throughout the union, a 

consist mechan for cooper between the supervisori author should be 

established. that mechan should in particular appli where a supervisori author 

intend to adopt a measur intend to produc legal effect a regard process 

oper which substanti affect a signific number of data subject in sever 

member states. It should also appli where ani supervisori author concern or the 

commiss request that such matter should be handl in the consist mechanism. 

that mechan should be without prejudic to ani measur that the commiss may 

take in the exercis of it power under the treaties. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 85 
dgd 2 EN 


(136) In appli the consist mechanism, the board should, within a determin period of 

time, issu an opinion, if a major of it member so decid or if so request by ani 

supervisori author concern or the commission. the board should also be empow 

to adopt legal bind decis where there be disput between supervisori 

authorities. for that purpose, it should issue, in principl with a two-third major of it 

members, legal bind decis in clearli specifi case where there be conflict 

view among supervisori authorities, in particular in the cooper mechan between 

the lead supervisori author and supervisori author concern on the merit of the 

case, in particular whether there be an infring of thi regulation. 

(137) there may be an urgent need to act in order to protect the right and freedom of data 

subjects, in particular when the danger exist that the enforc of a right of a data 

subject could be consider impeded.a supervisori author should therefor be abl to 

adopt duli justifi provision measur on it territori with a specifi period of valid 

which should not exceed three months. 

(138) the applic of such mechan should be a condit for the law of a measur 

intend to produc legal effect by a supervisori author in those case where it 

applic be mandatory. In other case of cross-bord relevance, the cooper 

mechan between the lead supervisori author and supervisori author concern 

should be appli and mutual assist and joint oper might be carri out between 

the supervisori author concern on a bilater or multilater basi without trigger 

the consist mechanism. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 86 
dgd 2 EN 


(139) In order to promot the consist applic of thi regulation, the board should be set 

up a an independ bodi of the union. To fulfil it objectives, the board should have 

legal personality. the board should be repres by it chair. It should replac the 

work parti on the protect of individu with regard to the process of person 

data establish by direct 95/46/ec. It should consist of the head of a supervisori 

author of each member state and the european data protect supervisor or their 

respect representatives. the commiss should particip in the board' activ 

without vote right and the european data protect supervisor should have specif 

vote rights. the board should contribut to the consist applic of thi regul 

throughout the union, includ by advis the commission, in particular on the level of 

protect in third countri or intern organisations, and promot cooper of 

the supervisori author throughout the union. the board should act independ 

when perform it tasks. 

(140) the board should be assist by a secretariat provid by the european data protect 

supervisor. the staff of the european data protect supervisor involv in carri out 

the task confer on the board by thi regul should perform it task exclus 

under the instruct of, and report to, the chair of the board. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 87 
dgd 2 EN 


(141) everi data subject should have the right to lodg a complaint with a singl supervisori 

authority, in particular in the member state of hi or her habitu residence, and the right to 

an effect judici remedi in accord with articl 47 of the charter if the data subject 

consid that hi or her right under thi regul be infring or where the supervisori 

author do not act on a complaint, partial or wholli reject or dismiss a complaint 

or do not act where such action be necessari to protect the right of the data subject. the 

investig follow a complaint should be carri out, subject to judici review, to the 

extent that be appropri in the specif case. the supervisori author should inform the 

data subject of the progress and the outcom of the complaint within a reason period. If 

the case requir further investig or coordin with anoth supervisori authority, 

intermedi inform should be give to the data subject. In order to facilit the 

submiss of complaints, each supervisori author should take measur such a 

provid a complaint submiss form which can also be complet electronically, 

without exclud other mean of communication. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 88 
dgd 2 EN 


(142) where a data subject consid that hi or her right under thi regul be infringed, he 

or she should have the right to mandat a not-for-profit body, organis or associ 

which be constitut in accord with the law of a member state, have statutori object 

which be in the public interest and be activ in the field of the protect of person data 

to lodg a complaint on hi or her behalf with a supervisori authority, exercis the right to 

a judici remedi on behalf of data subject or, if provid for in member state law, 

exercis the right to receiv compens on behalf of data subjects. A member state may 

provid for such a body, organis or associ to have the right to lodg a complaint 

in that member state, independ of a data subject' mandate, and the right to an 

effect judici remedi where it have reason to consid that the right of a data subject 

have be infring a a result of the process of person data which infring thi 

regulation. that body, organis or associ may not be allow to claim 

compens on a data subject' behalf independ of the data subject' mandate. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 89 
dgd 2 EN 


(143) ani natur or legal person have the right to bring an action for annul of decis of 

the board befor the court of justic under the condit provid for in 

articl 263 tfeu. As addresse of such decisions, the supervisori author 

concernedwhich wish to challeng them have to bring action within two month of be 

notifi of them, in accord with articl 263 tfeu. where decis of the board be 

of direct and individu concern to a controller, processor or complainant, the latter may 

bring an action for annul against those decis within two month of their 

public on the websit of the board, in accord with articl 263 tfeu. without 

prejudic to thi right under articl 263 tfeu, each natur or legal person should have an 

effect judici remedi befor the compet nation court against a decis of a 

supervisori author which produc legal effect concern that person. such a decis 

concern in particular the exercis of investigative, correct and authoris power by 

the supervisori author or the dismiss or reject of complaints. however, the right to 

an effect judici remedi do not encompass measur take by supervisori author 

which be not legal binding, such a opinion issu by or advic provid by the 

supervisori authority. proceed against a supervisori author should be brought 

befor the court of the member state where the supervisori author be establish and 

should be conduct in accord with that member state' procedur law. those court 

should exercis full jurisdiction, which should includ jurisdict to examin all question 

of fact and law relev to the disput befor them. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 90 
dgd 2 EN 


where a complaint have be reject or dismiss by a supervisori authority, the 

complain may bring proceed befor the court in the same member state. In the 

context of judici remedi relat to the applic of thi regulation, nation court 

which consid a decis on the question necessari to enabl them to give judgment, may, 

or in the case provid for in articl 267 tfeu, must, request the court of justic to give 

a preliminari rule on the interpret of union law, includ thi regulation. 

furthermore, where a decis of a supervisori author implement a decis of the 

board be challeng befor a nation court and the valid of the decis of the board be 

at issue, that nation court do not have the power to declar the board' decis invalid 

but must refer the question of valid to the court of justic in accord with 

articl 267 tfeu a interpret by the court of justice, where it consid the decis 

invalid. however, a nation court may not refer a question on the valid of the decis 

of the board at the request of a natur or legal person which have the opportun to bring 

an action for annul of that decision, in particular if it be directli and individu 

concern by that decision, but have not do so within the period laid down by 

articl 263 tfeu. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 91 
dgd 2 EN 


(144) where a court seiz of proceed against a decis by a supervisori author have 

reason to believ that proceed concern the same processing, such a the same 

subject matter a regard process by the same control or processor, or the same caus 

of action, be brought befor a compet court in anoth member state, it should contact 

that court in order to confirm the exist of such relat proceedings. If relat 

proceed be pend befor a court in anoth member state, ani court other than the 

court first seiz may stay it proceed or may, on request of one of the parties, declin 

jurisdict in favour of the court first seiz if that court have jurisdict over the 

proceed in question and it law permit the consolid of such relat proceedings. 

proceed be deem to be relat where they be so close connect that it be 

expedi to hear and determin them togeth in order to avoid the risk of irreconcil 

judgment result from separ proceedings. 

(145) for proceed against a control or processor, the plaintiff should have the choic to 

bring the action befor the court of the member state where the control or processor 

have an establish or where the data subject resides, unless the control be a public 

author of a member state act in the exercis of it public powers. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 92 
dgd 2 EN 


(146) the control or processor should compens ani damag which a person may suffer a a 

result of process that infring thi regulation. the control or processor should be 

exempt from liabil if it prof that it be not in ani way respons for the damage. the 

concept of damag should be broadli interpret in the light of the case-law of the court of 

justic in a manner which fulli reflect the object of thi regulation. thi be without 

prejudic to ani claim for damag deriv from the violat of other rule in union or 

member state law. process that infring thi regul also includ process that 

infring deleg and implement act adopt in accord with thi regul and 

member state law specifi rule of thi regulation. data subject should receiv full and 

effect compens for the damag they have suffered. where control or processor 

be involv in the same processing, each control or processor should be held liabl for 

the entir damage. however, where they be join to the same judici proceedings, in 

accord with member state law, compens may be apport accord to the 

respons of each control or processor for the damag caus by the processing, 

provid that full and effect compens of the data subject who suffer the damag 

be ensured. ani control or processor which have paid full compens may 

subsequ institut recours proceed against other control or processor 

involv in the same processing. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 93 
dgd 2 EN 


(147) where specif rule on jurisdict be contain in thi regulation, in particular a 

regard proceed seek a judici remedi includ compensation, against a control 

or processor, gener jurisdict rule such a those of regul (eu) No 1215/2012 of 

the european parliament and of the council1 should not prejudic the applic of such 

specif rules. 

(148) In order to strengthen the enforc of the rule of thi regulation, penalti includ 

administr fine should be impos for ani infring of thi regulation, in addit 

to, or instead of appropri measur impos by the supervisori author pursuant to thi 

regulation. In a case of a minor infring or if the fine like to be impos would 

constitut a disproportion burden to a natur person, a reprimand may be issu instead 

of a fine. due regard should howev be give to the nature, graviti and durat of the 

infringement, the intent charact of the infringement, action take to mitig the 

damag suffered, degre of respons or ani relev previou infringements, the 

manner in which the infring becom know to the supervisori authority, complianc 

with measur order against the control or processor, adher to a code of conduct 

and ani other aggrav or mitig factor. the imposit of penalti includ 

administr fine should be subject to appropriateprocedur safeguard in accord 

with the gener principl of union law and the charter, includ effect judici 

protect and due process. 


1 regul (eu) No 1215/2012 of the european parliament and of the council of 

12 decemb 2012 on jurisdict and the recognit and enforc of judgment in civil 
and commerci matter (oj L 351, 20.12.2012, p. 1). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 94 
dgd 2 EN 


(149) member state should be abl to lay down the rule on crimin penalti for infring 

of thi regulation, includ for infring of nation rule adopt pursuant to and 

within the limit of thi regulation. those crimin penalti may also allow for the 

depriv of the profit obtain through infring of thi regulation. however, the 

imposit of crimin penalti for infring of such nation rule and of 

administr penalti should not lead to a breach of the principl of ne bi in idem, a 

interpret by the court of justice. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 95 
dgd 2 EN 


(150) In order to strengthen and harmonis administr penalti for infring of thi 

regulation, each supervisori author should have the power to impos administr 

fines. thi regul should indic infring and the upper limit and criterion for 

fix the relat administr fines, which should be determin by the compet 

supervisori author in each individu case, take into account all relev 

circumst of the specif situation, with due regard in particular to the nature, graviti 

and durat of the infring and of it consequ and the measur take to ensur 

complianc with the oblig under thi regul and to prevent or mitig the 

consequ of the infringement. where administr fine be impos on an 

undertaking, an undertak should be understood to be an undertak in accord with 

articl 101 and 102 tfeu for those purposes. where administr fine be impos on 

person that be not an undertaking, the supervisori author should take account of the 

gener level of incom in the member state a well a the econom situat of the 

person in consid the appropri amount of the fine. the consist mechan may 

also be use to promot a consist applic of administr fines. It should be for the 

member state to determin whether and to which extent public author should be 

subject to administr fines. impos an administr fine or give a warn do 

not affect the applic of other power of the supervisori author or of other 

penalti under thi regulation. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 96 
dgd 2 EN 


(151) the legal system of denmark and estonia do not allow for administr fine a set out 

in thi regulation. the rule on administr fine may be appli in such a manner that 

in denmark the fine be impos by compet nation court a a crimin penalti and in 

estonia the fine be impos by the supervisori author in the framework of a 

misdemeanor procedure, provid that such an applic of the rule in those 

member state have an equival effect to administr fine impos by supervisori 

authorities. therefor the compet nation court should take into account the 

recommend by the supervisori author initi the fine. In ani event, the fine 

impos should be effective, proportion and dissuasive. 

(152) where thi regul do not harmonis administr penalti or where necessari in 

other cases, for exampl in case of seriou infring of thi regulation, 

member state should implement a system which provid for effective, proportion and 

dissuas penalties. the natur of such penalties, crimin or administrative, should be 

determin by member state law. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 97 
dgd 2 EN 


(153) member state law should reconcil the rule govern freedom of express and 

information, includ journalistic, academic, artist and or literari express with the 

right to the protect of person data pursuant to thi regulation. the process of 

person data sole for journalist purposes, or for the purpos of academic, artist or 

literari express should be subject to derog or exempt from certain provis 

of thi regul if necessari to reconcil the right to the protect of person data with 

the right to freedom of express and information, a enshrin in articl 11 of the 

charter. thi should appli in particular to the process of person data in the 

audiovisu field and in news archiv and press libraries. therefore, member state 

should adopt legisl measur which lay down the exempt and derog 

necessari for the purpos of balanc those fundament rights. member state should 

adopt such exempt and derog on gener principles, the right of the data subject, 

the control and the processor, the transfer of person data to third countri or 

intern organisations, the independ supervisori authorities, cooper and 

consistency, and specif data-process situations. where such exempt or 

derog differ from one member state to another, the law of the member state to 

which the control be subject should apply. In order to take account of the import of 

the right to freedom of express in everi democrat society, it be necessari to interpret 

notion relat to that freedom, such a journalism, broadly. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 98 
dgd 2 EN 


(154) thi regul allow the principl of public access to offici document to be take into 

account when appli thi regulation. public access to offici document may be 

consid to be in the public interest. person data in document held by a public 

author or a public bodi should be abl to be publicli disclos by that author or bodi 

if the disclosur be provid for by union or member state law to which the public 

author or public bodi be subject. such law should reconcil public access to offici 

document and the reus of public sector inform with the right to the protect of 

person data and may therefor provid for the necessari reconcili with the right to 

the protect of person data pursuant to thi regulation. the refer to public 

author and bodi should in that context includ all author or other bodi cover 

by member state law on public access to documents. direct 2003/98/ec of the 

european parliament and of the council1 leaf intact and in no way affect the level of 

protect of natur person with regard to the process of person data under the 

provis of union and member state law, and in particular do not alter the oblig 

and right set out in thi regulation. In particular, that direct should not appli to 

document to which access be exclud or restrict by virtu of the access regim on the 

ground of protect of person data, and part of document access by virtu of 

those regim which contain person data the re-us of which have be provid for by 

law a be incompat with the law concern the protect of natur person with 

regard to the process of person data. 


1 direct 2003/98/ec of the european parliament and of the council of 17 novemb 2003 

on the re-us of public sector inform (oj L 345, 31.12.2003, p. 90). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 99 
dgd 2 EN 


(155) member state law or collect agreements, includ 'work agreements', may provid for 

specif rule on the process of employees' person data in the employ context, in 

particular for the condit under which person data in the employ context may be 

process on the basi of the consent of the employee, the purpos of the recruitment, the 

perform of the contract of employment, includ discharg of oblig laid down 

by law or by collect agreements, management, plan and organis of work, 

equal and divers in the workplace, health and safeti at work, and for the purpos of 

the exercis and enjoyment, on an individu or collect basis, of right and benefit 

relat to employment, and for the purpos of the termin of the employ 

relationship. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 100 
dgd 2 EN 


(156) the process of person data for archiv purpos in the public interest, scientif or 

histor research purpos or statist purpos should be subject to appropri 

safeguard for the right and freedom of the data subject pursuant to thi regulation. 

those safeguard should ensur that technic and organis measur be in place in 

order to ensure, in particular, the principl of data minimisation. the further process of 

person data for archiv purpos in the public interest, scientif or histor research 

purpos or statist purpos be to be carri out when the control have assess the 

feasibl to fulfil those purpos by process data which do not permit or no longer 

permit the identif of data subjects, provid that appropri safeguard exist (such 

as, for instance, pseudonymis of the data). member state should provid for 

appropri safeguard for the process of person data for archiv purpos in the 

public interest, scientif or histor research purpos or statist purposes. 

member state should be authoris to provide, under specif condit and subject to 

appropri safeguard for data subjects, specif and derog with regard to the 

inform requir and right to rectification, to erasure, to be forgotten, to 

restrict of processing, to data portability, and to object when process person data 

for archiv purpos in the public interest, scientif or histor research purpos or 

statist purposes. the condit and safeguard in question may entail specif 

procedur for data subject to exercis those right if thi be appropri in the light of the 

purpos sought by the specif process along with technic and organis 

measur aim at minimis the process of person data in pursuanc of the 

proportion and necess principles. the process of person data for scientif 

purpos should also compli with other relev legisl such a on clinic trials. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 101 
dgd 2 EN 


(157) By coupl inform from registries, research can obtain new knowledg of great 

valu with regard to widespread medic condit such a cardiovascular disease, cancer 

and depression. On the basi of registries, research result can be enhanced, a they draw 

on a larg population. within social science, research on the basi of registri enabl 

research to obtain essenti knowledg about the long-term correl of a number of 

social condit such a unemploy and educ with other life conditions. research 

result obtain through registri provid solid, high-qual knowledg which can 

provid the basi for the formul and implement of knowledge-bas policy, 

improv the qualiti of life for a number of peopl and improv the effici of social 

services. In order to facilit scientif research, person data can be process for 

scientif research purposes, subject to appropri condit and safeguard set out in 

union or member state law. 

(158) where person data be process for archiv purposes, thi regul should also 

appli to that processing, bear in mind that thi regul should not appli to deceas 

persons. public author or public or privat bodi that hold record of public interest 

should be servic which, pursuant to union or member state law, have a legal oblig 

to acquire, preserve, appraise, arrange, describe, communicate, promote, dissemin and 

provid access to record of endur valu for gener public interest. member state 

should also be authoris to provid for the further process of person data for 

archiv purposes, for exampl with a view to provid specif inform relat to 

the polit behaviour under former totalitarian state regimes, genocide, crime against 

humanity, in particular the holocaust, or war crimes. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 102 
dgd 2 EN 


(159) where person data be process for scientif research purposes, thi regul should 

also appli to that processing. for the purpos of thi regulation, the process of 

person data for scientif research purpos should be interpret in a broad manner 

includ for exampl technolog develop and demonstration, fundament 

research, appli research and privat fund research. In addition, it should take into 

account the union' object under articl 179(1) tfeu of achiev a european 

research area. scientif research purpos should also includ studi conduct in the 

public interest in the area of public health. To meet the specif of process person 

data for scientif research purposes, specif condit should appli in particular a 

regard the public or otherwis disclosur of person data in the context of scientif 

research purposes. If the result of scientif research in particular in the health context 

give reason for further measur in the interest of the data subject, the gener rule of thi 

regul should appli in view of those measures. 

(160) where person data be process for histor research purposes, thi regul should 

also appli to that processing. thi should also includ histor research and research for 

genealog purposes, bear in mind that thi regul should not appli to deceas 

persons. 

(161) for the purpos of consent to the particip in scientif research activ in clinic 

trials, the relev provis of regul (eu) No 536/2014 of the european parliament 

and of the council1 should apply. 


1 regul (eu) No 536/2014 of the european parliament and of the council of 

16 april 2014 on clinic trial on medicin product for human use, and repeal 
direct 2001/20/ec (oj L 158, 27.5.2014, p. 1). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 103 
dgd 2 EN 


(162) where person data be process for statist purposes, thi regul should appli to 

that processing. union or member state law should, within the limit of thi regulation, 

determin statist content, control of access, specif for the process of person 

data for statist purpos and appropri measur to safeguard the right and freedom 

of the data subject and for ensur statist confidentiality. statist purpos mean ani 

oper of collect and the process of person data necessari for statist survey 

or for the product of statist results. those statist result may further be use for 

differ purposes, includ a scientif research purpose. the statist purpos impli 

that the result of process for statist purpos be not person data, but aggreg data, 

and that thi result or the person data be not use in support of measur or decis 

regard ani particular natur person. 

(163) the confidenti inform which the union and nation statist author collect for 

the product of offici european and offici nation statist should be protected. 

european statist should be developed, produc and dissemin in accord with 

the statist principl a set out in articl 338(2) tfeu, while nation statist should 

also compli with member state law. regul (ec) No 223/2009 of the european 

parliament and of the council1 provid further specif on statist confidenti 

for european statistics. 


1 regul (ec) No 223/2009 of the european parliament and of the council of 

11 march 2009 on european statist and repeal regul (ec, euratom) 
No 1101/2008 of the european parliament and of the council on the transmiss of data 
subject to statist confidenti to the statist offic of the european communities, 
council regul (ec) No 322/97 on commun statistics, and council 
decis 89/382/eec, euratom establish a committe on the statist programm of 
the european commun (oj L 87, 31.3.2009, p. 164). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 104 
dgd 2 EN 


(164) As regard the power of the supervisori author to obtain from the control or 

processor access to person data and access to their premises, member state may adopt 

by law, within the limit of thi regulation, specif rule in order to safeguard the 

profession or other equival secreci obligations, in so far a necessari to reconcil the 

right to the protect of person data with an oblig of profession secrecy. thi be 

without prejudic to exist member state oblig to adopt rule on profession 

secreci where requir by union law. 

(165) thi regul respect and do not prejudic the statu under exist constitut law 

of church and religi associ or commun in the member states, a recognis 

in articl 17 tfeu. 

(166) In order to fulfil the object of thi regulation, name to protect the fundament right 

and freedom of natur person and in particular their right to the protect of person 

data and to ensur the free movement of person data within the union, the power to 

adopt act in accord with articl 290 tfeu should be deleg to the commission. 

In particular, deleg act should be adopt in respect of criterion and requir for 

certif mechanisms, inform to be present by standardis icon and 

procedur for provid such icons. It be of particular import that the commiss 

carri out appropri consult dure it preparatori work, includ at expert level. 

the commission, when prepar and drawing-up deleg acts, should ensur a 

simultaneous, time and appropri transmiss of relev document to the european 

parliament and to the council. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 105 
dgd 2 EN 


(167) In order to ensur uniform condit for the implement of thi regulation, 

implement power should be confer on the commiss when provid for by thi 

regulation. those power should be exercis in accord with regul (eu) 

No 182/2011. In that context, the commiss should consid specif measur for 

micro, small and medium-s enterprises. 

(168) the examin procedur should be use for the adopt of implement act on 

standard contractu claus between control and processor and between processors; 

code of conduct; technic standard and mechan for certification; the adequ level 

of protect afford by a third country, a territori or a specifi sector within that third 

country, or an intern organisation; standard protect clauses; format and 

procedur for the exchang of inform by electron mean between controllers, 

processor and supervisori author for bind corpor rules; mutual assistance; and 

arrang for the exchang of inform by electron mean between supervisori 

authorities, and between supervisori author and the board. 

(169) the commiss should adopt immedi applic implement act where avail 

evid reveal that a third country, a territori or a specifi sector within that third 

country, or an intern organis do not ensur an adequ level of protection, 

and imper ground of urgenc so require. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 106 
dgd 2 EN 


(170) sinc the object of thi regulation, name to ensur an equival level of protect 

of natur person and the free flow of person data throughout the union, cannot be 

suffici achiev by the member state and can rather, by reason of the scale or effect 

of the action, be good achiev at union level, the union may adopt measures, in 

accord with the principl of subsidiar a set out in articl 5 of the treati on 

european union (teu). In accord with the principl of proportion a set out in 

that article, thi regul do not go beyond what be necessari in order to achiev that 

objective. 

(171) direct 95/46/ec should be repeal by thi regulation. process alreadi under way 

on the date of applic of thi regul should be brought into conform with thi 

regul within the period of two year after which thi regul enter into force. 

where process be base on consent pursuant to direct 95/46/ec, it be not necessari 

for the data subject to give hi or her consent again if the manner in which the consent have 

be give be in line with the condit of thi regulation, so a to allow the control to 

continu such process after the date of applic of thi regulation. commiss 

decis adopt and authoris by supervisori author base on 

direct 95/46/ec remain in forc until amended, replac or repealed. 

(172) the european data protect supervisor be consult in accord with articl 28(2) 

of regul (ec) No 45/2001 and deliv an opinion on 7 march 20121. 


1 OJ C 192, 30.6.2012, p. 7. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 107 
dgd 2 EN 


(173) thi regul should appli to all matter concern the protect of fundament right 

and freedom vis-à-vi the process of person data which be not subject to specif 

oblig with the same object set out in direct 2002/58/ec of the european 

parliament and of the council1, includ the oblig on the control and the right of 

natur persons. In order to clarifi the relationship between thi regul and 

direct 2002/58/ec, that direct should be amend accordingly. onc thi 

regul be adopted, direct 2002/58/ec should be review in particular in order to 

ensur consist with thi regulation, 

have adopt thi regulation: 


1 direct 2002/58/ec of the european parliament and of the council of 12 juli 2002 

concern the process of person data and the protect of privaci in the electron 
commun sector (direct on privaci and electron communications) (oj L 201, 
31.7.2002, p. 37). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 108 
dgd 2 EN 


chapter I 

gener provis 

articl 1 

subject-matt and object 

1. thi regul lay down rule relat to the protect of natur person with regard to 

the process of person data and rule relat to the free movement of person data. 

2. thi regul protect fundament right and freedom of natur person and in 

particular their right to the protect of person data. 

3. the free movement of person data within the union shall be neither restrict nor 

prohibit for reason connect with the protect of natur person with regard to the 

process of person data. 

articl 2 

materi scope 

1. thi regul appli to the process of person data wholli or partli by autom 

mean and to the process other than by autom mean of person data which form 

part of a file system or be intend to form part of a file system. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 109 
dgd 2 EN 


2. thi regul do not appli to the process of person data: 

(a) in the cours of an activ which fall outsid the scope of union law; 

(b) by the member state when carri out activ which fall within the scope of 

chapter 2 of titl V of the teu; 

(c) by a natur person in the cours of a pure person or household activity; 

(d) by compet author for the purpos of the prevention, investigation, detect 

or prosecut of crimin offences, the execut of crimin penalties, includ the 

safeguard against and the prevent of threat to public security. 

3. for the process of person data by the union institutions, bodies, offic and agencies, 

regul (ec) No 45/2001 applies. regul (ec) No 45/2001 and other union legal 

act applic to such process of person data shall be adapt to the principl and 

rule of thi regul in accord with articl 98. 

4. thi regul shall be without prejudic to the applic of direct 2000/31/ec, in 

particular of the liabil rule of intermediari servic provid in articl 12 to 15 of that 

directive. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 110 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 3 

territori scope 

1. thi regul appli to the process of person data in the context of the activ of 

an establish of a control or a processor in the union, regardless of whether the 

process take place in the union or not. 

2. thi regul appli to the process of person data of data subject who be in the 

union by a control or processor not establish in the union, where the process 

activ be relat to: 

(a) the offer of good or services, irrespect of whether a payment of the data 

subject be required, to such data subject in the union; or 

(b) the monitor of their behaviour a far a their behaviour take place within the 

union. 

3. thi regul appli to the process of person data by a control not establish in 

the union, but in a place where member state law appli by virtu of public intern 

law. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 111 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 4 

definit 

for the purpos of thi regulation: 

(1) 'person data' mean ani inform relat to an identifi or identifi natur person 

('data subject'); an identifi natur person be one who can be identified, directli or 

indirectly, in particular by refer to an identifi such a a name, an identif 

number, locat data, an onlin identifi or to one or more factor specif to the 

physical, physiological, genetic, mental, economic, cultur or social ident of that natur 

person; 

(2) 'processing' mean ani oper or set of oper which be perform on person data 

or on set of person data, whether or not by autom means, such a collection, 

recording, organisation, structuring, storage, adapt or alteration, retrieval, 

consultation, use, disclosur by transmission, dissemin or otherwis make available, 

align or combination, restriction, erasur or destruction; 

(3) 'restrict of processing' mean the mark of store person data with the aim of 

limit their process in the future; 

(4) 'profiling' mean ani form of autom process of person data consist of the use 

of person data to evalu certain person aspect relat to a natur person, in 

particular to analys or predict aspect concern that natur person' perform at 

work, econom situation, health, person preferences, interests, reliability, behaviour, 

locat or movements; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 112 
dgd 2 EN 


(5) 'pseudonymisation' mean the process of person data in such a manner that the 

person data can no longer be attribut to a specif data subject without the use of 

addit information, provid that such addit inform be kept separ and be 

subject to technic and organis measur to ensur that the person data be not 

attribut to an identifi or identifi natur person; 

(6) 'file system' mean ani structur set of person data which be access accord to 

specif criteria, whether centralised, decentralis or dispers on a function or 

geograph basis; 

(7) 'controller' mean the natur or legal person, public authority, agenc or other bodi which, 

alon or jointli with others, determin the purpos and mean of the process of 

person data; where the purpos and mean of such process be determin by union 

or member state law, the control or the specif criterion for it nomin may be 

provid for by union or member state law; 

(8) 'processor' mean a natur or legal person, public authority, agenc or other bodi which 

process person data on behalf of the controller; 

(9) 'recipient' mean a natur or legal person, public authority, agenc or anoth body, to 

which the person data be disclosed, whether a third parti or not. however, public 

author which may receiv person data in the framework of a particular inquiri in 

accord with union or member state law shall not be regard a recipients; the 

process of those data by those public author shall be in complianc with the 

applic data protect rule accord to the purpos of the processing; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 113 
dgd 2 EN 


(10) 'third party' mean a natur or legal person, public authority, agenc or bodi other than the 

data subject, controller, processor and person who, under the direct author of the 

control or processor, be authoris to process person data; 

(11) 'consent' of the data subject mean ani freeli given, specific, inform and unambigu 

indic of the data subject' wish by which he or she, by a statement or by a clear 

affirm action, signifi agreement to the process of person data relat to him or 

her; 

(12) 'person data breach' mean a breach of secur lead to the accident or unlaw 

destruction, loss, alteration, unauthoris disclosur of, or access to, person data 

transmitted, store or otherwis processed; 

(13) 'genet data' mean person data relat to the inherit or acquir genet 

characterist of a natur person which give uniqu inform about the physiolog or 

the health of that natur person and which result, in particular, from an analysi of a 

biolog sampl from the natur person in question; 

(14) 'biometr data' mean person data result from specif technic process relat to 

the physical, physiolog or behaviour characterist of a natur person, which allow 

or confirm the uniqu identif of that natur person, such a facial imag or 

dactyloscop data; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 114 
dgd 2 EN 


(15) 'data concern health' mean person data relat to the physic or mental health of a 

natur person, includ the provis of health care services, which reveal inform 

about hi or her health status; 

(16) 'main establishment' means: 

(a) a regard a control with establish in more than one member state, the place 

of it central administr in the union, unless the decis on the purpos and 

mean of the process of person data be take in anoth establish of the 

control in the union and the latter establish have the power to have such 

decis implemented, in which case the establish have take such decis 

be to be consid to be the main establishment; 

(b) a regard a processor with establish in more than one member state, the place 

of it central administr in the union, or, if the processor have no central 

administr in the union, the establish of the processor in the union where 

the main process activ in the context of the activ of an establish of 

the processor take place to the extent that the processor be subject to specif 

oblig under thi regulation; 

(17) 'representative' mean a natur or legal person establish in the union who, design 

by the control or processor in write pursuant to articl 27, repres the control or 

processor with regard to their respect oblig under thi regulation; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 115 
dgd 2 EN 


(18) 'enterprise' mean a natur or legal person engag in an econom activity, irrespect of 

it legal form, includ partnership or associ regularli engag in an econom 

activity; 

(19) 'group of undertakings' mean a control undertak and it control undertakings; 

(20) 'bind corpor rules' mean person data protect polici which be adher to by a 

control or processor establish on the territori of a member state for transfer or a set 

of transfer of person data to a control or processor in one or more third countri 

within a group of undertakings, or group of enterpris engag in a joint econom 

activity; 

(21) 'supervisori authority' mean an independ public author which be establish by a 

member state pursuant to articl 51; 

(22) 'supervisori author concerned' mean a supervisori author which be concern by the 

process of person data because: 

(a) the control or processor be establish on the territori of the member state of that 

supervisori authority; 

(b) data subject resid in the member state of that supervisori author be 

substanti affect or like to be substanti affect by the processing; or 

(c) a complaint have be lodg with that supervisori authority; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 116 
dgd 2 EN 


(23) 'cross-bord processing' mean either: 

(a) process of person data which take place in the context of the activ of 

establish in more than one member state of a control or processor in the 

union where the control or processor be establish in more than one 

member state; or 

(b) process of person data which take place in the context of the activ of a 

singl establish of a control or processor in the union but which substanti 

affect or be like to substanti affect data subject in more than one 

member state. 

(24) 'relev and reason objection' mean an object a to whether there be an infring 

of thi regul or not, or whether the envisag action in relat to the control or 

processor compli with thi regulation, which clearli demonstr the signific of the 

risk pose by the draft decis a regard the fundament right and freedom of data 

subject and, where applicable, the free flow of person data within the union; 

(25) 'inform societi service' mean a servic a defin in point (b) of articl 1(1) of 

direct (eu) 2015/1535 of the european parliament and of the council1; 

(26) 'intern organisation' mean an organis and it subordin bodi govern by 

public intern law, or ani other bodi which be set up by, or on the basi of, an 

agreement between two or more countries. 


1 direct (eu) 2015/1535 of the european parliament and of the council of 

9 septemb 2015 lay down a procedur for the provis of inform in the field of 
technic regul and of rule on inform societi servic (oj L 241, 17.9.2015, 
p. 1). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 117 
dgd 2 EN 


chapter II 

principl 

articl 5 

principl relat to process of person data 

1. person data shall be: 

(a) process lawfully, fairli and in a transpar manner in relat to the data subject 

('lawfulness, fair and transparency'); 

(b) collect for specified, explicit and legitim purpos and not further process in a 

manner that be incompat with those purposes; further process for archiv 

purpos in the public interest, scientif or histor research purpos or statist 

purpos shall, in accord with articl 89(1), not be consid to be 

incompat with the initi purpos ('purpos limitation'); 

(c) adequate, relev and limit to what be necessari in relat to the purpos for 

which they be process ('data minimisation'); 

(d) accur and, where necessary, kept up to date; everi reason step must be take 

to ensur that person data that be inaccurate, have regard to the purpos for 

which they be processed, be eras or rectifi without delay ('accuracy'); 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 118 
dgd 2 EN 


(e) kept in a form which permit identif of data subject for no longer than be 

necessari for the purpos for which the person data be processed; person data 

may be store for longer period insofar a the person data will be process sole 

for archiv purpos in the public interest, scientif or histor research purpos 

or statist purpos in accord with articl 89(1) subject to implement of 

the appropri technic and organis measur requir by thi regul in 

order to safeguard the right and freedom of the data subject ('storag limitation'); 

(f) process in a manner that ensur appropri secur of the person data, 

includ protect against unauthoris or unlaw process and against 

accident loss, destruct or damage, use appropri technic or organis 

measur ('integr and confidentiality'). 

2. the control shall be respons for, and be abl to demonstr complianc with, 

paragraph 1 ('accountability'). 

articl 6 

law of process 

1. process shall be law onli if and to the extent that at least one of the follow 

applies: 

(a) the data subject have give consent to the process of hi or her person data for 

one or more specif purposes; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 119 
dgd 2 EN 


(b) process be necessari for the perform of a contract to which the data subject be 

parti or in order to take step at the request of the data subject prior to enter into a 

contract; 

(c) process be necessari for complianc with a legal oblig to which the control 

be subject; 

(d) process be necessari in order to protect the vital interest of the data subject or of 

anoth natur person; 

(e) process be necessari for the perform of a task carri out in the public interest 

or in the exercis of offici author vest in the controller; 

(f) process be necessari for the purpos of the legitim interest pursu by the 

control or by a third party, except where such interest be overridden by the 

interest or fundament right and freedom of the data subject which requir 

protect of person data, in particular where the data subject be a child. 

point (f) of the first subparagraph shall not appli to process carri out by public 

author in the perform of their tasks. 

2. member state may maintain or introduc more specif provis to adapt the applic 

of the rule of thi regul with regard to process for complianc with point (c) 

and (e) of paragraph 1 by determin more precis specif requir for the 

process and other measur to ensur law and fair process includ for other 

specif process situat a provid for in chapter ix. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 120 
dgd 2 EN 


3. the basi for the process refer to in point (c) and (e) of paragraph 1 shall be laid 

down by: 

(a) union law; or 

(b) member state law to which the control be subject. 

the purpos of the process shall be determin in that legal basi or, a regard the 

process refer to in point (e) of paragraph 1, shall be necessari for the perform of 

a task carri out in the public interest or in the exercis of offici author vest in the 

controller. that legal basi may contain specif provis to adapt the applic of rule 

of thi regulation, inter alia: the gener condit govern the law of process 

by the controller; the type of data which be subject to the processing; the data subject 

concerned; the entiti to, and the purpos for which, the person data may be disclosed; 

the purpos limitation; storag periods; and process oper and process 

procedures, includ measur to ensur law and fair process such a those for other 

specif process situat a provid for in chapter ix. the union or the 

member state law shall meet an object of public interest and be proportion to the 

legitim aim pursued. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 121 
dgd 2 EN 


4. where the process for a purpos other than that for which the person data have be 

collect be not base on the data subject' consent or on a union or member state law 

which constitut a necessari and proportion measur in a democrat societi to 

safeguard the object refer to in articl 23(1), the control shall, in order to 

ascertain whether process for anoth purpos be compat with the purpos for which 

the person data be initi collected, take into account, inter alia: 

(a) ani link between the purpos for which the person data have be collect and 

the purpos of the intend further processing; 

(b) the context in which the person data have be collected, in particular regard the 

relationship between data subject and the controller; 

(c) the natur of the person data, in particular whether special categori of person 

data be processed, pursuant to articl 9, or whether person data relat to crimin 

convict and offenc be processed, pursuant to articl 10; 

(d) the possibl consequ of the intend further process for data subjects; 

(e) the exist of appropri safeguards, which may includ encrypt or 

pseudonymisation. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 122 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 7 

condit for consent 

1. where process be base on consent, the control shall be abl to demonstr that the 

data subject have consent to process of hi or her person data. 

2. If the data subject' consent be give in the context of a write declar which also 

concern other matters, the request for consent shall be present in a manner which be 

clearli distinguish from the other matters, in an intellig and easili access form, 

use clear and plain language. ani part of such a declar which constitut an 

infring of thi regul shall not be binding. 

3. the data subject shall have the right to withdraw hi or her consent at ani time. the 

withdraw of consent shall not affect the law of process base on consent befor 

it withdrawal. prior to give consent, the data subject shall be inform thereof. It shall 

be a easi to withdraw consent a to give it. 

4. when assess whether consent be freeli given, utmost account shall be take of whether, 

inter alia, the perform of a contract, includ the provis of a service, be condit 

on consent to the process of person data that be not necessari for the perform of 

that contract. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 123 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 8 

condit applic to child' consent 

in relat to inform societi servic 

1. where point (a) of articl 6(1) applies, in relat to the offer of inform societi 

servic directli to a child, the process of the person data of a child shall be law 

where the child be at least 16 year old. where the child be below the age of 16 years, such 

process shall be law onli if and to the extent that consent be give or authoris by 

the holder of parent respons over the child. 

member state may provid by law for a low age for those purpos provid that such 

low age be not below 13 years. 

2. the control shall make reason effort to verifi in such case that consent be give or 

authoris by the holder of parent respons over the child, take into consider 

avail technology. 

3. paragraph 1 shall not affect the gener contract law of member state such a the rule on 

the validity, format or effect of a contract in relat to a child. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 124 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 9 

process of special categori of person data 

1. process of person data reveal racial or ethnic origin, polit opinions, religi or 

philosoph beliefs, or trade-union membership, and the process of genet data, 

biometr data for the purpos of uniqu identifi a natur person, data concern 

health or data concern a natur person' sex life or sexual orient shall be 

prohibited. 

2. paragraph 1 shall not appli if one of the follow applies: 

(a) the data subject have give explicit consent to the process of those person data 

for one or more specifi purposes, except where union or member state law 

provid that the prohibit refer to in paragraph 1 may not be lift by the data 

subject; 

(b) process be necessari for the purpos of carri out the oblig and 

exercis specif right of the control or of the data subject in the field of 

employ and social secur and social protect law in so far a it be authoris 

by union or member state law or a collect agreement pursuant to member state 

law provid for appropri safeguard for the fundament right and the interest 

of the data subject; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 125 
dgd 2 EN 


(c) process be necessari to protect the vital interest of the data subject or of anoth 

natur person where the data subject be physic or legal incap of give 

consent; 

(d) process be carri out in the cours of it legitim activ with appropri 

safeguard by a foundation, associ or ani other not-for-profit bodi with a 

political, philosophical, religi or trade-union aim and on condit that the 

process relat sole to the member or to former member of the bodi or to 

person who have regular contact with it in connect with it purpos and that the 

person data be not disclos outsid that bodi without the consent of the data 

subjects; 

(e) process relat to person data which be manifestli make public by the data 

subject; 

(f) process be necessari for the establishment, exercis or defenc of legal claim or 

whenev court be act in their judici capacity; 

(g) process be necessari for reason of substanti public interest, on the basi of 

union or member state law which shall be proportion to the aim pursued, respect 

the essenc of the right to data protect and provid for suitabl and specif 

measur to safeguard the fundament right and the interest of the data subject; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 126 
dgd 2 EN 


(h) process be necessari for the purpos of prevent or occup medicine, for 

the assess of the work capac of the employee, medic diagnosis, the 

provis of health or social care or treatment or the manag of health or social 

care system and servic on the basi of union or member state law or pursuant to 

contract with a health profession and subject to the condit and safeguard 

refer to in paragraph 3; 

(i) process be necessari for reason of public interest in the area of public health, 

such a protect against seriou cross-bord threat to health or ensur high 

standard of qualiti and safeti of health care and of medicin product or medic 

devices, on the basi of union or member state law which provid for suitabl and 

specif measur to safeguard the right and freedom of the data subject, in 

particular profession secrecy; or 

(j) process be necessari for archiv purpos in the public interest, scientif or 

histor research purpos or statist purpos in accord with articl 89(1) 

base on union or member state law which shall be proportion to the aim 

pursued, respect the essenc of the right to data protect and provid for suitabl 

and specif measur to safeguard the fundament right and the interest of the 

data subject. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 127 
dgd 2 EN 


3. person data refer to in paragraph 1 may be process for the purpos refer to in 

point (h) of paragraph 2 when those data be process by or under the respons of a 

profession subject to the oblig of profession secreci under union or member state 

law or rule establish by nation compet bodi or by anoth person also subject to 

an oblig of secreci under union or member state law or rule establish by nation 

compet bodies. 

4. member state may maintain or introduc further conditions, includ limitations, with 

regard to the process of genet data, biometr data or data concern health. 

articl 10 

process of person data relat to crimin convict and offenc 

process of person data relat to crimin convict and offenc or relat secur 

measur base on articl 6(1) shall be carri out onli under the control of offici author or 

when the process be authoris by union or member state law provid for appropri 

safeguard for the right and freedom of data subjects. ani comprehens regist of crimin 

convict shall be kept onli under the control of offici authority. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 128 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 11 

process which do not requir identif 

1. If the purpos for which a control process person data do not or do no longer 

requir the identif of a data subject by the controller, the control shall not be 

oblig to maintain, acquir or process addit inform in order to identifi the data 

subject for the sole purpos of compli with thi regulation. 

2. where, in case refer to in paragraph 1 of thi article, the control be abl to 

demonstr that it be not in a posit to identifi the data subject, the control shall 

inform the data subject accordingly, if possible. In such cases, articl 15 to 20 shall not 

appli except where the data subject, for the purpos of exercis hi or her right under 

those articles, provid addit inform enabl hi or her identification. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 129 
dgd 2 EN 


chapter iii 

right OF the data subject 

section 1 

transpar and modal 

articl 12 

transpar information, commun and modal 

for the exercis of the right of the data subject 

1. the control shall take appropri measur to provid ani inform refer to in 

articl 13 and 14 and ani commun under articl 15 to 22 and 34 relat to 

process to the data subject in a concise, transparent, intellig and easili access 

form, use clear and plain language, in particular for ani inform address 

specif to a child. the inform shall be provid in writing, or by other means, 

including, where appropriate, by electron means. when request by the data subject, the 

inform may be provid orally, provid that the ident of the data subject be proven 

by other means. 

2. the control shall facilit the exercis of data subject right under articl 15 to 22. In 

the case refer to in articl 11(2), the control shall not refus to act on the request of 

the data subject for exercis hi or her right under articl 15 to 22, unless the 

control demonstr that it be not in a posit to identifi the data subject. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 130 
dgd 2 EN 


3. the control shall provid inform on action take on a request under articl 15 

to 22 to the data subject without undu delay and in ani event within one month of receipt 

of the request. that period may be extend by two further month where necessary, take 

into account the complex and number of the requests. the control shall inform the 

data subject of ani such extens within one month of receipt of the request, togeth with 

the reason for the delay. where the data subject make the request by electron form 

means, the inform shall be provid by electron mean where possible, unless 

otherwis request by the data subject. 

4. If the control do not take action on the request of the data subject, the control shall 

inform the data subject without delay and at the late within one month of receipt of the 

request of the reason for not take action and on the possibl of lodg a complaint 

with a supervisori author and seek a judici remedy. 

5. inform provid under articl 13 and 14 and ani commun and ani action 

take under articl 15 to 22 and 34 shall be provid free of charge. where request from 

a data subject be manifestli unfound or excessive, in particular becaus of their 

repetit character, the control may either: 

(a) charg a reason fee take into account the administr cost of provid the 

inform or commun or take the action requested; or 

(b) refus to act on the request. 

the control shall bear the burden of demonstr the manifestli unfound or 

excess charact of the request. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 131 
dgd 2 EN 


6. without prejudic to articl 11, where the control have reason doubt concern the 

ident of the natur person make the request refer to in articl 15 to 21, the 

control may request the provis of addit inform necessari to confirm the 

ident of the data subject. 

7. the inform to be provid to data subject pursuant to articl 13 and 14 may be 

provid in combin with standardis icon in order to give in an easili visible, 

intellig and clearli legibl manner a meaning overview of the intend processing. 

where the icon be present electron they shall be machine-readable. 

8. the commiss shall be empow to adopt deleg act in accord with articl 92 

for the purpos of determin the inform to be present by the icon and the 

procedur for provid standardis icons. 

section 2 

inform and access TO person data 

articl 13 

inform to be provid where person data be collect from the data subject 

1. where person data relat to a data subject be collect from the data subject, the 

control shall, at the time when person data be obtained, provid the data subject with 

all of the follow information: 

(a) the ident and the contact detail of the control and, where applicable, of the 

controller' representative; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 132 
dgd 2 EN 


(b) the contact detail of the data protect officer, where applicable; 

(c) the purpos of the process for which the person data be intend a well a the 

legal basi for the processing; 

(d) where the process be base on point (f) of articl 6(1), the legitim interest 

pursu by the control or by a third party; 

(e) the recipi or categori of recipi of the person data, if any; 

(f) where applicable, the fact that the control intend to transfer person data to a 

third countri or intern organis and the exist or absenc of an 

adequaci decis by the commission, or in the case of transfer refer to in 

articl 46 or 47, or the second subparagraph of articl 49(1), refer to the 

appropri or suitabl safeguard and the mean by which to obtain a copi of them 

or where they have be make available. 

2. In addit to the inform refer to in paragraph 1, the control shall, at the time 

when person data be obtained, provid the data subject with the follow further 

inform necessari to ensur fair and transpar processing: 

(a) the period for which the person data will be stored, or if that be not possible, the 

criterion use to determin that period; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 133 
dgd 2 EN 


(b) the exist of the right to request from the control access to and rectif or 

erasur of person data or restrict of process concern the data subject or to 

object to process a well a the right to data portability; 

(c) where the process be base on point (a) of articl 6(1) or point (a) of articl 9(2), 

the exist of the right to withdraw consent at ani time, without affect the 

law of process base on consent befor it withdrawal; 

(d) the right to lodg a complaint with a supervisori authority; 

(e) whether the provis of person data be a statutori or contractu requirement, or a 

requir necessari to enter into a contract, a well a whether the data subject be 

oblig to provid the person data and of the possibl consequ of failur to 

provid such data; 

(f) the exist of autom decision-making, includ profiling, refer to in 

articl 22(1) and (4) and, at least in those cases, meaning inform about the 

logic involved, a well a the signific and the envisag consequ of such 

process for the data subject. 

3. where the control intend to further process the person data for a purpos other than 

that for which the person data be collected, the control shall provid the data subject 

prior to that further process with inform on that other purpos and with ani 

relev further inform a refer to in paragraph 2. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 134 
dgd 2 EN 


4. paragraph 1, 2 and 3 shall not appli where and insofar a the data subject alreadi have the 

information. 

articl 14 

inform to be provid where person data have not be obtain from the data subject 

1. where person data have not be obtain from the data subject, the control shall 

provid the data subject with the follow information: 

(a) the ident and the contact detail of the control and, if any, of the controller' 

representative; 

(b) the contact detail of the data protect officer, where applicable; 

(c) the purpos of the process for which the person data be intend a well a the 

legal basi for the processing; 

(d) the categori of person data concerned; 

(e) the recipi or categori of recipi of the person data, where applicable; 

(f) where applicable, that the control intend to transfer person data to a recipi in 

a third countri or intern organis and the exist or absenc of an 

adequaci decis by the commission, or in the case of transfer refer to in 

articl 46 or 47, or the second subparagraph of articl 49(1), refer to the 

appropri or suitabl safeguard and the mean to obtain a copi of them or where 

they have be make available. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 135 
dgd 2 EN 


2. In addit to the inform refer to in paragraph 1, the control shall provid the 

data subject with the follow inform necessari to ensur fair and transpar 

process in respect of the data subject: 

(a) the period for which the person data will be stored, or if that be not possible, the 

criterion use to determin that period; 

(b) where the process be base on point (f) of articl 6(1), the legitim interest 

pursu by the control or by a third party; 

(c) the exist of the right to request from the control access to and rectif or 

erasur of person data or restrict of process concern the data subject and 

to object to process a well a the right to data portability; 

(d) where process be base on point (a) of articl 6(1) or point (a) of articl 9(2), the 

exist of the right to withdraw consent at ani time, without affect the 

law of process base on consent befor it withdrawal; 

(e) the right to lodg a complaint with a supervisori authority; 

(f) from which sourc the person data originate, and if applicable, whether it come 

from publicli access sources; 

(g) the exist of autom decision-making, includ profiling, refer to in 

articl 22(1) and (4) and, at least in those cases, meaning inform about the 

logic involved, a well a the signific and the envisag consequ of such 

process for the data subject. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 136 
dgd 2 EN 


3. the control shall provid the inform refer to in paragraph 1 and 2: 

(a) within a reason period after obtain the person data, but at the late within 

one month, have regard to the specif circumst in which the person data 

be processed; 

(b) if the person data be to be use for commun with the data subject, at the 

late at the time of the first commun to that data subject; or 

(c) if a disclosur to anoth recipi be envisaged, at the late when the person data 

be first disclosed. 

4. where the control intend to further process the person data for a purpos other than 

that for which the person data be obtained, the control shall provid the data subject 

prior to that further process with inform on that other purpos and with ani 

relev further inform a refer to in paragraph 2. 

5. paragraph 1 to 4 shall not appli where and insofar as: 

(a) the data subject alreadi have the information; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 137 
dgd 2 EN 


(b) the provis of such inform prof imposs or would involv a 

disproportion effort, in particular for process for archiv purpos in the 

public interest, scientif or histor research purpos or statist purposes, 

subject to the condit and safeguard refer to in articl 89(1) or in so far a the 

oblig refer to in paragraph 1 of thi articl be like to render imposs or 

serious impair the achiev of the object of that processing. In such case 

the control shall take appropri measur to protect the data subject' right and 

freedom and legitim interests, includ make the inform publicli 

available; 

(c) obtain or disclosur be expressli laid down by union or member state law to 

which the control be subject and which provid appropri measur to protect 

the data subject' legitim interests; or 

(d) where the person data must remain confidenti subject to an oblig of 

profession secreci regul by union or member state law, includ a statutori 

oblig of secrecy. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 138 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 15 

right of access by the data subject 

1. the data subject shall have the right to obtain from the control confirm a to 

whether or not person data concern him or her be be processed, and where that be 

the case, access to the person data and the follow information: 

(a) the purpos of the processing; 

(b) the categori of person data concerned; 

(c) the recipi or categori of recipi to whom the person data have be or will 

be disclosed, in particular recipi in third countri or intern organisations; 

(d) where possible, the envisag period for which the person data will be stored, or, if 

not possible, the criterion use to determin that period; 

(e) the exist of the right to request from the control rectif or erasur of 

person data or restrict of process of person data concern the data subject 

or to object to such processing; 

(f) the right to lodg a complaint with a supervisori authority; 

(g) where the person data be not collect from the data subject, ani avail 

inform a to their source; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 139 
dgd 2 EN 


(h) the exist of autom decision-making, includ profiling, refer to in 

articl 22(1) and (4) and, at least in those cases, meaning inform about the 

logic involved, a well a the signific and the envisag consequ of such 

process for the data subject. 

2. where person data be transfer to a third countri or to an intern organisation, 

the data subject shall have the right to be inform of the appropri safeguard pursuant 

to articl 46 relat to the transfer. 

3. the control shall provid a copi of the person data undergo processing. for ani 

further copi request by the data subject, the control may charg a reason fee 

base on administr costs. where the data subject make the request by electron 

means, and unless otherwis request by the data subject, the inform shall be 

provid in a commonli use electron form. 

4. the right to obtain a copi refer to in paragraph 3 shall not advers affect the right 

and freedom of others. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 140 
dgd 2 EN 


section 3 

rectif and erasur 

articl 16 

right to rectif 

the data subject shall have the right to obtain from the control without undu delay the 

rectif of inaccur person data concern him or her . take into account the purpos of 

the processing, the data subject shall have the right to have incomplet person data completed, 

includ by mean of provid a supplementari statement. 

articl 17 

right to erasur ('right to be forgotten') 

1. the data subject shall have the right to obtain from the control the erasur of person 

data concern him or her without undu delay and the control shall have the oblig 

to eras person data without undu delay where one of the follow ground applies: 

(a) the person data be no longer necessari in relat to the purpos for which they 

be collect or otherwis processed; 

(b) the data subject withdraw consent on which the process be base accord to 

point (a) of articl 6(1), or point (a) of articl 9(2), and where there be no other legal 

ground for the processing; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 141 
dgd 2 EN 


(c) the data subject object to the process pursuant to articl 21(1) and there be no 

overrid legitim ground for the processing, or the data subject object to the 

process pursuant to articl 21(2); 

(d) the person data have be unlaw processed; 

(e) the person data have to be eras for complianc with a legal oblig in union 

or member state law to which the control be subject; 

(f) the person data have be collect in relat to the offer of inform societi 

servic refer to in articl 8(1). 

2. where the control have make the person data public and be oblig pursuant to 

paragraph 1 to eras the person data, the controller, take account of avail 

technolog and the cost of implementation, shall take reason steps, includ technic 

measures, to inform control which be process the person data that the data subject 

have request the erasur by such control of ani link to, or copi or replic of, 

those person data. 

3. paragraph 1 and 2 shall not appli to the extent that process be necessary: 

(a) for exercis the right of freedom of express and information; 

(b) for complianc with a legal oblig which requir process by union or 

member state law to which the control be subject or for the perform of a task 

carri out in the public interest or in the exercis of offici author vest in the 

controller; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 142 
dgd 2 EN 


(c) for reason of public interest in the area of public health in accord with 

point (h) and (i) of articl 9(2) a well a articl 9(3); 

(d) for archiv purpos in the public interest, scientif or histor research purpos 

or statist purpos in accord with articl 89(1) in so far a the right refer 

to in paragraph 1 be like to render imposs or serious impair the achiev 

of the object of that processing; or 

(e) for the establishment, exercis or defenc of legal claims. 

articl 18 

right to restrict of process 

1. the data subject shall have the right to obtain from the control restrict of process 

where one of the follow applies: 

(a) the accuraci of the person data be contest by the data subject, for a period 

enabl the control to verifi the accuraci of the person data; 

(b) the process be unlaw and the data subject oppos the erasur of the person 

data and request the restrict of their use instead; 

(c) the control no longer need the person data for the purpos of the processing, 

but they be requir by the data subject for the establishment, exercis or defenc of 

legal claims; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 143 
dgd 2 EN 


(d) the data subject have object to process pursuant to articl 21(1) pend the 

verif whether the legitim ground of the control overrid those of the 

data subject. 

2. where process have be restrict under paragraph 1, such person data shall, with the 

except of storage, onli be process with the data subject' consent or for the 

establishment, exercis or defenc of legal claim or for the protect of the right of 

anoth natur or legal person or for reason of import public interest of the union or of 

a member state. 

3. A data subject who have obtain restrict of process pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be 

inform by the control befor the restrict of process be lifted. 

articl 19 

notif oblig regard rectif 

or erasur of person data or restrict of process 

the control shall commun ani rectif or erasur of person data or restrict of 

process carri out in accord with articl 16, 17(1) and 18 to each recipi to whom the 

person data have be disclosed, unless thi prof imposs or involv disproportion effort. 

the control shall inform the data subject about those recipi if the data subject request it. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 144 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 20 

right to data portabl 

1. the data subject shall have the right to receiv the person data concern him or her, 

which he or she have provid to a controller, in a structured, commonli use and 

machine-read format and have the right to transmit those data to anoth control 

without hindranc from the control to which the person data have be provided, 

where: 

(a) the process be base on consent pursuant to point (a) of articl 6(1) or point (a) of 

articl 9(2) or on a contract pursuant to point (b) of articl 6(1); and 

(b) the process be carri out by autom means. 

2. In exercis hi or her right to data portabl pursuant to paragraph 1, the data subject 

shall have the right to have the person data transmit directli from one control to 

another, where technic feasible. 

3. the exercis of the right refer to in paragraph 1 of thi articl shall be without 

prejudic to articl 17. that right shall not appli to process necessari for the 

perform of a task carri out in the public interest or in the exercis of offici 

author vest in the controller. 

4. the right refer to in paragraph 1 shall not advers affect the right and freedom of 

others. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 145 
dgd 2 EN 


section 4 

right TO object and autom individu decision-mak 

articl 21 

right to object 

1. the data subject shall have the right to object, on ground relat to hi or her particular 

situation, at ani time to process of person data concern him or her which be base 

on point (e) or (f) of articl 6(1), includ profil base on those provisions. the 

control shall no longer process the person data unless the control demonstr 

compel legitim ground for the process which overrid the interests, right and 

freedom of the data subject or for the establishment, exercis or defenc of legal claims. 

2. where person data be process for direct market purposes, the data subject shall 

have the right to object at ani time to process of person data concern him or her 

for such marketing, which includ profil to the extent that it be relat to such direct 

marketing. 

3. where the data subject object to process for direct market purposes, the person 

data shall no longer be process for such purposes. 

4. At the late at the time of the first commun with the data subject, the right refer 

to in paragraph 1 and 2 shall be explicitli brought to the attent of the data subject and 

shall be present clearli and separ from ani other information. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 146 
dgd 2 EN 


5. In the context of the use of inform societi services, and notwithstand 

direct 2002/58/ec, the data subject may exercis hi or her right to object by autom 

mean use technic specifications. 

6. where person data be process for scientif or histor research purpos or 

statist purpos pursuant to articl 89(1), the data subject, on ground relat to hi or 

her particular situation, shall have the right to object to process of person data 

concern him or her, unless the process be necessari for the perform of a task 

carri out for reason of public interest. 

articl 22 

autom individu decision-making, includ profil 

1. the data subject shall have the right not to be subject to a decis base sole on 

autom processing, includ profiling, which produc legal effect concern him or 

her or similarli significantli affect him or her. 

2. paragraph 1 shall not appli if the decision: 

(a) be necessari for enter into, or perform of, a contract between the data subject 

and a data controller; 

(b) be authoris by union or member state law to which the control be subject and 

which also lay down suitabl measur to safeguard the data subject' right and 

freedom and legitim interests; or 

(c) be base on the data subject' explicit consent. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 147 
dgd 2 EN 


3. In the case refer to in point (a) and (c) of paragraph 2, the data control shall 

implement suitabl measur to safeguard the data subject' right and freedom and 

legitim interests, at least the right to obtain human intervent on the part of the 

controller, to express hi or her point of view and to contest the decision. 

4. decis refer to in paragraph 2 shall not be base on special categori of person 

data refer to in articl 9(1), unless point (a) or (g) of articl 9(2) appli and suitabl 

measur to safeguard the data subject' right and freedom and legitim interest be in 

place. 

section 5 

restrict 

articl 23 

restrict 

1. union or member state law to which the data control or processor be subject may restrict 

by way of a legisl measur the scope of the oblig and right provid for in 

articl 12 to 22 and articl 34, a well a articl 5 in so far a it provis correspond 

to the right and oblig provid for in articl 12 to 22, when such a restrict 

respect the essenc of the fundament right and freedom and be a necessari and 

proportion measur in a democrat societi to safeguard: 

(a) nation security; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 148 
dgd 2 EN 


(b) defence; 

(c) public security; 

(d) the prevention, investigation, detect or prosecut of crimin offenc or the 

execut of crimin penalties, includ the safeguard against and the 

prevent of threat to public security; 

(e) other import object of gener public interest of the union or of a 

member state, in particular an import econom or financi interest of the union 

or of a member state, includ monetary, budgetari and taxat a matters, public 

health and social security; 

(f) the protect of judici independ and judici proceedings; 

(g) the prevention, investigation, detect and prosecut of breach of ethic for 

regul professions; 

(h) a monitoring, inspect or regulatori function connected, even occasionally, to the 

exercis of offici author in the case refer to in point (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) 

and (g); 

(i) the protect of the data subject or the right and freedom of others; 

(j) the enforc of civil law claims. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 149 
dgd 2 EN 


2. In particular, ani legisl measur refer to in paragraph 1 shall contain specif 

provis at least, where relevant, a to: 

(a) the purpos of the process or categori of processing; 

(b) the categori of person data; 

(c) the scope of the restrict introduced; 

(d) the safeguard to prevent abus or unlaw access or transfer; 

(e) the specif of the control or categori of controllers; 

(f) the storag period and the applic safeguard take into account the nature, 

scope and purpos of the process or categori of processing; 

(g) the risk to the right and freedom of data subjects; and 

(h) the right of data subject to be inform about the restriction, unless that may be 

prejudici to the purpos of the restriction. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 150 
dgd 2 EN 


chapter IV 

control and processor 

section 1 

gener oblig 

articl 24 

respons of the control 

1. take into account the nature, scope, context and purpos of process a well a the 

risk of vari likelihood and sever for the right and freedom of natur persons, the 

control shall implement appropri technic and organis measur to ensur and 

to be abl to demonstr that process be perform in accord with thi regulation. 

those measur shall be review and updat where necessary. 

2. where proportion in relat to process activities, the measur refer to in 

paragraph 1 shall includ the implement of appropri data protect polici by the 

controller. 

3. adher to approv code of conduct a refer to in articl 40 or approv 

certif mechan a refer to in articl 42 may be use a an element by which 

to demonstr complianc with the oblig of the controller. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 151 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 25 

data protect by design and by default 

1. take into account the state of the art, the cost of implement and the nature, scope, 

context and purpos of process a well a the risk of vari likelihood and sever 

for right and freedom of natur person pose by the processing, the control shall, 

both at the time of the determin of the mean for process and at the time of the 

process itself, implement appropri technic and organis measures, such a 

pseudonymisation, which be design to implement data-protect principles, such a 

data minimisation, in an effect manner and to integr the necessari safeguard into the 

process in order to meet the requir of thi regul and protect the right of 

data subjects. 

2. the control shall implement appropri technic and organis measur for 

ensur that, by default, onli person data which be necessari for each specif purpos 

of the process be processed. that oblig appli to the amount of person data 

collected, the extent of their processing, the period of their storag and their accessibility. 

In particular, such measur shall ensur that by default person data be not make 

access without the individual' intervent to an indefinit number of natur persons. 

3. An approv certif mechan pursuant to articl 42 may be use a an element to 

demonstr complianc with the requir set out in paragraph 1 and 2 of thi article. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 152 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 26 

joint control 

1. where two or more control jointli determin the purpos and mean of processing, 

they shall be joint controllers. they shall in a transpar manner determin their 

respect respons for complianc with the oblig under thi regulation, in 

particular a regard the exercis of the right of the data subject and their respect 

duti to provid the inform refer to in articl 13 and 14, by mean of an 

arrang between them unless, and in so far as, the respect respons of the 

control be determin by union or member state law to which the control be 

subject. the arrang may design a contact point for data subjects. 

2. the arrang refer to in paragraph 1 shall duli reflect the respect role and 

relationship of the joint control vis-à-vi the data subjects. the essenc of the 

arrang shall be make avail to the data subject. 

3. irrespect of the term of the arrang refer to in paragraph 1, the data subject 

may exercis hi or her right under thi regul in respect of and against each of the 

controllers. 

articl 27 

repres of control or processor not establish in the union 

1. where articl 3(2) applies, the control or the processor shall design in write a 

repres in the union. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 153 
dgd 2 EN 


2. thi oblig shall not appli to: 

(a) process which be occasional, do not include, on a larg scale, process of 

special categori of data a refer to in articl 9(1) or process of person data 

relat to crimin convict and offenc refer to in articl 10, and be unlik 

to result in a risk to the right and freedom of natur persons, take into account 

the nature, context, scope and purpos of the processing; or 

(b) a public author or body. 

3. the repres shall be establish in one of those member state where the data 

subject be and whose person data be process in relat to the offer of good or 

servic to them, or whose behaviour be monitored. 

4. the repres shall be mandat by the control or processor to be address in 

addit to or instead of the control or the processor by, in particular, supervisori 

author and data subjects, on all issu relat to processing, for the purpos of 

ensur complianc with thi regulation. 

5. the design of a repres by the control or processor shall be without 

prejudic to legal action which could be initi against the control or the processor 

themselves. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 154 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 28 

processor 

1. where process be to be carri out on behalf of a controller, the control shall use onli 

processor provid suffici guarante to implement appropri technic and 

organis measur in such a manner that process will meet the requir of 

thi regul and ensur the protect of the right of the data subject. 

2. the processor shall not engag anoth processor without prior specif or gener write 

authoris of the controller. In the case of gener write authorisation, the processor 

shall inform the control of ani intend chang concern the addit or replac 

of other processors, therebi give the control the opportun to object to such changes. 

3. process by a processor shall be govern by a contract or other legal act under union or 

member state law, that be bind on the processor with regard to the control and that 

set out the subject-matt and durat of the processing, the natur and purpos of the 

processing, the type of person data and categori of data subject and the oblig 

and right of the controller. that contract or other legal act shall stipulate, in particular, that 

the processor: 

(a) process the person data onli on document instruct from the controller, 

includ with regard to transfer of person data to a third countri or an 

intern organisation, unless requir to do so by union or member state law to 

which the processor be subject; in such a case, the processor shall inform the 

control of that legal requir befor processing, unless that law prohibit such 

inform on import ground of public interest; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 155 
dgd 2 EN 


(b) ensur that person authoris to process the person data have commit 

themselv to confidenti or be under an appropri statutori oblig of 

confidentiality; 

(c) take all measur requir pursuant to articl 32; 

(d) respect the condit refer to in paragraph 2 and 4 for engag anoth 

processor; 

(e) take into account the natur of the processing, assist the control by appropri 

technic and organis measures, insofar a thi be possible, for the fulfil of 

the controller' oblig to respond to request for exercis the data subject' 

right laid down in chapter iii; 

(f) assist the control in ensur complianc with the oblig pursuant to 

articl 32 to 36 take into account the natur of process and the inform 

avail to the processor; 

(g) at the choic of the controller, delet or return all the person data to the control 

after the end of the provis of servic relat to processing, and delet exist 

copi unless union or member state law requir storag of the person data; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 156 
dgd 2 EN 


(h) make avail to the control all inform necessari to demonstr 

complianc with the oblig laid down in thi articl and allow for and 

contribut to audits, includ inspections, conduct by the control or anoth 

auditor mandat by the controller. 

with regard to point (h) of the first subparagraph, the processor shall immedi inform 

the control if, in it opinion, an instruct infring thi regul or other union or 

member state data protect provisions. 

4. where a processor engag anoth processor for carri out specif process activ 

on behalf of the controller, the same data protect oblig a set out in the contract or 

other legal act between the control and the processor a refer to in paragraph 3 shall 

be impos on that other processor by way of a contract or other legal act under union or 

member state law, in particular provid suffici guarante to implement appropri 

technic and organis measur in such a manner that the process will meet the 

requir of thi regulation. where that other processor fail to fulfil it data protect 

obligations, the initi processor shall remain fulli liabl to the control for the 

perform of that other processor' obligations. 

5. adher of a processor to an approv code of conduct a refer to in articl 40 or an 

approv certif mechan a refer to in articl 42 may be use a an element 

by which to demonstr suffici guarante a refer to in paragraph 1 and 4 of 

thi article. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 157 
dgd 2 EN 


6. without prejudic to an individu contract between the control and the processor, the 

contract or the other legal act refer to in paragraph 3 and 4 of thi articl may be 

based, in whole or in part, on standard contractu claus refer to in paragraph 7 and 8 

of thi article, includ when they be part of a certif grant to the control or 

processor pursuant to articl 42 and 43. 

7. the commiss may lay down standard contractu claus for the matter refer to in 

paragraph 3 and 4 of thi articl and in accord with the examin procedur 

refer to in articl 93(2). 

8. A supervisori author may adopt standard contractu claus for the matter refer to 

in paragraph 3 and 4 of thi articl and in accord with the consist mechan 

refer to in articl 63. 

9. the contract or the other legal act refer to in paragraph 3 and 4 shall be in writing, 

includ in electron form. 

10. without prejudic to articl 82, 83 and 84, if a processor infring thi regul by 

determin the purpos and mean of processing, the processor shall be consid to be 

a control in respect of that processing. 

articl 29 

process under the author of the control or processor 

the processor and ani person act under the author of the control or of the processor, who 

have access to person data, shall not process those data except on instruct from the controller, 

unless requir to do so by union or member state law. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 158 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 30 

record of process activ 

1. each control and, where applicable, the controller' representative, shall maintain a 

record of process activ under it responsibility. that record shall contain all of the 

follow information: 

(a) the name and contact detail of the control and, where applicable, the joint 

controller, the controller' repres and the data protect officer; 

(b) the purpos of the processing; 

(c) a descript of the categori of data subject and of the categori of person data; 

(d) the categori of recipi to whom the person data have be or will be disclos 

includ recipi in third countri or intern organisations; 

(e) where applicable, transfer of person data to a third countri or an intern 

organisation, includ the identif of that third countri or intern 

organis and, in the case of transfer refer to in the second subparagraph of 

articl 49(1), the document of appropri safeguards; 

(f) where possible, the envisag time limit for erasur of the differ categori of 

data; 

(g) where possible, a gener descript of the technic and organis secur 

measur refer to in articl 32(1). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 159 
dgd 2 EN 


2. each processor and, where applicable, the processor' repres shall maintain a 

record of all categori of process activ carri out on behalf of a controller, 

containing: 

(a) the name and contact detail of the processor or processor and of each control on 

behalf of which the processor be acting, and, where applicable, of the controller' or 

the processor' representative, and the data protect officer; 

(b) the categori of process carri out on behalf of each controller; 

(c) where applicable, transfer of person data to a third countri or an intern 

organisation, includ the identif of that third countri or intern 

organis and, in the case of transfer refer to in the second subparagraph of 

articl 49(1), the document of appropri safeguards; 

(d) where possible, a gener descript of the technic and organis secur 

measur refer to in articl 32(1). 

3. the record refer to in paragraph 1 and 2 shall be in writing, includ in electron 

form. 

4. the control or the processor and, where applicable, the controller' or the processor' 

representative, shall make the record avail to the supervisori author on request. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 160 
dgd 2 EN 


5. the oblig refer to in paragraph 1 and 2 shall not appli to an enterpris or an 

organis employ few than 250 person unless the process it carri out be like 

to result in a risk to the right and freedom of data subjects, the process be not 

occasional, or the process includ special categori of data a refer to in 

articl 9(1) or person data relat to crimin convict and offenc refer to in 

articl 10. 

articl 31 

cooper with the supervisori author 

the control and the processor and, where applicable, their representatives, shall cooperate, on 

request, with the supervisori author in the perform of it tasks. 

section 2 

secur OF person data 

articl 32 

secur of process 

1. take into account the state of the art, the cost of implement and the nature, scope, 

context and purpos of process a well a the risk of vari likelihood and sever 

for the right and freedom of natur persons, the control and the processor shall 

implement appropri technic and organis measur to ensur a level of secur 

appropri to the risk, includ inter alia a appropriate: 

(a) the pseudonymis and encrypt of person data; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 161 
dgd 2 EN 


(b) the abil to ensur the ongo confidentiality, integrity, avail and resili 

of process system and services; 

(c) the abil to restor the avail and access to person data in a time manner in 

the event of a physic or technic incident; 

(d) a process for regularli testing, assess and evalu the effect of technic 

and organis measur for ensur the secur of the processing. 

2. In assess the appropri level of secur account shall be take in particular of the 

risk that be present by processing, in particular from accident or unlaw 

destruction, loss, alteration, unauthoris disclosur of, or access to person data 

transmitted, store or otherwis processed. 

3. adher to an approv code of conduct a refer to in articl 40 or an approv 

certif mechan a refer to in articl 42 may be use a an element by which to 

demonstr complianc with the requir set out in paragraph 1 of thi article. 

4. the control and processor shall take step to ensur that ani natur person act under 

the author of the control or the processor who have access to person data do not 

process them except on instruct from the controller, unless he or she be requir to do 

so by union or member state law. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 162 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 33 

notif of a person data breach to the supervisori author 

1. In the case of a person data breach, the control shall without undu delay and, where 

feasible, not late than 72 hour after have becom awar of it, notifi the person data 

breach to the supervisori author compet in accord with articl 55, unless the 

person data breach be unlik to result in a risk to the right and freedom of natur 

persons. where the notif to the supervisori author be not make within 72 hours, it 

shall be accompani by reason for the delay. 

2. the processor shall notifi the control without undu delay after becom awar of a 

person data breach. 

3. the notif refer to in paragraph 1 shall at least: 

(a) describ the natur of the person data breach includ where possible, the 

categori and approxim number of data subject concern and the categori 

and approxim number of person data record concerned; 

(b) commun the name and contact detail of the data protect offic or other 

contact point where more inform can be obtained; 

(c) describ the like consequ of the person data breach; 

(d) describ the measur take or propos to be take by the control to address the 

person data breach, including, where appropriate, measur to mitig it possibl 

advers effects. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 163 
dgd 2 EN 


4. where, and in so far as, it be not possibl to provid the inform at the same time, the 

inform may be provid in phase without undu further delay. 

5. the control shall document ani person data breaches, compris the fact relat to 

the person data breach, it effect and the remedi action taken. that document 

shall enabl the supervisori author to verifi complianc with thi article. 

articl 34 

commun of a person data breach to the data subject 

1. when the person data breach be like to result in a high risk to the right and freedom of 

natur persons, the control shall commun the person data breach to the data 

subject without undu delay. 

2. the commun to the data subject refer to in paragraph 1 of thi articl shall 

describ in clear and plain languag the natur of the person data breach and contain at 

least the inform and the recommend provid for in point (b), (c) and (d) of 

articl 33(3). 

3. the commun to the data subject refer to in paragraph 1 shall not be requir if 

ani of the follow condit be met: 

(a) the control have implement appropri technic and organis protect 

measures, and that those measur be appli to the person data affect by the 

person data breach, in particular those that render the person data unintellig to 

ani person who be not authoris to access it, such a encryption; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 164 
dgd 2 EN 


(b) the control have take subsequ measur which ensur that the high risk to the 

right and freedom of data subject refer to in paragraph 1 be no longer like to 

materialise; 

(c) it would involv disproportion effort. In such a case, there shall instead be a 

public commun or similar measur wherebi the data subject be inform in 

an equal effect manner. 

4. If the control have not alreadi commun the person data breach to the data subject, 

the supervisori authority, have consid the likelihood of the person data breach 

result in a high risk, may requir it to do so or may decid that ani of the condit 

refer to in paragraph 3 be met. 

section 3 

data protect impact assess and prior consult 

articl 35 

data protect impact assess 

1. where a type of process in particular use new technologies, and take into account 

the nature, scope, context and purpos of the processing, be like to result in a high risk to 

the right and freedom of natur persons, the control shall, prior to the processing, 

carri out an assess of the impact of the envisag process oper on the 

protect of person data. A singl assess may address a set of similar process 

oper that present similar high risks. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 165 
dgd 2 EN 


2. the control shall seek the advic of the data protect officer, where designated, when 

carri out a data protect impact assessment. 

3. A data protect impact assess refer to in paragraph 1 shall in particular be 

requir in the case of: 

(a) a systemat and extens evalu of person aspect relat to natur person 

which be base on autom processing, includ profiling, and on which decis 

be base that produc legal effect concern the natur person or similarli 

significantli affect the natur person; 

(b) process on a larg scale of special categori of data refer to in articl 9(1), or 

of person data relat to crimin convict and offenc refer to in 

articl 10; or 

(c) a systemat monitor of a publicli access area on a larg scale. 

4. the supervisori author shall establish and make public a list of the kind of process 

oper which be subject to the requir for a data protect impact assess 

pursuant to paragraph 1. the supervisori author shall commun those list to 

the board refer to in articl 68. 

5. the supervisori author may also establish and make public a list of the kind of 

process oper for which no data protect impact assess be required. the 

supervisori author shall commun those list to the board. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 166 
dgd 2 EN 


6. prior to the adopt of the list refer to in paragraph 4 and 5, the compet 

supervisori author shall appli the consist mechan refer to in articl 63 

where such list involv process activ which be relat to the offer of good or 

servic to data subject or to the monitor of their behaviour in sever member states, 

or may substanti affect the free movement of person data within the union. 

7. the assess shall contain at least: 

(a) a systemat descript of the envisag process oper and the purpos of 

the processing, including, where applicable, the legitim interest pursu by the 

controller; 

(b) an assess of the necess and proportion of the process oper in 

relat to the purposes; 

(c) an assess of the risk to the right and freedom of data subject refer to in 

paragraph 1; and 

(d) the measur envisag to address the risks, includ safeguards, secur measur 

and mechan to ensur the protect of person data and to demonstr 

complianc with thi regul take into account the right and legitim 

interest of data subject and other person concerned. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 167 
dgd 2 EN 


8. complianc with approv code of conduct refer to in articl 40 by the relev 

control or processor shall be take into due account in assess the impact of the 

process oper perform by such control or processors, in particular for the 

purpos of a data protect impact assessment. 

9. where appropriate, the control shall seek the view of data subject or their 

repres on the intend processing, without prejudic to the protect of 

commerci or public interest or the secur of process operations. 

10. where process pursuant to point (c) or (e) of articl 6(1) have a legal basi in union law 

or in the law of the member state to which the control be subject, that law regul the 

specif process oper or set of oper in question, and a data protect impact 

assess have alreadi be carri out a part of a gener impact assess in the 

context of the adopt of that legal basis, paragraph 1 to 7 shall not appli unless 

member state deem it to be necessari to carri out such an assess prior to process 

activities. 

11. where necessary, the control shall carri out a review to ass if process be 

perform in accord with the data protect impact assess at least when there be 

a chang of the risk repres by process operations. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 168 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 36 

prior consult 

1. the control shall consult the supervisori author prior to process where a data 

protect impact assess under articl 35 indic that the process would result in 

a high risk in the absenc of measur take by the control to mitig the risk. 

2. where the supervisori author be of the opinion that the intend process refer to in 

paragraph 1 would infring thi regulation, in particular where the control have 

insuffici identifi or mitig the risk, the supervisori author shall, within period 

of up to eight week of receipt of the request for consultation, provid write advic to the 

control and, where applic to the processor, and may use ani of it power refer to 

in articl 58. that period may be extend by six weeks, take into account the 

complex of the intend processing. the supervisori author shall inform the 

control and, where applicable, the processor, of ani such extens within one month of 

receipt of the request for consult togeth with the reason for the delay. those 

period may be suspend until the supervisori author have obtain inform it have 

request for the purpos of the consultation. 

3. when consult the supervisori author pursuant to paragraph 1, the control shall 

provid the supervisori author with: 

(a) where applicable, the respect respons of the controller, joint control 

and processor involv in the processing, in particular for process within a group 

of undertakings; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 169 
dgd 2 EN 


(b) the purpos and mean of the intend processing; 

(c) the measur and safeguard provid to protect the right and freedom of data 

subject pursuant to thi regulation; 

(d) where applicable, the contact detail of the data protect officer; 

(e) the data protect impact assess provid for in articl 35; and 

(f) ani other inform request by the supervisori authority. 

4. member state shall consult the supervisori author dure the prepar of a propos 

for a legisl measur to be adopt by a nation parliament, or of a regulatori measur 

base on such a legisl measure, which relat to processing. 

5. notwithstand paragraph 1, member state law may requir control to consult with, 

and obtain prior authoris from, the supervisori author in relat to process by a 

control for the perform of a task carri out by the control in the public interest, 

includ process in relat to social protect and public health. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 170 
dgd 2 EN 


section 4 

data protect offic 

articl 37 

design of the data protect offic 

1. the control and the processor shall design a data protect offic in ani case where: 

(a) the process be carri out by a public author or body, except for court act in 

their judici capacity; 

(b) the core activ of the control or the processor consist of process oper 

which, by virtu of their nature, their scope and/or their purposes, requir regular and 

systemat monitor of data subject on a larg scale; or 

(c) the core activ of the control or the processor consist of process on a larg 

scale of special categori of data pursuant to articl 9 and person data relat to 

crimin convict and offenc refer to in articl 10. 

2. A group of undertak may appoint a singl data protect offic provid that a data 

protect offic be easili access from each establishment. 

3. where the control or the processor be a public author or body, a singl data protect 

offic may be design for sever such author or bodies, take account of their 

organis structur and size. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 171 
dgd 2 EN 


4. In case other than those refer to in paragraph 1, the control or processor or 

associ and other bodi repres categori of control or processor may or, 

where requir by union or member state law shall, design a data protect officer. 

the data protect offic may act for such associ and other bodi repres 

control or processors. 

5. the data protect offic shall be design on the basi of profession qualiti and, in 

particular, expert knowledg of data protect law and practic and the abil to fulfil 

the task refer to in articl 39. 

6. the data protect offic may be a staff member of the control or processor, or fulfil 

the task on the basi of a servic contract. 

7. the control or the processor shall publish the contact detail of the data protect 

offic and commun them to the supervisori authority. 

articl 38 

posit of the data protect offic 

1. the control and the processor shall ensur that the data protect offic be involved, 

properli and in a time manner, in all issu which relat to the protect of person 

data. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 172 
dgd 2 EN 


2. the control and processor shall support the data protect offic in perform the 

task refer to in articl 39 by provid resourc necessari to carri out those task and 

access to person data and process operations, and to maintain hi or her expert 

knowledge. 

3. the control and processor shall ensur that the data protect offic do not receiv 

ani instruct regard the exercis of those tasks. He or she shall not be dismiss or 

penalis by the control or the processor for perform hi tasks. the data protect 

offic shall directli report to the high manag level of the control or the 

processor. 

4. data subject may contact the data protect offic with regard to all issu relat to 

process of their person data and to the exercis of their right under thi regulation. 

5. the data protect offic shall be bound by secreci or confidenti concern the 

perform of hi or her tasks, in accord with union or member state law. 

6. the data protect offic may fulfil other task and duties. the control or processor 

shall ensur that ani such task and duti do not result in a conflict of interests. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 173 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 39 

task of the data protect offic 

1. the data protect offic shall have at least the follow tasks: 

(a) to inform and advis the control or the processor and the employe who carri out 

process of their oblig pursuant to thi regul and to other union or 

member state data protect provisions; 

(b) to monitor complianc with thi regulation, with other union or member state data 

protect provis and with the polici of the control or processor in relat to 

the protect of person data, includ the assign of responsibilities, 

awareness-rais and train of staff involv in process operations, and the 

relat audits; 

(c) to provid advic where request a regard the data protect impact assess 

and monitor it perform pursuant to articl 35; 

(d) to cooper with the supervisori authority; 

(e) to act a the contact point for the supervisori author on issu relat to 

processing, includ the prior consult refer to in articl 36, and to consult, 

where appropriate, with regard to ani other matter. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 174 
dgd 2 EN 


2. the data protect offic shall in the perform of hi or her task have due regard to 

the risk associ with process operations, take into account the nature, scope, 

context and purpos of processing. 

section 5 

code OF conduct and certif 

articl 40 

code of conduct 

1. the member states, the supervisori authorities, the board and the commiss shall 

encourag the draw up of code of conduct intend to contribut to the proper 

applic of thi regulation, take account of the specif featur of the variou 

process sector and the specif need of micro, small and medium-s enterprises. 

2. associ and other bodi repres categori of control or processor may 

prepar code of conduct, or amend or extend such codes, for the purpos of specifi the 

applic of thi regulation, such a with regard to: 

(a) fair and transpar processing; 

(b) the legitim interest pursu by control in specif contexts; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 175 
dgd 2 EN 


(c) the collect of person data; 

(d) the pseudonymis of person data; 

(e) the inform provid to the public and to data subjects; 

(f) the exercis of the right of data subjects; 

(g) the inform provid to, and the protect of, children, and the manner in which 

the consent of the holder of parent respons over child be to be obtained; 

(h) the measur and procedur refer to in articl 24 and 25 and the measur to 

ensur secur of process refer to in articl 32; 

(i) the notif of person data breach to supervisori author and the 

commun of such person data breach to data subjects; 

(j) the transfer of person data to third countri or intern organisations; or 

(k) out-of-court proceed and other disput resolut procedur for resolv 

disput between control and data subject with regard to processing, without 

prejudic to the right of data subject pursuant to articl 77 and 79. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 176 
dgd 2 EN 


3. In addit to adher by control or processor subject to thi regulation, code of 

conduct approv pursuant to paragraph 5 of thi articl and have gener valid 

pursuant to paragraph 9 of thi articl may also be adher to by control or processor 

that be not subject to thi regul pursuant to articl 3 in order to provid appropri 

safeguard within the framework of person data transfer to third countri or 

intern organis under the term refer to in point (e) of articl 46(2). such 

control or processor shall make bind and enforc commitments, via contractu 

or other legal bind instruments, to appli those appropri safeguard includ with 

regard to the right of data subjects. 

4. A code of conduct refer to in paragraph 2 of thi articl shall contain mechan 

which enabl the bodi refer to in articl 41(1) to carri out the mandatori monitor of 

complianc with it provis by the control or processor which undertak to appli it, 

without prejudic to the task and power of supervisori author compet pursuant to 

articl 55 or 56. 

5. associ and other bodi refer to in paragraph 2 of thi articl which intend to 

prepar a code of conduct or to amend or extend an exist code shall submit the draft 

code, amend or extens to the supervisori author which be compet pursuant to 

articl 55. the supervisori author shall provid an opinion on whether the draft code, 

amend or extens compli with thi regul and shall approv that draft code, 

amend or extens if it find that it provid suffici appropri safeguards. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 177 
dgd 2 EN 


6. where the draft code, or amend or extens be approv in accord with 

paragraph 5, and where the code of conduct concern do not relat to process 

activ in sever member states, the supervisori author shall regist and publish the 

code. 

7. where a draft code of conduct relat to process activ in sever member states, the 

supervisori author which be compet pursuant to articl 55 shall, befor approv the 

draft code, amend or extension, submit it in the procedur refer to in articl 63 to 

the board which shall provid an opinion on whether the draft code, amend or 

extens compli with thi regul or, in the situat refer to in paragraph 3, 

provid appropri safeguards. 

8. where the opinion refer to in paragraph 7 confirm that the draft code, amend or 

extens compli with thi regulation, or, in the situat refer to in paragraph 3, 

provid appropri safeguards, the board shall submit it opinion to the commission. 

9. the commiss may, by way of implement acts, decid that the approv code of 

conduct, amend or extens submit to it pursuant to paragraph 8 have gener 

valid within the union. those implement act shall be adopt in accord with 

the examin procedur set out in articl 93(2). 

10. the commiss shall ensur appropri public for the approv code which have 

be decid a have gener valid in accord with paragraph 9. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 178 
dgd 2 EN 


11. the board shall collat all approv code of conduct, amend and extens in a 

regist and shall make them publicli avail by way of appropri means. 

articl 41 

monitor of approv code of conduct 

1. without prejudic to the task and power of the compet supervisori author under 

articl 57 and 58, the monitor of complianc with a code of conduct pursuant to 

articl 40 may be carri out by a bodi which have an appropri level of expertis in 

relat to the subject-matt of the code and be accredit for that purpos by the 

compet supervisori authority. 

2. A bodi a refer to in paragraph 1 may be accredit to monitor complianc with a code 

of conduct where that bodi has: 

(a) demonstr it independ and expertis in relat to the subject-matt of the 

code to the satisfact of the compet supervisori authority; 

(b) establish procedur which allow it to ass the elig of control and 

processor concern to appli the code, to monitor their complianc with it 

provis and to period review it operation; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 179 
dgd 2 EN 


(c) establish procedur and structur to handl complaint about infring of 

the code or the manner in which the code have been, or be being, implement by a 

control or processor, and to make those procedur and structur transpar to 

data subject and the public; and 

(d) demonstr to the satisfact of the compet supervisori author that it task 

and duti do not result in a conflict of interests. 

3. the compet supervisori author shall submit the draft criterion for accredit of a 

bodi a refer to in paragraph 1 of thi articl to the board pursuant to the consist 

mechan refer to in articl 63. 

4. without prejudic to the task and power of the compet supervisori author and the 

provis of chapter viii, a bodi a refer to in paragraph 1 shall, subject to 

appropri safeguards, take appropri action in case of infring of the code by a 

control or processor, includ suspens or exclus of the control or processor 

concern from the code. It shall inform the compet supervisori author of such 

action and the reason for take them. 

5. the compet supervisori author shall revok the accredit of a bodi a refer to 

in paragraph 1 if the condit for accredit be not, or be no longer, met or where 

action take by the bodi infring thi regulation. 

6. thi articl shall not appli to process carri out by public author and bodies. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 180 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 42 

certif 

1. the member states, the supervisori authorities, the board and the commiss shall 

encourage, in particular at union level, the establish of data protect certif 

mechan and of data protect seal and marks, for the purpos of demonstr 

complianc with thi regul of process oper by control and processors. 

the specif need of micro, small and medium-s enterpris shall be take into 

account. 

2. In addit to adher by control or processor subject to thi regulation, data 

protect certif mechanisms, seal or mark approv pursuant to paragraph 5 of 

thi articl may be establish for the purpos of demonstr the exist of 

appropri safeguard provid by control or processor that be not subject to thi 

regul pursuant to articl 3 within the framework of person data transfer to third 

countri or intern organis under the term refer to in point (f) of 

articl 46(2). such control or processor shall make bind and enforc 

commitments, via contractu or other legal bind instruments, to appli those 

appropri safeguards, includ with regard to the right of data subjects. 

3. the certif shall be voluntari and avail via a process that be transparent. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 181 
dgd 2 EN 


4. A certif pursuant to thi articl do not reduc the respons of the control 

or the processor for complianc with thi regul and be without prejudic to the task 

and power of the supervisori author which be compet pursuant to articl 55 

or 56. 

5. A certif pursuant to thi articl shall be issu by the certif bodi refer to 

in articl 43 or by the compet supervisori authority, on the basi of criterion approv 

by that compet supervisori author pursuant to articl 58(3) or by the board pursuant 

to articl 63. where the criterion be approv by the board, thi may result in a common 

certification, the european data protect seal. 

6. the control or processor which submit it process to the certif mechan 

shall provid the certif bodi refer to in articl 43, or where applicable, the 

compet supervisori authority, with all inform and access to it process activ 

which be necessari to conduct the certif procedure. 

7. certif shall be issu to a control or processor for a maximum period of three 

year and may be renewed, under the same conditions, provid that the relev 

requir continu to be met. certif shall be withdrawn, a applicable, by the 

certif bodi refer to in articl 43 or by the compet supervisori author 

where the requir for the certif be not or be no longer met. 

8. the board shall collat all certif mechan and data protect seal and mark in 

a regist and shall make them publicli avail by ani appropri means. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 182 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 43 

certif bodi 

1. without prejudic to the task and power of the compet supervisori author under 

articl 57 and 58, certif bodi which have an appropri level of expertis in 

relat to data protect shall, after inform the supervisori author in order to allow 

it to exercis it power pursuant to point (h) of articl 58(2) where necessary, issu and 

renew certification. member state shall ensur that those certif bodi be 

accredit by one or both of the following: 

(a) the supervisori author which be compet pursuant to articl 55 or 56; 

(b) the nation accredit bodi name in accord with regul (ec) 

No 765/2008 of the european parliament and of the council1 in accord with 

en-iso/iec 17065/2012 and with the addit requir establish by the 

supervisori author which be compet pursuant to articl 55 or 56. 

2. certif bodi refer to in paragraph 1 shall be accredit in accord with 

paragraph 1 onli where they have: 

(a) demonstr their independ and expertis in relat to the subject-matt of the 

certif to the satisfact of the compet supervisori authority; 


1 regul (ec) No 765/2008 of the european parliament and of the council of 9 juli 2008 

set out the requir for accredit and market surveil relat to the 
market of product and repeal regul (eec) No 339/93 (oj L 218, 13.8.2008, 
p. 30). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 183 
dgd 2 EN 


(b) undertaken to respect the criterion refer to in articl 42(5) and approv by the 

supervisori author which be compet pursuant to articl 55 or 56 or by the 

board pursuant to articl 63; 

(c) establish procedur for the issuing, period review and withdraw of data 

protect certification, seal and marks; 

(d) establish procedur and structur to handl complaint about infring of 

the certif or the manner in which the certif have been, or be being, 

implement by the control or processor, and to make those procedur and 

structur transpar to data subject and the public; and 

(e) demonstrated, to the satisfact of the compet supervisori authority, that their 

task and duti do not result in a conflict of interests. 

3. the accredit of certif bodi a refer to in paragraph 1 and 2 shall take 

place on the basi of criterion approv by the supervisori author which be compet 

pursuant to articl 55 or 56 or by the board pursuant to articl 63. In the case of 

accredit pursuant to point (b) of paragraph 1 of thi article, those requir shall 

complement those envisag in regul (ec) No 765/2008 and the technic rule that 

describ the method and procedur of the certif bodies. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 184 
dgd 2 EN 


4. the certif bodi refer to in paragraph 1 shall be respons for the proper 

assess lead to the certif or the withdraw of such certif without 

prejudic to the respons of the control or processor for complianc with thi 

regulation. the accredit shall be issu for a maximum period of five year and may 

be renew on the same condit provid that the certif bodi meet the 

requir set out in thi article. 

5. the certif bodi refer to in paragraph 1 shall provid the compet supervisori 

author with the reason for grant or withdraw the request certification. 

6. the requir refer to in paragraph 3 of thi articl and the criterion refer to in 

articl 42(5) shall be make public by the supervisori author in an easili access 

form. the supervisori author shall also transmit those requir and criterion to the 

board. the board shall collat all certif mechan and data protect seal in a 

regist and shall make them publicli avail by ani appropri means. 

7. without prejudic to chapter viii, the compet supervisori author or the nation 

accredit bodi shall revok an accredit of a certif bodi pursuant to 

paragraph 1 of thi articl where the condit for the accredit be not, or be no 

longer, met or where action take by a certif bodi infring thi regulation. 

8. the commiss shall be empow to adopt deleg act in accord with articl 92 

for the purpos of specifi the requir to be take into account for the data 

protect certif mechan refer to in articl 42(1). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 185 
dgd 2 EN 


9. the commiss may adopt implement act lay down technic standard for 

certif mechan and data protect seal and marks, and mechan to promot 

and recognis those certif mechanisms, seal and marks. those implement act 

shall be adopt in accord with the examin procedur refer to in articl 93(2). 

chapter V 

transfer OF person data TO third countri 

OR intern organis 

articl 44 

gener principl for transfer 

ani transfer of person data which be undergo process or be intend for process after 

transfer to a third countri or to an intern organis shall take place onli if, subject to the 

other provis of thi regulation, the condit laid down in thi chapter be compli with by 

the control and processor, includ for onward transfer of person data from the third countri 

or an intern organis to anoth third countri or to anoth intern organisation. all 

provis in thi chapter shall be appli in order to ensur that the level of protect of natur 

person guarante by thi regul be not undermined. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 186 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 45 

transfer on the basi of an adequaci decis 

1. A transfer of person data to a third countri or an intern organis may take 

place where the commiss have decid that the third country, a territori or one or more 

specifi sector within that third country, or the intern organis in question 

ensur an adequ level of protection. such a transfer shall not requir ani specif 

authorisation. 

2. when assess the adequaci of the level of protection, the commiss shall, in 

particular, take account of the follow elements: 

(a) the rule of law, respect for human right and fundament freedoms, relev 

legislation, both gener and sectoral, includ concern public security, defence, 

nation secur and crimin law and the access of public author to person 

data, a well a the implement of such legislation, data protect rules, 

profession rule and secur measures, includ rule for the onward transfer of 

person data to anoth third countri or intern organis which be 

compli with in that countri or intern organisation, case-law, a well a 

effect and enforc data subject right and effect administr and judici 

redress for the data subject whose person data be be transferred; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 187 
dgd 2 EN 


(b) the exist and effect function of one or more independ supervisori 

author in the third countri or to which an intern organis be subject, 

with respons for ensur and enforc complianc with the data protect 

rules, includ adequ enforc powers, for assist and advis the data 

subject in exercis their right and for cooper with the supervisori author 

of the member states; and 

(c) the intern commit the third countri or intern organis 

concern have enter into, or other oblig aris from legal bind 

convent or instrument a well a from it particip in multilater or region 

systems, in particular in relat to the protect of person data. 

3. the commission, after assess the adequaci of the level of protection, may decide, by 

mean of implement act, that a third country, a territori or one or more specifi sector 

within a third country, or an intern organis ensur an adequ level of 

protect within the mean of paragraph 2 of thi article. the implement act shall 

provid for a mechan for a period review, at least everi four years, which shall take 

into account all relev develop in the third countri or intern organisation. 

the implement act shall specifi it territori and sector applic and, where 

applicable, identifi the supervisori author or author refer to in point (b) of 

paragraph 2 of thi article. the implement act shall be adopt in accord with the 

examin procedur refer to in articl 93(2). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 188 
dgd 2 EN 


4. the commiss shall, on an ongo basis, monitor develop in third countri and 

intern organis that could affect the function of decis adopt pursuant 

to paragraph 3 of thi articl and decis adopt on the basi of articl 25(6) of 

direct 95/46/ec. 

5. the commiss shall, where avail inform reveals, in particular follow the 

review refer to in paragraph 3 of thi article, that a third country, a territori or one or 

more specifi sector within a third country, or an intern organis no longer 

ensur an adequ level of protect within the mean of paragraph 2 of thi article, 

to the extent necessary, repeal, amend or suspend the decis refer to in paragraph 3 of 

thi articl by mean of implement act without retro-act effect. those 

implement act shall be adopt in accord with the examin procedur refer 

to in articl 93(2). 

On duli justifi imper ground of urgency, the commiss shall adopt immedi 

applic implement act in accord with the procedur refer to in articl 93(3). 

6. the commiss shall enter into consult with the third countri or intern 

organis with a view to remedi the situat give rise to the decis make 

pursuant to paragraph 5. 

7. A decis pursuant to paragraph 5 of thi articl be without prejudic to transfer of 

person data to the third country, a territori or one or more specifi sector within that 

third country, or the intern organis in question pursuant to articl 46 to 49. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 189 
dgd 2 EN 


8. the commiss shall publish in the offici journal of the european union and on it 

websit a list of the third countries, territori and specifi sector within a third countri 

and intern organis for which it have decid that an adequ level of protect 

be or be no longer ensured. 

9. decis adopt by the commiss on the basi of articl 25(6) of direct 95/46/ec 

shall remain in forc until amended, replac or repeal by a commiss decis 

adopt in accord with paragraph 3 or 5 of thi article. 

articl 46 

transfer subject to appropri safeguard 

1. In the absenc of a decis pursuant to articl 45(3), a control or processor may 

transfer person data to a third countri or an intern organis onli if the 

control or processor have provid appropri safeguards, and on condit that 

enforc data subject right and effect legal remedi for data subject be available. 

2. the appropri safeguard refer to in paragraph 1 may be provid for, without 

requir ani specif authoris from a supervisori authority, by: 

(a) a legal bind and enforc instrument between public author or bodies; 

(b) bind corpor rule in accord with articl 47; 

(c) standard data protect claus adopt by the commiss in accord with the 

examin procedur refer to in articl 93(2); 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 190 
dgd 2 EN 


(d) standard data protect claus adopt by a supervisori author and approv by 

the commiss pursuant to the examin procedur refer to in articl 93(2); 

(e) an approv code of conduct pursuant to articl 40 togeth with bind and 

enforc commit of the control or processor in the third countri to appli 

the appropri safeguards, includ a regard data subjects' rights; or 

(f) an approv certif mechan pursuant to articl 42 togeth with bind 

and enforc commit of the control or processor in the third countri to 

appli the appropri safeguards, includ a regard data subjects' rights. 

3. subject to the authoris from the compet supervisori authority, the appropri 

safeguard refer to in paragraph 1 may also be provid for, in particular, by: 

(a) contractu claus between the control or processor and the controller, processor 

or the recipi of the person data in the third countri or intern organisation; 

or 

(b) provis to be insert into administr arrang between public author 

or bodi which includ enforc and effect data subject rights. 

4. the supervisori author shall appli the consist mechan refer to in articl 63 

in the case refer to in paragraph 3 of thi article. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 191 
dgd 2 EN 


5. authoris by a member state or supervisori author on the basi of articl 26(2) of 

direct 95/46/ec shall remain valid until amended, replac or repealed, if necessary, by 

that supervisori authority. decis adopt by the commiss on the basi of 

articl 26(4) of direct 95/46/ec shall remain in forc until amended, replac or 

repealed, if necessary, by a commiss decis adopt in accord with paragraph 2 

of thi article. 

articl 47 

bind corpor rule 

1. the compet supervisori author shall approv bind corpor rule in accord 

with the consist mechan set out in articl 63, provid that they: 

(a) be legal bind and appli to and be enforc by everi member concern of the 

group of undertakings, or group of enterpris engag in a joint econom activity, 

includ their employees; 

(b) expressli confer enforc right on data subject with regard to the process of 

their person data; and 

(c) fulfil the requir laid down in paragraph 2. 

2. the bind corpor rule refer to in paragraph 1 shall specifi at least: 

(a) the structur and contact detail of the group of undertakings, or group of enterpris 

engag in a joint econom activ and of each of it members; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 192 
dgd 2 EN 


(b) the data transfer or set of transfers, includ the categori of person data, the 

type of process and it purposes, the type of data subject affect and the 

identif of the third countri or countri in question; 

(c) their legal bind nature, both intern and externally; 

(d) the applic of the gener data protect principles, in particular purpos 

limitation, data minimisation, limit storag periods, data quality, data protect by 

design and by default, legal basi for processing, process of special categori of 

person data, measur to ensur data security, and the requir in respect of 

onward transfer to bodi not bound by the bind corpor rules; 

(e) the right of data subject in regard to process and the mean to exercis those 

rights, includ the right not to be subject to decis base sole on autom 

processing, includ profil in accord with articl 22, the right to lodg a 

complaint with the compet supervisori author and befor the compet court 

of the member state in accord with articl 79, and to obtain redress and, where 

appropriate, compens for a breach of the bind corpor rules; 

(f) the accept by the control or processor establish on the territori of a 

member state of liabil for ani breach of the bind corpor rule by ani 

member concern not establish in the union; the control or the processor shall 

be exempt from that liability, in whole or in part, onli if it prof that that member be 

not respons for the event give rise to the damage; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 193 
dgd 2 EN 


(g) how the inform on the bind corpor rules, in particular on the provis 

refer to in point (d), (e) and (f) of thi paragraph be provid to the data subject 

in addit to articl 13 and 14; 

(h) the task of ani data protect offic design in accord with articl 37 or 

ani other person or entiti in charg of the monitor complianc with the bind 

corpor rule within the group of undertakings, or group of enterpris engag in a 

joint econom activity, a well a monitor train and complaint-handling; 

(i) the complaint procedures; 

(j) the mechan within the group of undertakings, or group of enterpris engag in 

a joint econom activ for ensur the verif of complianc with the bind 

corpor rules. such mechan shall includ data protect audit and method 

for ensur correct action to protect the right of the data subject. result of 

such verif should be commun to the person or entiti refer under 

point (h) and to the board of the control undertak of a group of undertakings, 

or of the group of enterpris engag in a joint econom activity, and should be 

avail upon request to the compet supervisori authority; 

(k) the mechan for report and record chang to the rule and report those 

chang to the supervisori authority; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 194 
dgd 2 EN 


(l) the cooper mechan with the supervisori author to ensur complianc by 

ani member of the group of undertakings, or group of enterpris engag in a joint 

econom activity, in particular by make avail to the supervisori author the 

result of verif of the measur refer to in point (j); 

(m) the mechan for report to the compet supervisori author ani legal 

requir to which a member of the group of undertakings, or group of 

enterpris engag in a joint econom activ be subject in a third countri which 

be like to have a substanti advers effect on the guarante provid by the 

bind corpor rules; and 

(n) the appropri data protect train to personnel have perman or regular 

access to person data. 

3. the commiss may specifi the format and procedur for the exchang of inform 

between controllers, processor and supervisori author for bind corpor rule 

within the mean of thi article. those implement act shall be adopt in accord 

with the examin procedur set out in articl 93(2). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 195 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 48 

transfer or disclosur not authoris by union law 

ani judgment of a court or tribun and ani decis of an administr author of a third 

countri requir a control or processor to transfer or disclos person data may onli be 

recognis or enforc in ani manner if base on an intern agreement, such a a mutual 

legal assist treaty, in forc between the request third countri and the union or a 

member state, without prejudic to other ground for transfer pursuant to thi chapter. 

articl 49 

derog for specif situat 

1. In the absenc of an adequaci decis pursuant to articl 45(3), or of appropri 

safeguard pursuant to articl 46, includ bind corpor rules, a transfer or a set of 

transfer of person data to a third countri or an intern organis shall take place 

onli on one of the follow conditions: 

(a) the data subject have explicitli consent to the propos transfer, after have be 

inform of the possibl risk of such transfer for the data subject due to the absenc 

of an adequaci decis and appropri safeguards; 

(b) the transfer be necessari for the perform of a contract between the data subject 

and the control or the implement of pre-contractu measur take at the 

data subject' request; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 196 
dgd 2 EN 


(c) the transfer be necessari for the conclus or perform of a contract conclud in 

the interest of the data subject between the control and anoth natur or legal 

person; 

(d) the transfer be necessari for import reason of public interest; 

(e) the transfer be necessari for the establishment, exercis or defenc of legal claims; 

(f) the transfer be necessari in order to protect the vital interest of the data subject or of 

other persons, where the data subject be physic or legal incap of give 

consent; 

(g) the transfer be make from a regist which accord to union or member state law be 

intend to provid inform to the public and which be open to consult either 

by the public in gener or by ani person who can demonstr a legitim interest, 

but onli to the extent that the condit laid down in union or member state law for 

consult be fulfil in the particular case. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 197 
dgd 2 EN 


where a transfer could not be base on a provis in articl 45 or 46, includ the 

provis on bind corpor rules, and none of the derog for a specif situat 

pursuant to point (a) to (g) of thi paragraph be applicable, a transfer to a third countri or 

an intern organis may take place onli if the transfer be not repetitive, concern 

onli a limit number of data subjects, be necessari for the purpos of compel 

legitim interest pursu by the control which be not overridden by the interest or 

right and freedom of the data subject, and the control have assess all the 

circumst surround the data transfer and have on the basi of that assess 

provid suitabl safeguard with regard to the protect of person data. the control 

shall inform the supervisori author of the transfer. the control shall, in addit to 

provid the inform refer to in articl 13 and 14, inform the data subject of the 

transfer and on the compel legitim interest pursued. 

2. A transfer pursuant to point (g) of paragraph 1 shall not involv the entireti of the person 

data or entir categori of the person data contain in the register. where the regist be 

intend for consult by person have a legitim interest, the transfer shall be make 

onli at the request of those person or if they be to be the recipients. 

3. point (a), (b) and (c) of the first subparagraph and the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 

shall not appli to activ carri out by public author in the exercis of their public 

powers. 

4. the public interest refer to in point (d) of paragraph 1 shall be recognis in union law 

or in the law of the member state to which the control be subject. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 198 
dgd 2 EN 


5. In the absenc of an adequaci decision, union or member state law may, for import 

reason of public interest, expressli set limit to the transfer of specif categori of 

person data to a third countri or an intern organisation. member state shall notifi 

such provis to the commission. 

6. the control or processor shall document the assess a well a the suitabl 

safeguard refer to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 of thi articl in the 

record refer to in articl 30. 

articl 50 

intern cooper for the protect of person data 

In relat to third countri and intern organisations, the commiss and supervisori 

author shall take appropri step to: 

(a) develop intern cooper mechan to facilit the effect enforc of 

legisl for the protect of person data; 

(b) provid intern mutual assist in the enforc of legisl for the protect 

of person data, includ through notification, complaint referral, investig assist 

and inform exchange, subject to appropri safeguard for the protect of person 

data and other fundament right and freedoms; 

(c) engag relev stakehold in discuss and activ aim at further intern 

cooper in the enforc of legisl for the protect of person data; 

(d) promot the exchang and document of person data protect legisl and 

practice, includ on jurisdict conflict with third countries. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 199 
dgd 2 EN 


chapter VI 

independ supervisori author 

section 1 

independ statu 

articl 51 

supervisori author 

1. each member state shall provid for one or more independ public author to be 

respons for monitor the applic of thi regulation, in order to protect the 

fundament right and freedom of natur person in relat to process and to 

facilit the free flow of person data within the union. 

2. each supervisori author shall contribut to the consist applic of thi regul 

throughout the union. for that purpose, the supervisori author shall cooper with 

each other and the commiss in accord with chapter vii. 

3. where more than one supervisori author be establish in a member state, that 

member state shall design the supervisori author which be to repres those 

author in the board and shall set out the mechan to ensur complianc by the other 

author with the rule relat to the consist mechan refer to in articl 63. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 200 
dgd 2 EN 


4. each member state shall notifi to the commiss the provis of it law which it 

adopt pursuant to thi chapter, by … [two year from the date of entri into forc of thi 

regulation] at the late and, without delay, ani subsequ amend affect them. 

articl 52 

independ 

1. each supervisori author shall act with complet independ in perform it task 

and exercis it power in accord with thi regulation. 

2. the member or member of each supervisori author shall, in the perform of their 

task and exercis of their power in accord with thi regulation, remain free from 

extern influence, whether direct or indirect, and shall neither seek nor take instruct 

from anybody. 

3. member or member of each supervisori author shall refrain from ani action 

incompat with their duti and shall not, dure their term of office, engag in ani 

incompat occupation, whether gain or not. 

4. each member state shall ensur that each supervisori author be provid with the 

human, technic and financi resources, premis and infrastructur necessari for the 

effect perform of it task and exercis of it powers, includ those to be carri 

out in the context of mutual assistance, cooper and particip in the board. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 201 
dgd 2 EN 


5. each member state shall ensur that each supervisori author choos and have it own 

staff which shall be subject to the exclus direct of the member or member of the 

supervisori author concerned. 

6. each member state shall ensur that each supervisori author be subject to financi 

control which do not affect it independ and that it have separate, public annual 

budgets, which may be part of the overal state or nation budget. 

articl 53 

gener condit for the member of the supervisori author 

1. member state shall provid for each member of their supervisori author to be 

appoint by mean of a transpar procedur by: 

– their parliament; 

– their government; 

– their head of state; or 

– an independ bodi entrust with the appoint under member state law. 

2. each member shall have the qualifications, experi and skills, in particular in the area 

of the protect of person data, requir to perform it duti and exercis it powers. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 202 
dgd 2 EN 


3. the duti of a member shall end in the event of the expiri of the term of office, 

resign or compulsori retirement, in accord with the law of the member state 

concerned. 

4. A member shall be dismiss onli in case of seriou misconduct or if the member no 

longer fulfil the condit requir for the perform of the duties. 

articl 54 

rule on the establish of the supervisori author 

1. each member state shall provid by law for all of the following: 

(a) the establish of each supervisori authority; 

(b) the qualif and elig condit requir to be appoint a member of 

each supervisori authority; 

(c) the rule and procedur for the appoint of the member or member of each 

supervisori authority; 

(d) the durat of the term of the member or member of each supervisori author of 

no less than four years, except for the first appoint after … [the date of entri 

into forc of thi regulation], part of which may take place for a shorter period 

where that be necessari to protect the independ of the supervisori author by 

mean of a stagger appoint procedure; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 203 
dgd 2 EN 


(e) whether and, if so, for how mani term the member or member of each supervisori 

author be elig for reappointment; 

(f) the condit govern the oblig of the member or member and staff of each 

supervisori authority, prohibit on actions, occup and benefit incompat 

therewith dure and after the term of offic and rule govern the cessat of 

employment. 

2. the member or member and the staff of each supervisori author shall, in accord 

with union or member state law, be subject to a duti of profession secreci both dure 

and after their term of office, with regard to ani confidenti inform which have come 

to their knowledg in the cours of the perform of their task or exercis of their 

powers. dure their term of office, that duti of profession secreci shall in particular 

appli to report by natur person of infring of thi regulation. 

section 2 

competence, task and power 

articl 55 

compet 

1. each supervisori author shall be compet for the perform of the task assign to 

and the exercis of the power confer on it in accord with thi regul on the 

territori of it own member state. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 204 
dgd 2 EN 


2. where process be carri out by public author or privat bodi act on the basi 

of point (c) or (e) of articl 6(1), the supervisori author of the member state 

concern shall be competent. In such case articl 56 do not apply. 

3. supervisori author shall not be compet to supervis process oper of court 

act in their judici capacity. 

articl 56 

compet of the lead supervisori author 

1. without prejudic to articl 55, the supervisori author of the main establish or of 

the singl establish of the control or processor shall be compet to act a lead 

supervisori author for the cross-bord process carri out by that control or 

processor in accord with the procedur provid in articl 60. 

2. By derog from paragraph 1, each supervisori author shall be compet to handl a 

complaint lodg with it or a possibl infring of thi regulation, if the subject matter 

relat onli to an establish in it member state or substanti affect data subject 

onli in it member state. 

3. In the case refer to in paragraph 2 of thi article, the supervisori author shall inform 

the lead supervisori author without delay on that matter. within a period of three week 

after be inform the lead supervisori author shall decid whether or not it will 

handl the case in accord with the procedur provid in articl 60, take into 

account whether or not there be an establish of the control or processor in the 

member state of which the supervisori author inform it. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 205 
dgd 2 EN 


4. where the lead supervisori author decid to handl the case, the procedur provid in 

articl 60 shall apply. the supervisori author which inform the lead supervisori 

author may submit to the lead supervisori author a draft for a decision. the lead 

supervisori author shall take utmost account of that draft when prepar the draft 

decis refer to in articl 60(3). 

5. where the lead supervisori author decid not to handl the case, the supervisori 

author which inform the lead supervisori author shall handl it accord to 

articl 61 and 62. 

6. the lead supervisori author shall be the sole interlocutor of the control or processor 

for the cross-bord process carri out by that control or processor. 

articl 57 

task 

1. without prejudic to other task set out under thi regulation, each supervisori author 

shall on it territory: 

(a) monitor and enforc the applic of thi regulation; 

(b) promot public awar and understand of the risks, rules, safeguard and right 

in relat to processing. activ address specif to child shall receiv 

specif attention; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 206 
dgd 2 EN 


(c) advise, in accord with member state law, the nation parliament, the 

government, and other institut and bodi on legisl and administr 

measur relat to the protect of natur persons' right and freedom with 

regard to processing; 

(d) promot the awar of control and processor of their oblig under thi 

regulation; 

(e) upon request, provid inform to ani data subject concern the exercis of their 

right under thi regul and, if appropriate, cooper with the supervisori 

author in other member state to that end; 

(f) handl complaint lodg by a data subject, or by a body, organis or associ 

in accord with articl 80, and investigate, to the extent appropriate, the subject 

matter of the complaint and inform the complain of the progress and the outcom 

of the investig within a reason period, in particular if further investig or 

coordin with anoth supervisori author be necessary; 

(g) cooper with, includ share inform and provid mutual assist to, other 

supervisori author with a view to ensur the consist of applic and 

enforc of thi regulation; 

(h) conduct investig on the applic of thi regulation, includ on the basi of 

inform receiv from anoth supervisori author or other public authority; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 207 
dgd 2 EN 


(i) monitor relev developments, insofar a they have an impact on the protect of 

person data, in particular the develop of inform and commun 

technolog and commerci practices; 

(j) adopt standard contractu claus refer to in articl 28(8) and point (d) of 

articl 46(2); 

(k) establish and maintain a list in relat to the requir for data protect impact 

assess pursuant to articl 35(4); 

(l) give advic on the process oper refer to in articl 36(2); 

(m) encourag the draw up of code of conduct pursuant to articl 40 and provid an 

opinion and approv such code of conduct which provid suffici safeguards, 

pursuant to articl 40(5); 

(n) encourag the establish of data protect certif mechan and of data 

protect seal and mark pursuant to articl 42(1), and approv the criterion of 

certif pursuant to articl 42(5); 

(o) where applicable, carri out a period review of certif issu in accord 

with articl 42(7); 

(p) draft and publish the criterion for accredit of a bodi for monitor code of 

conduct pursuant to articl 41 and of a certif bodi pursuant to articl 43; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 208 
dgd 2 EN 


(q) conduct the accredit of a bodi for monitor code of conduct pursuant to 

articl 41 and of a certif bodi pursuant to articl 43; 

(r) authoris contractu claus and provis refer to in articl 46(3); 

(s) approv bind corpor rule pursuant to articl 47; 

(t) contribut to the activ of the board; 

(u) keep intern record of infring of thi regul and of measur take in 

accord with articl 58(2); and 

(v) fulfil ani other task relat to the protect of person data. 

2. each supervisori author shall facilit the submiss of complaint refer to in 

point (f) of paragraph 1, by measur such a a complaint submiss form which may also 

be complet electronically, without exclud other mean of communication. 

3. the perform of the task of each supervisori author shall be free of charg for the 

data subject and, where applicable, for the data protect officer. 

4. where request be manifestli unfound or excessive, in particular becaus of their 

repetit character, the supervisori author may charg a reason fee base on 

administr costs, or refus to act on the request. the supervisori author shall bear 

the burden of demonstr the manifestli unfound or excess charact of the 

request. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 209 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 58 

power 

1. each supervisori author shall have all of the follow investig powers: 

(a) to order the control and the processor, and, where applicable, the controller' or the 

processor' repres to provid ani inform it requir for the perform 

of it tasks; 

(b) to carri out investig in the form of data protect audits; 

(c) to carri out a review on certif issu pursuant to articl 42(7); 

(d) to notifi the control or the processor of an alleg infring of thi regulation; 

(e) to obtain, from the control and the processor, access to all person data and to all 

inform necessari for the perform of it tasks; 

(f) to obtain access to ani premis of the control and the processor, includ to ani 

data process equip and means, in accord with union or member state 

procedur law. 

2. each supervisori author shall have all of the follow correct powers: 

(a) to issu warn to a control or processor that intend process oper be 

like to infring provis of thi regulation; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 210 
dgd 2 EN 


(b) to issu reprimand to a control or a processor where process oper have 

infring provis of thi regulation; 

(c) to order the control or the processor to compli with the data subject' request to 

exercis hi or her right pursuant to thi regulation; 

(d) to order the control or processor to bring process oper into complianc 

with the provis of thi regulation, where appropriate, in a specifi manner and 

within a specifi period; 

(e) to order the control to commun a person data breach to the data subject; 

(f) to impos a temporari or definit limit includ a ban on processing; 

(g) to order the rectif or erasur of person data or restrict of process 

pursuant to articl 16, 17 and 18 and the notif of such action to recipi to 

whom the person data have be disclos pursuant to articl 17(2) and 19; 

(h) to withdraw a certif or to order the certif bodi to withdraw a 

certif issu pursuant to articl 42 and 43, or to order the certif bodi 

not to issu certif if the requir for the certif be not or be no 

longer met; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 211 
dgd 2 EN 


(i) to impos an administr fine pursuant to articl 83, in addit to, or instead of 

measur refer to in thi paragraph, depend on the circumst of each 

individu case; 

(j) to order the suspens of data flow to a recipi in a third countri or to an 

intern organisation. 

3. each supervisori author shall have all of the follow authoris and advisori 

powers: 

(a) to advis the control in accord with the prior consult procedur refer 

to in articl 36; 

(b) to issue, on it own initi or on request, opinion to the nation parliament, the 

member state govern or, in accord with member state law, to other 

institut and bodi a well a to the public on ani issu relat to the protect 

of person data; 

(c) to authoris process refer to in articl 36(5), if the law of the member state 

requir such prior authorisation; 

(d) to issu an opinion and approv draft code of conduct pursuant to articl 40(5); 

(e) to accredit certif bodi pursuant to articl 43; 

(f) to issu certif and approv criterion of certif in accord with 

articl 42(5); 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 212 
dgd 2 EN 


(g) to adopt standard data protect claus refer to in articl 28(8) and in point (d) 

of articl 46(2); 

(h) to authoris contractu claus refer to in point (a) of articl 46(3); 

(i) to authoris administr arrang refer to in point (b) of articl 46(3); 

(j) to approv bind corpor rule pursuant to articl 47. 

4. the exercis of the power confer on the supervisori author pursuant to thi articl 

shall be subject to appropri safeguards, includ effect judici remedi and due 

process, set out in union and member state law in accord with the charter. 

5. each member state shall provid by law that it supervisori author shall have the power 

to bring infring of thi regul to the attent of the judici author and 

where appropriate, to commenc or engag otherwis in legal proceedings, in order to 

enforc the provis of thi regulation. 

6. each member state may provid by law that it supervisori author shall have addit 

power to those refer to in paragraph 1, 2 and 3. the exercis of those power shall not 

impair the effect oper of chapter vii. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 213 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 59 

activ report 

each supervisori author shall draw up an annual report on it activities, which may includ a list 

of type of infring notifi and type of measur take in accord with articl 58(2). 

those report shall be transmit to the nation parliament, the govern and other author 

a design by member state law. they shall be make avail to the public, to the commiss 

and to the board. 

chapter vii 

cooper and consist 

section 1 

cooper 

articl 60 

cooper between the lead supervisori author 

and other supervisori author concern 

1. the lead supervisori author shall cooper with the other supervisori author 

concern in accord with thi articl in an endeavour to reach consensus. the lead 

supervisori author and the supervisori author concern shall exchang all relev 

inform with each other. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 214 
dgd 2 EN 


2. the lead supervisori author may request at ani time other supervisori author 

concern to provid mutual assist pursuant to articl 61 and may conduct joint 

oper pursuant to articl 62, in particular for carri out investig or for 

monitor the implement of a measur concern a control or processor 

establish in anoth member state. 

3. the lead supervisori author shall, without delay, commun the relev inform 

on the matter to the other supervisori author concerned. It shall without delay submit a 

draft decis to the other supervisori author concern for their opinion and take due 

account of their views. 

4. where ani of the other supervisori author concern within a period of four week 

after have be consult in accord with paragraph 3 of thi article, express a 

relev and reason object to the draft decision, the lead supervisori author shall, if 

it do not follow the relev and reason object or be of the opinion it be not relev 

and reasoned, submit the matter to the consist mechan refer to in articl 63. 

5. where the lead supervisori author intend to follow the relev and reason object 

made, it shall submit to the other supervisori author concern a revis draft decis 

for their opinion. that revis draft decis shall be subject to the procedur refer to in 

paragraph 4 within a period of two weeks. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 215 
dgd 2 EN 


6. where none of the other supervisori author concern have object to the draft 

decis submit by the lead supervisori author within the period refer to in 

paragraph 4 and 5, the lead supervisori author and the supervisori author 

concern shall be deem to be in agreement with that draft decis and shall be bound 

by it. 

7. the lead supervisori author shall adopt and notifi the decis to the main 

establish or singl establish of the control or processor, a the case may be and 

inform the other supervisori author concern and the board of the decis in 

question, includ a summari of the relev fact and grounds. the supervisori author 

with which a complaint have be lodg shall inform the complain on the decision. 

8. By derog from paragraph 7, where a complaint be dismiss or rejected, the 

supervisori author with which the complaint be lodg shall adopt the decis and 

notifi it to the complain and shall inform the control thereof. 

9. where the lead supervisori author and the supervisori author concern agre to 

dismiss or reject part of a complaint and to act on other part of that complaint, a separ 

decis shall be adopt for each of those part of the matter. the lead supervisori 

author shall adopt the decis for the part concern action in relat to the 

controller, shall notifi it to the main establish or singl establish of the control 

or processor on the territori of it member state and shall inform the complain thereof, 

while the supervisori author of the complain shall adopt the decis for the part 

concern dismiss or reject of that complaint, and shall notifi it to that complain 

and shall inform the control or processor thereof. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 216 
dgd 2 EN 


10. after be notifi of the decis of the lead supervisori author pursuant to 

paragraphs7 and 9, the control or processor shall take the necessari measur to ensur 

complianc with the decis a regard process activ in the context of all it 

establish in the union. the control or processor shall notifi the measur take for 

compli with the decis to the lead supervisori authority, which shall inform the other 

supervisori author concerned. 

11. where, in except circumstances, a supervisori author concern have reason to 

consid that there be an urgent need to act in order to protect the interest of data subjects, 

the urgenc procedur refer to in articl 66 shall apply. 

12. the lead supervisori author and the other supervisori author concern shall suppli 

the inform requir under thi articl to each other by electron means, use a 

standardis format. 

articl 61 

mutual assist 

1. supervisori author shall provid each other with relev inform and mutual 

assist in order to implement and appli thi regul in a consist manner, and 

shall put in place measur for effect cooper with one another. mutual assist 

shall cover, in particular, inform request and supervisori measures, such a request 

to carri out prior authoris and consultations, inspect and investigations. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 217 
dgd 2 EN 


2. each supervisori author shall take all appropri measur requir to repli to a 

request of anoth supervisori author without undu delay and no late than one month 

after receiv the request. such measur may include, in particular, the transmiss of 

relev inform on the conduct of an investigation. 

3. request for assist shall contain all the necessari information, includ the purpos 

of and reason for the request. inform exchang shall be use onli for the purpos 

for which it be requested. 

4. the request supervisori author shall not refus to compli with the request unless: 

(a) it be not compet for the subject-matt of the request or for the measur it be 

request to execute; or 

(b) complianc with the request would infring thi regul or union or 

member state law to which the supervisori author receiv the request be subject. 

5. the request supervisori author shall inform the request supervisori author of 

the result or, a the case may be, of the progress of the measur take in order to respond 

to the request. the request supervisori author shall provid reason for ani refus to 

compli with a requestpursu to paragraph 4. 

6. request supervisori author shall, a a rule, suppli the inform request by 

other supervisori author by electron means, use a standardis format. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 218 
dgd 2 EN 


7. request supervisori author shall not charg a fee for ani action take by them 

pursuant to a request for mutual assistance. supervisori author may agre on rule to 

indemnifi each other for specif expenditur aris from the provis of mutual 

assist in except circumstances. 

8. where a supervisori author do not provid the inform refer to in paragraph 5 

within one month of receiv the request of anoth supervisori authority, the request 

supervisori author may adopt a provision measur on the territori of it member state 

in accord with articl 55(1). In that case, the urgent need to act under articl 66(1) 

shall be presum to be met and requir an urgent bind decis from the board 

pursuant to articl 66(2). 

9. the commiss may, by mean of implement acts, specifi the format and procedur 

for mutual assist refer to in thi articl and the arrang for the exchang of 

inform by electron mean between supervisori authorities, and between supervisori 

author and the board, in particular the standardis format refer to in paragraph 6 

of thi article. those implement act shall be adopt in accord with the 

examin procedur refer to in articl 93(2). 

articl 62 

joint oper of supervisori author 

1. the supervisori author shall, where appropriate, conduct joint oper includ 

joint investig and joint enforc measur in which member or staff from the 

supervisori author of other member state be involved. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 219 
dgd 2 EN 


2. where the control or processor have establish in sever member state or where a 

signific number of data subject in more than one member state be like to be 

substanti affect by process operations, a supervisori author of each of those 

member state shall have the right to particip in joint operations. the supervisori 

author which be compet pursuant to articl 56 (1) or 56(4) shall invit the supervisori 

author of each of those member state to take part in the joint oper and shall 

respond without delay to the request of a supervisori author to participate. 

3. A supervisori author may, in accord with member state law, and with the 

second supervisori authority' authorisation, confer powers, includ investig 

power on the second supervisori authority' member or staff involv in joint 

oper or, in so far a the law of the member state of the host supervisori author 

permits, allow the second supervisori authority' member or staff to exercis their 

investig power in accord with the law of the member state of the second 

supervisori authority. such investig power may be exercis onli under the guidanc 

and in the presenc of member or staff of the host supervisori authority. the second 

supervisori authority' member or staff shall be subject to the member state law of the 

host supervisori authority. 

4. where, in accord with paragraph 1, staff of a second supervisori author oper 

in anoth member state, the member state of the host supervisori author shall assum 

respons for their actions, includ liability, for ani damag caus by them dure 

their operations, in accord with the law of the member state in whose territori they 

be operating. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 220 
dgd 2 EN 


5. the member state in whose territori the damag be caus shall make good such 

damag under the condit applic to damag caus by it own staff. the 

member state of the second supervisori author whose staff have caus damag to 

ani person in the territori of anoth member state shall reimburs that other 

member state in full ani sum it have paid to the person entitl on their behalf. 

6. without prejudic to the exercis of it right vis-à-vi third parti and with the except 

of paragraph 5, each member state shall refrain, in the case provid for in paragraph 1, 

from request reimburs from anoth member state in relat to damag refer 

to in paragraph 4. 

7. where a joint oper be intend and a supervisori author do not, within one 

month, compli with the oblig laid down in the second sentenc of paragraph 2 of thi 

article, the other supervisori author may adopt a provision measur on the territori 

of it member state in accord with articl 55. In that case, the urgent need to act 

under articl 66(1) shall be presum to be met and requir an opinion or an urgent 

bind decis from the board pursuant to articl 66(2). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 221 
dgd 2 EN 


section 2 

consist 

articl 63 

consist mechan 

In order to contribut to the consist applic of thi regul throughout the union, the 

supervisori author shall cooper with each other and, where relevant, with the commission, 

through the consist mechan a set out in thi section. 

articl 64 

opinion of the board 

1. the board shall issu an opinion where a compet supervisori author intend to adopt 

ani of the measur below. To that end, the compet supervisori author shall 

commun the draft decis to the board, when it: 

(a) aim to adopt a list of the process oper subject to the requir for a data 

protect impact assess pursuant to articl 35(4); 

(b) concern a matter pursuant to articl 40(7) whether a draft code of conduct or an 

amend or extens to a code of conduct compli with thi regulation; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 222 
dgd 2 EN 


(c) aim to approv the criterion for accredit of a bodi pursuant to articl 41(3) or a 

certif bodi pursuant to articl 43(3); 

(d) aim to determin standard data protect claus refer to in point (d) of 

articl 46(2) and articl 28(8); 

(e) aim to authoris contractu claus refer to in point (a) of articl 46(3); or 

(f) aim to approv bind corpor rule within the mean of articl 47. 

2. ani supervisori authority, the chair of the board or the commiss may request that ani 

matter of gener applic or produc effect in more than one member state be 

examin by the board with a view to obtain an opinion, in particular where a 

compet supervisori author do not compli with the oblig for mutual 

assist in accord with articl 61 or for joint oper in accord with 

articl 62. 

3. In the case refer to in paragraph 1 and 2, the board shall issu an opinion on the 

matter submit to it provid that it have not alreadi issu an opinion on the same matter. 

that opinion shall be adopt within eight week by simpl major of the member of the 

board. that period may be extend by a further six weeks, take into account the 

complex of the subject matter. regard the draft decis refer to in paragraph 1 

circul to the member of the board in accord with paragraph 5, a member which 

have not object within a reason period indic by the chair, shall be deem to be 

in agreement with the draft decision. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 223 
dgd 2 EN 


4. supervisori author and the commiss shall, without undu delay, commun by 

electron mean to the board, use a standardis format ani relev information, 

includ a the case may be a summari of the facts, the draft decision, the ground which 

make the enact of such measur necessary, and the view of other supervisori 

author concerned. 

5. the chair of the board shall, without undue, delay inform by electron means: 

(a) the member of the board and the commiss of ani relev inform which 

have be commun to it use a standardis format. the secretariat of the 

board shall, where necessary, provid translat of relev information; and 

(b) the supervisori author refer to, a the case may be, in paragraph 1 and 2, and 

the commiss of the opinion and make it public. 

6. the compet supervisori author shall not adopt it draft decis refer to in 

paragraph 1 within the period refer to in paragraph 3. 

7. the supervisori author refer to in paragraph 1 shall take utmost account of the 

opinion of the board and shall within two week after receiv the opinion, electron 

commun to the chair of the board whether it maintain or will amend it draft 

decis and, if any, the amend draft decision, use a standardis format. 

8. where the supervisori author concern inform the chair of the board within the 

period refer to in paragraph 7 of thi articl that it do not intend to follow the opinion 

of the board, in whole or in part, provid the relev grounds, articl 65(1) shall apply. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 224 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 65 

disput resolut by the board 

1. In order to ensur the correct and consist applic of thi regul in individu 

cases, the board shall adopt a bind decis in the follow cases: 

(a) where, in a case refer to in articl 60(4), a supervisori author concern have 

rais a relev and reason object to a draft decis of the lead author or 

the lead author have reject an object a be not relev or reasoned. the 

bind decis shall concern all the matter which be the subject of the relev 

and reason objection, in particular whether there be an infring of thi 

regulation; 

(b) where there be conflict view on which of the supervisori author concern 

be compet for the main establishment; 

(c) where a compet supervisori author do not request the opinion of the board in 

the case refer to in articl 64(1), or do not follow the opinion of the board 

issu under articl 64. In that case, ani supervisori author concern or the 

commiss may commun the matter to the board. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 225 
dgd 2 EN 


2. the decis refer to in paragraph 1 shall be adopt within one month from the referr 

of the subject-matt by a two-third major of the member of the board. thi period may 

be extend by a further month on account of the complex of the subject-matter. the 

decis refer to in paragraph 1 shall be reason and address to the lead supervisori 

author and all the supervisori author concern and bind on them. 

3. where the board have be unabl to adopt a decis within the period refer to in 

paragraph 2, it shall adopt it decis within two week follow the expir of the 

second month refer to in paragraph 2 by a simpl major of the member of the board. 

where the member of the board be split, the decis shall by adopt by the vote of it 

chair. 

4. the supervisori author concern shall not adopt a decis on the subject matter 

submit to the board under paragraph 1 dure the period refer to in paragraph 2 

and 3. 

5. the chair of the board shall notify, without undu delay, the decis refer to in 

paragraph 1 to the supervisori author concerned. It shall inform the commiss 

thereof. the decis shall be publish on the websit of the board without delay after the 

supervisori author have notifi the final decis refer to in paragraph 6. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 226 
dgd 2 EN 


6. the lead supervisori author or, a the case may be, the supervisori author with which 

the complaint have be lodg shall adopt it final decis on the basi of the decis 

refer to in paragraph 1 of thi article, without undu delay and at the late by one 

month after the board have notifi it decision. the lead supervisori author or, a the 

case may be, the supervisori author with which the complaint have be lodged, shall 

inform the board of the date when it final decis be notifi respect to the 

control or the processor and to the data subject. the final decis of the supervisori 

author concern shall be adopt under the term of articl 60(7), (8) and (9). the 

final decis shall refer to the decis refer to in paragraph 1 of thi articl and shall 

specifi that the decis refer to in that paragraph will be publish on the websit of 

the board in accord with paragraph 5 of thi article. the final decis shall attach the 

decis refer to in paragraph 1 of thi article. 

articl 66 

urgenc procedur 

1. In except circumstances, where a supervisori author concern consid that there 

be an urgent need to act in order to protect the right and freedom of data subjects, it may, 

by way of derog from the consist mechan refer to in articl 63, 64 and 65 

or the procedur refer to in articl 60, immedi adopt provision measur 

intend to produc legal effect on it own territori with a specifi period of valid 

which shall not exceed three months. the supervisori author shall, without delay, 

commun those measur and the reason for adopt them to the other supervisori 

author concerned, to the board and to the commission. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 227 
dgd 2 EN 


2. where a supervisori author have take a measur pursuant to paragraph 1 and consid 

that final measur need urgent be adopted, it may request an urgent opinion or an urgent 

bind decis from the board, give reason for request such opinion or decision. 

3. ani supervisori author may request an urgent opinion or an urgent bind decision, a 

the case may be, from the board where a compet supervisori author have not take an 

appropri measur in a situat where there be an urgent need to act, in order to protect 

the right and freedom of data subjects, give reason for request such opinion or 

decision, includ for the urgent need to act. 

4. By derog from articl 64(3) and 65(2), an urgent opinion or an urgent bind 

decis refer to in paragraph 2 and 3 of thi articl shall be adopt within two week 

by simpl major of the member of the board. 

articl 67 

exchang of inform 

the commiss may adopt implement act of gener scope in order to specifi the 

arrang for the exchang of inform by electron mean between supervisori authorities, 

and between supervisori author and the board, in particular the standardis format refer to 

in articl 64. 

those implement act shall be adopt in accord with the examin procedur refer to 

in articl 93(2). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 228 
dgd 2 EN 


section 3 

european data protect board 

articl 68 

european data protect board 

1. the european data protect board (the 'board') be herebi establish a a bodi of the 

union and shall have legal personality. 

2. the board shall be repres by it chair. 

3. the board shall be compos of the head of one supervisori author of each 

member state and of the european data protect supervisor, or their respect 

representatives. 

4. where in a member state more than one supervisori author be respons for 

monitor the applic of the provis pursuant to thi regulation, a joint 

repres shall be appoint in accord with that member state' law. 

5. the commiss shall have the right to particip in the activ and meet of the 

board without vote right. the commiss shall design a representative. the chair of 

the board shall commun to the commiss the activ of the board. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 229 
dgd 2 EN 


6. In the case refer to in articl 65, the european data protect supervisor shall have 

vote right onli on decis which concern principl and rule applic to the union 

institutions, bodies, offic and agenc which correspond in substanc to those of thi 

regulation. 

articl 69 

independ 

1. the board shall act independ when perform it task or exercis it power 

pursuant to articl 70 and 71. 

2. without prejudic to request by the commiss refer to in point (b) of articl 70(1) 

and in articl 70(2), the board shall, in the perform of it task or the exercis of it 

powers, neither seek nor take instruct from anybody. 

articl 70 

task of the board 

1. the board shall ensur the consist applic of thi regulation. To that end, the board 

shall, on it own initi or, where relevant, at the request of the commission, in 

particular: 

(a) monitor and ensur the correct applic of thi regul in the case provid 

for in articl 64 and 65 without prejudic to the task of nation supervisori 

authorities; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 230 
dgd 2 EN 


(b) advis the commiss on ani issu relat to the protect of person data in the 

union, includ on ani propos amend of thi regulation; 

(c) advis the commiss on the format and procedur for the exchang of 

inform between controllers, processor and supervisori author for bind 

corpor rules; 

(d) issu guidelines, recommendations, and best practic on procedur for eras 

links, copi or replic of person data from publicli avail commun 

servic a refer to in articl 17 (2); 

(e) examine, on it own initiative, on request of one of it member or on request of the 

commission, ani question cover the applic of thi regul and issu 

guidelines, recommend and best practic in order to encourag consist 

applic of thi regulation; 

(f) issu guidelines, recommend and best practic in accord with point (e) of 

thi paragraph for further specifi the criterion and condit for decis base 

on profil pursuant to articl 22(2); 

(g) issu guidelines, recommend and best practic in accord with point (e) of 

thi paragraph for establish the person data breach and determin the undu 

delay refer to in articl 33(1) and (2) and for the particular circumst in 

which a control or a processor be requir to notifi the person data breach; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 231 
dgd 2 EN 


(h) issu guidelines, recommend and best practic in accord with point (e) of 

thi paragraph a to the circumst in which a person data breach be like to 

result in a high risk to the right and freedom of the natur person refer to in 

articl 34(1). 

(i) issu guidelines, recommend and best practic in accord with point (e) of 

thi paragraph for the purpos of further specifi the criterion and requir for 

person data transfer base on bind corpor rule adher to by control and 

bind corpor rule adher to by processor and on further necessari 

requir to ensur the protect of person data of the data subject concern 

refer to in articl 47; 

(j) issu guidelines, recommend and best practic in accord with point (e) of 

thi paragraph for the purpos of further specifi the criterion and requir for 

the person data transfer on the basi of articl 49(1); 

(k) draw up guidelin for supervisori author concern the applic of 

measur refer to in articl 58(1), (2) and (3) and the fix of administr 

fine pursuant to articl 83; 

(l) review the practic applic of the guidelines, recommend and best 

practic refer to in point (e) and (f); 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 232 
dgd 2 EN 


(m) issu guidelines, recommend and best practic in accord with point (e) of 

thi paragraph for establish common procedur for report by natur person 

of infring of thi regul pursuant to articl 54(2); 

(n) encourag the drawing-up of code of conduct and the establish of data 

protect certif mechan and data protect seal and mark pursuant to 

articl 40 and 42; 

(o) carri out the accredit of certif bodi and it period review pursuant to 

articl 43 and maintain a public regist of accredit bodi pursuant to 

articl 43(6) and of the accredit control or processor establish in third 

countri pursuant to articl 42(7); 

(p) specifi the requir refer to in articl 43(3) with a view to the accredit 

of certif bodi under articl 42; 

(q) provid the commiss with an opinion on the certif requir refer to 

in articl 43(8); 

(r) provid the commiss with an opinion on the the icon refer to in articl 12(7); 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 233 
dgd 2 EN 


(s) provid the commiss with an opinion for the assess of the adequaci of the 

level of protect in a third countri or intern organisation, includ for the 

assess whether a third country, a territori or one or more specifi sector 

within that third country, or an intern organis no longer ensur an 

adequ level of protection. To that end, the commiss shall provid the board 

with all necessari documentation, includ correspond with the govern of 

the third country, with regard to that third country, territori or specifi sector, or 

with the intern organisation. 

(t) issu opinion on draft decis of supervisori author pursuant to the 

consist mechan refer to in articl 64(1), on matter submit pursuant to 

articl 64(2) and to issu bind decis pursuant to articl 65, includ in case 

refer to in articl 66; 

(u) promot the cooper and the effect bilater and multilater exchang of 

inform and best practic between the supervisori authorities; 

(v) promot common train programm and facilit personnel exchang between 

the supervisori author and, where appropriate, with the supervisori author 

of third countri or with intern organisations; 

(w) promot the exchang of knowledg and document on data protect 

legisl and practic with data protect supervisori author worldwide. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 234 
dgd 2 EN 


(x) issu opinion on code of conduct drawn up at union level pursuant to 

articl 40(9); and 

(y) maintain a publicli access electron regist of decis take by supervisori 

author and court on issu handl in the consist mechanism. 

2. where the commiss request advic from the board, it may indic a time limit, take 

into account the urgenc of the matter. 

3. the board shall forward it opinions, guidelines, recommendations, and best practic to 

the commiss and to the committe refer to in articl 93 and make them public. 

4. the board shall, where appropriate, consult interest parti and give them the 

opportun to comment within a reason period. the board shall, without prejudic to 

articl 76, make the result of the consult procedur publicli available. 

articl 71 

report 

1. the board shall draw up an annual report regard the protect of natur person with 

regard to process in the union and, where relevant, in third countri and intern 

organisations. the report shall be make public and be transmit to the european 

parliament, to the council and to the commission. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 235 
dgd 2 EN 


2. the annual report shall includ a review of the practic applic of the guidelines, 

recommend and best practic refer to in point (l) of articl 70(1) a well a of 

the bind decis refer to in articl 65. 

articl 72 

procedur 

1. the board shall take decis by a simpl major of it members, unless otherwis 

provid for in thi regulation. 

2. the board shall adopt it own rule of procedur by a two-third major of it member 

and organis it own oper arrangements. 

articl 73 

chair 

1. the board shall elect a chair and two deputi chair from amongst it member by simpl 

majority. 

2. the term of offic of the chair and of the deputi chair shall be five year and be 

renew once. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 236 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 74 

task of the chair 

1. the chair shall have the follow tasks: 

(a) to conven the meet of the board and prepar it agenda; 

(b) to notifi decis adopt by the board pursuant to articl 65 to the lead 

supervisori author and the supervisori author concerned; 

(c) to ensur the time perform of the task of the board, in particular in relat to 

the consist mechan refer to in articl 63. 

2. the board shall lay down the alloc of task between the chair and the deputi chair 

in it rule of procedure. 

articl 75 

secretariat 

1. the board shall have a secretariat, which shall be provid by the european data 

protect supervisor. 

2. the secretariat shall perform it task exclus under the instruct of the chair of the 

board. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 237 
dgd 2 EN 


3. the staff of the european data protect supervisor involv in carri out the task 

confer on the board by thi regul shall be subject to separ report line from 

the staff involv in carri out task confer on the european data protect 

supervisor. 

4. where appropriate, the board and the european data protect supervisor shall establish 

and publish a memorandum of understand implement thi article, determin the 

term of their cooperation, and applic to the staff of the european data protect 

supervisor involv in carri out the task confer on the board by thi regulation. 

5. the secretariat shall provid analytical, administr and logist support to the board. 

6. the secretariat shall be respons in particular for: 

(a) the day-to-day busi of the board; 

(b) commun between the member of the board, it chair and the commission; 

(c) commun with other institut and the public; 

(d) the use of electron mean for the intern and extern communication; 

(e) the translat of relev information; 

(f) the prepar and follow-up of the meet of the board; 

(g) the preparation, draft and public of opinions, decis on the settlement of 

disput between supervisori author and other text adopt by the board. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 238 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 76 

confidenti 

1. the discuss of the board shall be confidenti where the board deem it necessary, a 

provid for in it rule of procedure. 

2. access to document submit to member of the board, expert and repres of 

third parti shall be govern by regul (ec) No 1049/2001 of the european 

parliament and of the council1. 

chapter viii 

remedies, liabil and penalti 

articl 77 

right to lodg a complaint with a supervisori author 

1. without prejudic to ani other administr or judici remedy, everi data subject shall 

have the right to lodg a complaint with a supervisori authority, in particular in the 

member state of hi or her habitu residence, place of work or place of the alleg 

infring if the data subject consid that the process of person data relat to him 

or her infring thi regulation. 


1 regul (ec) No 1049/2001 of the european parliament and of the council of 

30 may 2001 regard public access to european parliament, council and commiss 
document (oj L 145, 31.5.2001, p. 43). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 239 
dgd 2 EN 


2. the supervisori author with which the complaint have be lodg shall inform the 

complain on the progress and the outcom of the complaint includ the possibl of 

a judici remedi pursuant to articl 78. 

articl 78 

right to an effect judici remedi against a supervisori author 

1. without prejudic to ani other administr or non-judici remedy, each natur or legal 

person shall have the right to an effect judici remedi against a legal bind 

decis of a supervisori author concern them. 

2. without prejudic to ani other administr or non-judici remedy, each data subject 

shall have the right to a an effect judici remedi where the supervisori author which 

be compet pursuant to articl 55 and articl 56 do not handl a complaint or do not 

inform the data subject within three month on the progress or outcom of the complaint 

lodg pursuant to articl 77. 

3. proceed against a supervisori author shall be brought befor the court of the 

member state where the supervisori author be established. 

4. where proceed be brought against a decis of a supervisori author which be 

preced by an opinion or a decis of the board in the consist mechanism, the 

supervisori author shall forward that opinion or decis to the court. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 240 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 79 

right to an effect judici remedi 

against a control or processor 

1. without prejudic to ani avail administr or non-judici remedy, includ the 

right to lodg a complaint with a supervisori author pursuant to articl 77, each data 

subject shall have the right to an effect judici remedi where he or she consid that 

hi or her right under thi regul have be infring a a result of the process of 

hi or her person data in non-compli with thi regulation. 

2. proceed against a control or a processor shall be brought befor the court of the 

member state where the control or processor have an establishment. alternatively, such 

proceed may be brought befor the court of the member state where the data subject 

have hi or her habitu residence, unless the control or processor be a public author of 

a member state act in the exercis of it public powers. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 241 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 80 

represent of data subject 

1. the data subject shall have the right to mandat a not-for-profit body, organis or 

associ which have be properli constitut in accord with the law of a 

member state, have statutori object which be in the public interest, and be activ in the 

field of the protect of data subjects' right and freedom with regard to the protect of 

their person data to lodg the complaint on hi or her behalf, to exercis the right 

refer to in articl 77, 78 and 79 on hi or her behalf, and to exercis the right to 

receiv compens refer to in articl 82 on hi or her behalf where provid for by 

member state law. 

2. member state may provid that ani body, organis or associ refer to in 

paragraph 1 of thi article, independ of a data subject' mandate, have the right to 

lodge, in that member state, a complaint with the supervisori author which be 

compet pursuant to articl 77 and to exercis the right refer to in articl 78 and 79 

if it consid that the right of a data subject under thi regul have be infring a 

a result of the processing. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 242 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 81 

suspens of proceed 

1. where a compet court of a member state have inform on proceedings, concern 

the same subject matter a regard process by the same control or processor, that be 

pend in a court in anoth member state, it shall contact that court in the other 

member state to confirm the exist of such proceedings. 

2. where proceed concern the same subject matter a regard process of the same 

control or processor be pend in a court in anoth member state, ani compet 

court other than the court first seiz may suspend it proceedings. 

3. where those proceed be pend at first instance, ani court other than the court first 

seiz may also, on the applic of one of the parties, declin jurisdict if the court 

first seiz have jurisdict over the action in question and it law permit the 

consolid thereof. 

articl 82 

right to compens and liabil 

1. ani person who have suffer materi or non-materi damag a a result of an 

infring of thi regul shall have the right to receiv compens from the 

control or processor for the damag suffered. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 243 
dgd 2 EN 


2. ani control involv in process shall be liabl for the damag caus by process 

which infring thi regulation. A processor shall be liabl for the damag caus by 

process onli where it have not compli with oblig of thi regul specif 

direct to processor or where it have act outsid or contrari to law instruct of the 

controller. 

3. A control or processor shall be exempt from liabil under paragraph 2 if it prof that 

it be not in ani way respons for the event give rise to the damage. 

4. where more than one control or processor, or both a control and a processor, be 

involv in the same process and where they are, under paragraph 2 and 3, respons 

for ani damag caus by processing, each control or processor shall be held liabl for 

the entir damag in order to ensur effect compens of the data subject. 

5. where a control or processor has, in accord with paragraph 4, paid full 

compens for the damag suffered, that control or processor shall be entitl to 

claim back from the other control or processor involv in the same process that 

part of the compens correspond to their part of respons for the damage, in 

accord with the condit set out in paragraph 2. 

6. court proceed for exercis the right to receiv compens shall be brought befor 

the court compet under the law of the member state refer to in articl 79(2). 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 244 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 83 

gener condit for impos administr fine 

1. each supervisori author shall ensur that the imposit of administr fine pursuant 

to thi articl in respect of infring of thi regul refer to in paragraph 4, 5 

and 6 shall in each individu case be effective, proportion and dissuasive. 

2. administr fine shall, depend on the circumst of each individu case, be 

impos in addit to, or instead of, measur refer to in point (a) to (h) and (j) of 

articl 58(2). when decid whether to impos an administr fine and decid on the 

amount of the administr fine in each individu case due regard shall be give to the 

following: 

(a) the nature, graviti and durat of the infring take into account the natur 

scope or purpos of the process concern a well a the number of data subject 

affect and the level of damag suffer by them; 

(b) the intent or neglig charact of the infringement; 

(c) ani action take by the control or processor to mitig the damag suffer by 

data subjects; 

(d) the degre of respons of the control or processor take into account 

technic and organis measur implement by them pursuant to articl 25 

and 32; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 245 
dgd 2 EN 


(e) ani relev previou infring by the control or processor; 

(f) the degre of cooper with the supervisori authority, in order to remedi the 

infring and mitig the possibl advers effect of the infringement; 

(g) the categori of person data affect by the infringement; 

(h) the manner in which the infring becom know to the supervisori authority, in 

particular whether, and if so to what extent, the control or processor notifi the 

infringement; 

(i) in case measur refer to in articl 58(2) have previous be order against the 

control or processor concern with regard to the same subject-matter, complianc 

with those measures; 

(j) adher to approv code of conduct pursuant to articl 40 or approv 

certif mechan pursuant to articl 42; and 

(k) ani other aggrav or mitig factor applic to the circumst of the 

case, such a financi benefit gained, or loss avoided, directli or indirectly, from 

the infringement. 

3. If a control or processor intent or negligently, for the same or link process 

operations, infring sever provis of thi regulation, the total amount of the 

administr fine shall not exceed the amount specifi for the gravest infringement. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 246 
dgd 2 EN 


4. infring of the follow provis shall, in acccord with paragraph 2, be subject 

to administr fine up to 10 000 000 eur, or in the case of an undertaking, up to 2 % 

of the total worldwid annual turnov of the preced financi year, whichev be higher: 

(a) the oblig of the control and the processor pursuant to articl 8, 11, 25, 26, 

27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 42 and 43; 

(b) the oblig of the certif bodi pursuant to articl 42 and 43; 

(c) the oblig of the monitor bodi pursuant to articl 41(4). 

5. infring of the follow provis shall, in accord with paragraph 2, be subject 

to administr fine up to 20 000 000 eur, or in the case of an undertaking, up to 4 % 

of the total worldwid annual turnov of the preced financi year, whichev be higher: 

(a) the basic principl for processing, includ condit for consent, pursuant to 

articl 5, 6, 7 and 9; 

(b) the data subjects' right pursuant to articl 12 to 22; 

(c) the transfer of person data to a recipi in a third countri or an intern 

organis pursuant to articl 44 to 49; 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 247 
dgd 2 EN 


(d) ani oblig pursuant to member state law adopt unter chapter ix; 

(e) non-compli with an order or a temporari or definit limit on process 

or the suspens of data flow by the supervisori author pursuant to articl 58(2) 

or failur to provid access in violat of articl 58(1). 

6. non-compli with an order by the supervisori author a refer to in articl 58(2) 

shall, in acccord with paragraph 2 of thi article, be subject to administr fine up 

to 20 000 000 eur, or in the case of an undertaking, up to 4 % of the total worldwid 

annual turnov of the preced financi year, whichev be higher. 

7. without prejudic to the correct power of supervisori author pursuant to 

articl 58(2), each member state may lay down the rule on whether and to what extent 

administr fine may be impos on public author and bodi establish in that 

member state. 

8. the exercis by the supervisori author of it power under thi articl shall be subject 

to appropri procedur safeguard in accord with union and member state law, 

includ effect judici remedi and due process. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 248 
dgd 2 EN 


9. where the legal system of the member state do not provid for administr fines, thi 

articl may be appli in such a manner that the fine be initi by the compet 

supervisori author and impos by compet nation courts, while ensur that those 

legal remedi be effect and have an equival effect to the administr fine 

impos by supervisori authorities. In ani event, the fine impos shall be effective, 

proportion and dissuasive. those member state shall notifi to the commiss the 

provis of their law which they adopt pursuant to thi paragraph by … [two year from 

the date of entri into forc of thi regulation] and, without delay, ani subsequ 

amend law or amend affect them. 

articl 84 

penalti 

1. member state shall lay down the rule on other penalti applic to infring of 

thi regul in particular for infring which be not subject to administr fine 

pursuant to articl 83, and shall take all measur necessari to ensur that they be 

implemented. such penalti shall be effective, proportion and dissuasive. 

2. each member state shall notifi to the commiss the provis of it law which it 

adopt pursuant to paragraph 1, by … [two year from the date of entri into forc of thi 

regulation] and, without delay, ani subsequ amend affect them. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 249 
dgd 2 EN 


chapter IX 

provis relat 

TO specif process situat 

articl 85 

process and freedom of express and inform 

1. member state shall by law reconcil the right to the protect of person data pursuant 

to thi regul with the right to freedom of express and information, includ 

process for journalist purpos and the purpos of academic, artist or literari 

expression. 

2. for process carri out for journalist purpos or the purpos of academ artist or 

literari expression, member state shall provid for exempt or derog from 

chapter II (principles), chapter iii (right of the data subject), chapter IV (control and 

processor), chapter V (transfer of person data to third countri or intern 

organisations), chapter VI (independ supervisori authorities), chapter vii (cooper 

and consistency) and chapter IX (specif data process situations) if they be necessari 

to reconcil the right to the protect of person data with the freedom of express and 

information. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 250 
dgd 2 EN 


3. each member state shall notifi to the commiss the provis of it law which it have 

adopt pursuant to paragraph 2 and, without delay, ani subsequ amend law or 

amend affect them. 

articl 86 

process and public access to offici document 

person data in offici document held by a public author or a public bodi or a privat bodi for 

the perform of a task carri out in the public interest may be disclos by the author or 

bodi in accord with union or member state law to which the public author or bodi be 

subject in order to reconcil public access to offici document with the right to the protect of 

person data pursuant to thi regulation. 

articl 87 

process of the nation identif number 

member state may further determin the specif condit for the process of a nation 

identif number or ani other identifi of gener application. In that case the nation 

identif number or ani other identifi of gener applic shall be use onli under 

appropri safeguard for the right and freedom of the data subject pursuant to thi regulation. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 251 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 88 

process in the context of employ 

1. member state may, by law or by collect agreements, provid for more specif rule to 

ensur the protect of the right and freedom in respect of the process of employees' 

person data in the employ context, in particular for the purpos of the recruitment, 

the perform of the contract of employment, includ discharg of oblig laid 

down by law or by collect agreements, management, plan and organis of work, 

equal and divers in the workplace, health and safeti at work, protect of employer' 

or customer' properti and for the purpos of the exercis and enjoyment, on an individu 

or collect basis, of right and benefit relat to employment, and for the purpos of the 

termin of the employ relationship. 

2. those rule shall includ suitabl and specif measur to safeguard the data subject' 

human dignity, legitim interest and fundament rights, with particular regard to the 

transpar of processing, the transfer of person data within a group of undertakings, or 

a group of entrepris engag in a joint econom activ and monitor system at the 

work place. 

3. each member state shall notifi to the commiss those provis of it law which it 

adopt pursuant to paragraph 1, by … [two year from the date of entri into forc of thi 

regulation] and, without delay, ani subsequ amend affect them. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 252 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 89 

safeguard and derog 

relat to process for archiv purpos in the public interest, 

scientif or histor research purpos or statist purpos 

1. process for archiv purpos in the public interest, scientif or histor research 

purpos or statist purposes, shall be subject to appropri safeguards, in accord 

with thi regulation, for the right and freedom of the data subject. those safeguard shall 

ensur that technic and organis measur be in place in particular in order to 

ensur respect for the principl of data minimisation. those measur may includ 

pseudonymis provid that those purpos can be fulfil in that manner. where 

those purpos can be fulfil by further process which do not permit or no longer 

permit the identif of data subjects, those purpos shall be fulfil in that manner. 

2. where person data be process for scientif or histor research purpos or 

statist purposes, union or member state law may provid for derog from the 

right refer to in articl 15, 16, 18 and 21 subject to the condit and safeguard 

refer to in paragraph 1 of thi articl in so far a such right be like to render 

imposs or serious impair the achiev of the specif purposes, and such 

derog be necessari for the fulfil of those purposes. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 253 
dgd 2 EN 


3. where person data be process for archiv purpos in the public interest, union or 

member state law may provid for derog from the right refer to in articl 15, 

16, 18, 19, 20 and 21 subject to the condit and safeguard refer to in paragraph 1 of 

thi articl in so far a such right be like to render imposs or serious impair the 

achiev of the specif purposes, and such derog be necessari for the fulfil 

of those purposes. 

4. where process refer to in paragraph 2 and 3 serf at the same time anoth 

purpose, the derog shall appli onli to process for the purpos refer to in those 

paragraphs. 

articl 90 

oblig of secreci 

1. member state may adopt specif rule to set out the power of the supervisori author 

laid down in point (e) and (f) of articl 58(1) in relat to control or processor that 

be subject, under union or member state law or rule establish by nation compet 

bodies, to an oblig of profession secreci or other equival oblig of secreci 

where thi be necessari and proportion to reconcil the right of the protect of 

person data with the oblig of secrecy. those rule shall appli onli with regard to 

person data which the control or processor have receiv a a result ofor have obtain in 

an activ cover by that oblig of secrecy. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 254 
dgd 2 EN 


2. each member state shall notifi to the commiss the rule adopt pursuant to paragraph 

1, by … [two year from the date of entri into forc of thi regulation] and, without delay, 

ani subsequ amend affect them. 

articl 91 

exist data protect rule of church and religi associ 

1. where in a member state, church and religi associ or commun apply, at the 

time of entri into forc of thi regulation, comprehens rule relat to the protect 

of natur person with regard to processing, such rule may continu to apply, provid 

that they be brought into line with thi regulation. 

2. church and religi associ which appli comprehens rule in accord with 

paragraph 1 shall be subject to the supervis of an independ supervisori authority, 

which may be specific, provid that it fulfil the condit laid down in chapter VI of 

thi regulation. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 255 
dgd 2 EN 


chapter X 

deleg act and implement act 

articl 92 

exercis of the deleg 

1. the power to adopt deleg act be confer on the commiss subject to the 

condit laid down in thi article. 

2. the deleg of power refer to in articl 12(8) and articl 43(8) shall be confer on 

the commiss for an indetermin period of time from … [the date of entri into forc of 

thi regulation]. 

3. the deleg of power refer to in articl 12(8) and articl 43(8) may be revok at 

ani time by the european parliament or by the council. A decis of revoc shall put 

an end to the deleg of power specifi in that decision. It shall take effect the day 

follow that of it public in the offici journal of the european union or at a late 

date specifi therein. It shall not affect the valid of ani deleg act alreadi in force. 

4. As soon a it adopt a deleg act, the commiss shall notifi it simultan to the 

european parliament and to the council. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 256 
dgd 2 EN 


5. A deleg act adopt pursuant to articl 12(8) and articl 43(8) shall enter into forc 

onli if no object have be express by either the european parliament or the council 

within a period of three month of notif of that act to the european parliament and 

the council or if, befor the expiri of that period, the european parliament and the council 

have both inform the commiss that they will not object. that period shall be 

extend by three month at the initi of the european parliament or of the council. 

articl 93 

committe procedur 

1. the commiss shall be assist by a committee. that committe shall be a committe 

within the mean of regul (eu) No 182/2011. 

2. where refer be make to thi paragraph, articl 5 of regul (eu) No 182/2011 shall 

apply. 

3. where refer be make to thi paragraph, articl 8 of regul (eu) No 182/2011, in 

conjunct with articl 5 thereof, shall apply. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 257 
dgd 2 EN 


chapter XI 

final provis 

articl 94 

repeal of direct 95/46/ec 

1. direct 95/46/ec be repeal with effect from … [two year from the date of entri into 

forc of thi regulation]. 

2. refer to the repeal direct shall be constru a refer to thi regulation. 

refer to the work parti on the protect of individu with regard to the 

process of person data establish by articl 29 of direct 95/46/ec shall be 

constru a refer to the european data protect board establish by thi 

regulation. 

articl 95 

relationship with direct 2002/58/ec 

thi regul shall not impos addit oblig on natur or legal person in relat to 

process in connect with the provis of publicli avail electron commun 

servic in public commun network in the union in relat to matter for which they be 

subject to specif oblig with the same object set out in direct 2002/58/ec. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 258 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 96 

relationship with previous conclud agreement 

intern agreement involv the transfer of person data to third countri or intern 

organis which be conclud by member state prior to … [the date of entri into forc of 

thi regulation], and which be in accord with union law applic prior to … [the date of 

entri into forc of thi regulation], shall remain in forc until amended, replac or revoked. 

articl 97 

commiss report 

1. By … [4 year after the date of entri into forc of thi regulation] and everi four year 

thereafter, the commiss shall submit a report on the evalu and review of thi 

regul to the european parliament and to the council. the report shall be make 

public. 

2. In the context of the evalu and review refer to in paragraph 1, the commiss 

shall examine, in particular, the applic and function of: 

(a) chapter V on the transfer of person data to third countri or intern 

organis with particular regard to decis adopt pursuant to articl 45(3) of 

thi regul and decis adopt on the basi of articl 25(6) of 

direct 95/46/ec; 

(b) chapter vii on cooper and consistency. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 259 
dgd 2 EN 


3. for the purpos of paragraph 1, the commiss may request inform from 

member state and supervisori authorities. 

4. In carri out the evalu and review refer to in paragraph 1 and 2, the 

commiss shall take into account the posit and find of the european parliament, 

of the council, and of other relev bodi or sources. 

5. the commiss shall, if necessary, submit appropri propos to amend thi 

regulation, in particular take into account of develop in inform technolog 

and in the light of the state of progress in the inform society. 

articl 98 

review of other union legal act on data protect 

the commiss shall, if appropriate, submit legisl propos with a view to amend other 

union legal act on the protect of person data, in order to ensur uniform and consist 

protect of natur person with regard to processing. thi shall in particular concern the rule 

relat to the protect of natur person with regard to process by union institutions, bodies, 

offic and agenc and on the free movement of such data. 







5419/16 av/nt/sr 260 
dgd 2 EN 


articl 99 

entri into forc and applic 

1. thi regul shall enter into forc on the twentieth day follow that of it public 

in the offici journal of the european union. 

2. It shall appli from … [two year from the date of entri into forc of thi regulation]. 

thi regul shall be bind in it entireti and directli applic in all member states. 

done at …, 

for the european parliament for the council 

the presid the presid 




1. thi regul lay down rule relat to the protect of natur person with regard to the process of person data and rule relat to the free movement of person data. 
2. thi regul protect fundament right and freedom of natur person and in particular their right to the protect of person data. 
3. the free movement of person data within the union shall be neither restrict nor prohibit for reason connect with the protect of natur person with regard to the process of person data. 
1. thi regul appli to the process of person data wholli or partli by autom mean and to the process other than by autom mean of person data which form part of a file system or be intend to form part of a file system. 
2. thi regul do not appli to the process of person data: 
(a) in the cours of an activ which fall outsid the scope of union law; 
(b) by the member state when carri out activ which fall within the scope of chapter 2 of titl V of the teu; 
(c) by a natur person in the cours of a pure person or household activity; 
(d) by compet author for the purpos of the prevention, investigation, detect or prosecut of crimin offences, the execut of crimin penalties, includ the safeguard against and the prevent of threat to public security. 
3. for the process of person data by the union institutions, bodies, offic and agencies, regul (ec) No 45/2001 applies. regul (ec) No 45/2001 and other union legal act applic to such process of person data shall be adapt t... 
4. thi regul shall be without prejudic to the applic of direct 2000/31/ec, in particular of the liabil rule of intermediari servic provid in articl 12 to 15 of that directive. 
1. thi regul appli to the process of person data in the context of the activ of an establish of a control or a processor in the union, regardless of whether the process take place in the union or not. 
2. thi regul appli to the process of person data of data subject who be in the union by a control or processor not establish in the union, where the process activ be relat to: 
(a) the offer of good or services, irrespect of whether a payment of the data subject be required, to such data subject in the union; or 
(b) the monitor of their behaviour a far a their behaviour take place within the union. 
3. thi regul appli to the process of person data by a control not establish in the union, but in a place where member state law appli by virtu of public intern law. 
(a) a regard a control with establish in more than one member state, the place of it central administr in the union, unless the decis on the purpos and mean of the process of person data be take in anoth establish o... 
(b) a regard a processor with establish in more than one member state, the place of it central administr in the union, or, if the processor have no central administr in the union, the establish of the processor in the union where ... 
(a) the control or processor be establish on the territori of the member state of that supervisori authority; 
(b) data subject resid in the member state of that supervisori author be substanti affect or like to be substanti affect by the processing; or 
(c) a complaint have be lodg with that supervisori authority; 
(a) process of person data which take place in the context of the activ of establish in more than one member state of a control or processor in the union where the control or processor be establish in more than one member state... 
(b) process of person data which take place in the context of the activ of a singl establish of a control or processor in the union but which substanti affect or be like to substanti affect data subject in more than one ... 
1. person data shall be: 
(a) process lawfully, fairli and in a transpar manner in relat to the data subject ('lawfulness, fair and transparency'); 
(b) collect for specified, explicit and legitim purpos and not further process in a manner that be incompat with those purposes; further process for archiv purpos in the public interest, scientif or histor research purpos ... 
(c) adequate, relev and limit to what be necessari in relat to the purpos for which they be process ('data minimisation'); 
(d) accur and, where necessary, kept up to date; everi reason step must be take to ensur that person data that be inaccurate, have regard to the purpos for which they be processed, be eras or rectifi without delay ('accuracy'); 
(e) kept in a form which permit identif of data subject for no longer than be necessari for the purpos for which the person data be processed; person data may be store for longer period insofar a the person data will be processed... 
(f) process in a manner that ensur appropri secur of the person data, includ protect against unauthoris or unlaw process and against accident loss, destruct or damage, use appropri technic or organis measur... 
2. the control shall be respons for, and be abl to demonstr complianc with, paragraph 1 ('accountability'). 
1. process shall be law onli if and to the extent that at least one of the follow applies: 
(a) the data subject have give consent to the process of hi or her person data for one or more specif purposes; 
(b) process be necessari for the perform of a contract to which the data subject be parti or in order to take step at the request of the data subject prior to enter into a contract; 
(c) process be necessari for complianc with a legal oblig to which the control be subject; 
(d) process be necessari in order to protect the vital interest of the data subject or of anoth natur person; 
(e) process be necessari for the perform of a task carri out in the public interest or in the exercis of offici author vest in the controller; 
(f) process be necessari for the purpos of the legitim interest pursu by the control or by a third party, except where such interest be overridden by the interest or fundament right and freedom of the data subject which requir pr... 
point (f) of the first subparagraph shall not appli to process carri out by public author in the perform of their tasks. 
2. member state may maintain or introduc more specif provis to adapt the applic of the rule of thi regul with regard to process for complianc with point (c) and (e) of paragraph 1 by determin more precis specif require... 
3. the basi for the process refer to in point (c) and (e) of paragraph 1 shall be laid down by: 
(a) union law; or 
(b) member state law to which the control be subject. 
the purpos of the process shall be determin in that legal basi or, a regard the process refer to in point (e) of paragraph 1, shall be necessari for the perform of a task carri out in the public interest or in the exercis of offi... 
4. where the process for a purpos other than that for which the person data have be collect be not base on the data subject' consent or on a union or member state law which constitut a necessari and proportion measur in a democratic... 
(a) ani link between the purpos for which the person data have be collect and the purpos of the intend further processing; 
(b) the context in which the person data have be collected, in particular regard the relationship between data subject and the controller; 
(c) the natur of the person data, in particular whether special categori of person data be processed, pursuant to articl 9, or whether person data relat to crimin convict and offenc be processed, pursuant to articl 10; 
(d) the possibl consequ of the intend further process for data subjects; 
(e) the exist of appropri safeguards, which may includ encrypt or pseudonymisation. 
1. where process be base on consent, the control shall be abl to demonstr that the data subject have consent to process of hi or her person data. 
2. If the data subject' consent be give in the context of a write declar which also concern other matters, the request for consent shall be present in a manner which be clearli distinguish from the other matters, in an intellig and... 
3. the data subject shall have the right to withdraw hi or her consent at ani time. the withdraw of consent shall not affect the law of process base on consent befor it withdrawal. prior to give consent, the data subject shall be inf... 
4. when assess whether consent be freeli given, utmost account shall be take of whether, inter alia, the perform of a contract, includ the provis of a service, be condit on consent to the process of person data that be not nece... 
1. where point (a) of articl 6(1) applies, in relat to the offer of inform societi servic directli to a child, the process of the person data of a child shall be law where the child be at least 16 year old. where the child be below... 
member state may provid by law for a low age for those purpos provid that such low age be not below 13 years. 
2. the control shall make reason effort to verifi in such case that consent be give or authoris by the holder of parent respons over the child, take into consider avail technology. 
3. paragraph 1 shall not affect the gener contract law of member state such a the rule on the validity, format or effect of a contract in relat to a child. 
1. process of person data reveal racial or ethnic origin, polit opinions, religi or philosoph beliefs, or trade-union membership, and the process of genet data, biometr data for the purpos of uniqu identifi a natur p... 
2. paragraph 1 shall not appli if one of the follow applies: 
(a) the data subject have give explicit consent to the process of those person data for one or more specifi purposes, except where union or member state law provid that the prohibit refer to in paragraph 1 may not be lift by the data s... 
(b) process be necessari for the purpos of carri out the oblig and exercis specif right of the control or of the data subject in the field of employ and social secur and social protect law in so far a it be authorised... 
(c) process be necessari to protect the vital interest of the data subject or of anoth natur person where the data subject be physic or legal incap of give consent; 
(d) process be carri out in the cours of it legitim activ with appropri safeguard by a foundation, associ or ani other not-for-profit bodi with a political, philosophical, religi or trade-union aim and on condit that the ... 
(e) process relat to person data which be manifestli make public by the data subject; 
(f) process be necessari for the establishment, exercis or defenc of legal claim or whenev court be act in their judici capacity; 
(g) process be necessari for reason of substanti public interest, on the basi of union or member state law which shall be proportion to the aim pursued, respect the essenc of the right to data protect and provid for suitabl and specifi... 
(h) process be necessari for the purpos of prevent or occup medicine, for the assess of the work capac of the employee, medic diagnosis, the provis of health or social care or treatment or the manag of health or soc... 
(i) process be necessari for reason of public interest in the area of public health, such a protect against seriou cross-bord threat to health or ensur high standard of qualiti and safeti of health care and of medicin product or med... 
(j) process be necessari for archiv purpos in the public interest, scientif or histor research purpos or statist purpos in accord with articl 89(1) base on union or member state law which shall be proportion to the aim p... 
3. person data refer to in paragraph 1 may be process for the purpos refer to in point (h) of paragraph 2 when those data be process by or under the respons of a profession subject to the oblig of profession secreci und... 
4. member state may maintain or introduc further conditions, includ limitations, with regard to the process of genet data, biometr data or data concern health. 
1. If the purpos for which a control process person data do not or do no longer requir the identif of a data subject by the controller, the control shall not be oblig to maintain, acquir or process addit inform in orde... 
2. where, in case refer to in paragraph 1 of thi article, the control be abl to demonstr that it be not in a posit to identifi the data subject, the control shall inform the data subject accordingly, if possible. In such cases, artic... 
1. the control shall take appropri measur to provid ani inform refer to in articl 13 and 14 and ani commun under articl 15 to 22 and 34 relat to process to the data subject in a concise, transparent, intellig and ... 
2. the control shall facilit the exercis of data subject right under articl 15 to 22. In the case refer to in articl 11(2), the control shall not refus to act on the request of the data subject for exercis hi or her right under... 
3. the control shall provid inform on action take on a request under articl 15 to 22 to the data subject without undu delay and in ani event within one month of receipt of the request. that period may be extend by two further month wh... 
4. If the control do not take action on the request of the data subject, the control shall inform the data subject without delay and at the late within one month of receipt of the request of the reason for not take action and on the possi... 
5. inform provid under articl 13 and 14 and ani commun and ani action take under articl 15 to 22 and 34 shall be provid free of charge. where request from a data subject be manifestli unfound or excessive, in particular becau... 
(a) charg a reason fee take into account the administr cost of provid the inform or commun or take the action requested; or 
(b) refus to act on the request. 
the control shall bear the burden of demonstr the manifestli unfound or excess charact of the request. 
6. without prejudic to articl 11, where the control have reason doubt concern the ident of the natur person make the request refer to in articl 15 to 21, the control may request the provis of addit inform neces... 
7. the inform to be provid to data subject pursuant to articl 13 and 14 may be provid in combin with standardis icon in order to give in an easili visible, intellig and clearli legibl manner a meaning overview of the intend... 
8. the commiss shall be empow to adopt deleg act in accord with articl 92 for the purpos of determin the inform to be present by the icon and the procedur for provid standardis icons. 
1. where person data relat to a data subject be collect from the data subject, the control shall, at the time when person data be obtained, provid the data subject with all of the follow information: 
(a) the ident and the contact detail of the control and, where applicable, of the controller' representative; 
(b) the contact detail of the data protect officer, where applicable; 
(c) the purpos of the process for which the person data be intend a well a the legal basi for the processing; 
(d) where the process be base on point (f) of articl 6(1), the legitim interest pursu by the control or by a third party; 
(e) the recipi or categori of recipi of the person data, if any; 
(f) where applicable, the fact that the control intend to transfer person data to a third countri or intern organis and the exist or absenc of an adequaci decis by the commission, or in the case of transfer refer to in ar... 
2. In addit to the inform refer to in paragraph 1, the control shall, at the time when person data be obtained, provid the data subject with the follow further inform necessari to ensur fair and transpar processing: 
(a) the period for which the person data will be stored, or if that be not possible, the criterion use to determin that period; 
(b) the exist of the right to request from the control access to and rectif or erasur of person data or restrict of process concern the data subject or to object to process a well a the right to data portability; 
(c) where the process be base on point (a) of articl 6(1) or point (a) of articl 9(2), the exist of the right to withdraw consent at ani time, without affect the law of process base on consent befor it withdrawal; 
(d) the right to lodg a complaint with a supervisori authority; 
(e) whether the provis of person data be a statutori or contractu requirement, or a requir necessari to enter into a contract, a well a whether the data subject be oblig to provid the person data and of the possibl consequ of ... 
(f) the exist of autom decision-making, includ profiling, refer to in articl 22(1) and (4) and, at least in those cases, meaning inform about the logic involved, a well a the signific and the envisag consequ of such... 
3. where the control intend to further process the person data for a purpos other than that for which the person data be collected, the control shall provid the data subject prior to that further process with inform on that othe... 
4. paragraph 1, 2 and 3 shall not appli where and insofar a the data subject alreadi have the information. 
1. where person data have not be obtain from the data subject, the control shall provid the data subject with the follow information: 
(a) the ident and the contact detail of the control and, if any, of the controller' representative; 
(b) the contact detail of the data protect officer, where applicable; 
(c) the purpos of the process for which the person data be intend a well a the legal basi for the processing; 
(d) the categori of person data concerned; 
(e) the recipi or categori of recipi of the person data, where applicable; 
(f) where applicable, that the control intend to transfer person data to a recipi in a third countri or intern organis and the exist or absenc of an adequaci decis by the commission, or in the case of transfer refer to... 
2. In addit to the inform refer to in paragraph 1, the control shall provid the data subject with the follow inform necessari to ensur fair and transpar process in respect of the data subject: 
(a) the period for which the person data will be stored, or if that be not possible, the criterion use to determin that period; 
(b) where the process be base on point (f) of articl 6(1), the legitim interest pursu by the control or by a third party; 
(c) the exist of the right to request from the control access to and rectif or erasur of person data or restrict of process concern the data subject and to object to process a well a the right to data portability; 
(d) where process be base on point (a) of articl 6(1) or point (a) of articl 9(2), the exist of the right to withdraw consent at ani time, without affect the law of process base on consent befor it withdrawal; 
(e) the right to lodg a complaint with a supervisori authority; 
(f) from which sourc the person data originate, and if applicable, whether it come from publicli access sources; 
(g) the exist of autom decision-making, includ profiling, refer to in articl 22(1) and (4) and, at least in those cases, meaning inform about the logic involved, a well a the signific and the envisag consequ of such... 
3. the control shall provid the inform refer to in paragraph 1 and 2: 
(a) within a reason period after obtain the person data, but at the late within one month, have regard to the specif circumst in which the person data be processed; 
(b) if the person data be to be use for commun with the data subject, at the late at the time of the first commun to that data subject; or 
(c) if a disclosur to anoth recipi be envisaged, at the late when the person data be first disclosed. 
4. where the control intend to further process the person data for a purpos other than that for which the person data be obtained, the control shall provid the data subject prior to that further process with inform on that other... 
5. paragraph 1 to 4 shall not appli where and insofar as: 
(a) the data subject alreadi have the information; 
(b) the provis of such inform prof imposs or would involv a disproportion effort, in particular for process for archiv purpos in the public interest, scientif or histor research purpos or statist purposes, subjec... 
(c) obtain or disclosur be expressli laid down by union or member state law to which the control be subject and which provid appropri measur to protect the data subject' legitim interests; or 
(d) where the person data must remain confidenti subject to an oblig of profession secreci regul by union or member state law, includ a statutori oblig of secrecy. 
1. the data subject shall have the right to obtain from the control confirm a to whether or not person data concern him or her be be processed, and where that be the case, access to the person data and the follow information: 
(a) the purpos of the processing; 
(b) the categori of person data concerned; 
(c) the recipi or categori of recipi to whom the person data have be or will be disclosed, in particular recipi in third countri or intern organisations; 
(d) where possible, the envisag period for which the person data will be stored, or, if not possible, the criterion use to determin that period; 
(e) the exist of the right to request from the control rectif or erasur of person data or restrict of process of person data concern the data subject or to object to such processing; 
(f) the right to lodg a complaint with a supervisori authority; 
(g) where the person data be not collect from the data subject, ani avail inform a to their source; 
(h) the exist of autom decision-making, includ profiling, refer to in articl 22(1) and (4) and, at least in those cases, meaning inform about the logic involved, a well a the signific and the envisag consequ of suc... 
2. where person data be transfer to a third countri or to an intern organisation, the data subject shall have the right to be inform of the appropri safeguard pursuant to articl 46 relat to the transfer. 
3. the control shall provid a copi of the person data undergo processing. for ani further copi request by the data subject, the control may charg a reason fee base on administr costs. where the data subject make the request... 
4. the right to obtain a copi refer to in paragraph 3 shall not advers affect the right and freedom of others. 
1. the data subject shall have the right to obtain from the control the erasur of person data concern him or her without undu delay and the control shall have the oblig to eras person data without undu delay where one of the foll... 
(a) the person data be no longer necessari in relat to the purpos for which they be collect or otherwis processed; 
(b) the data subject withdraw consent on which the process be base accord to point (a) of articl 6(1), or point (a) of articl 9(2), and where there be no other legal ground for the processing; 
(c) the data subject object to the process pursuant to articl 21(1) and there be no overrid legitim ground for the processing, or the data subject object to the process pursuant to articl 21(2); 
(d) the person data have be unlaw processed; 
(e) the person data have to be eras for complianc with a legal oblig in union or member state law to which the control be subject; 
(f) the person data have be collect in relat to the offer of inform societi servic refer to in articl 8(1). 
2. where the control have make the person data public and be oblig pursuant to paragraph 1 to eras the person data, the controller, take account of avail technolog and the cost of implementation, shall take reason steps, includ ... 
3. paragraph 1 and 2 shall not appli to the extent that process be necessary: 
(a) for exercis the right of freedom of express and information; 
(b) for complianc with a legal oblig which requir process by union or member state law to which the control be subject or for the perform of a task carri out in the public interest or in the exercis of offici author vest in... 
(c) for reason of public interest in the area of public health in accord with point (h) and (i) of articl 9(2) a well a articl 9(3); 
(d) for archiv purpos in the public interest, scientif or histor research purpos or statist purpos in accord with articl 89(1) in so far a the right refer to in paragraph 1 be like to render imposs or serious impair... 
(e) for the establishment, exercis or defenc of legal claims. 
1. the data subject shall have the right to obtain from the control restrict of process where one of the follow applies: 
(a) the accuraci of the person data be contest by the data subject, for a period enabl the control to verifi the accuraci of the person data; 
(b) the process be unlaw and the data subject oppos the erasur of the person data and request the restrict of their use instead; 
(c) the control no longer need the person data for the purpos of the processing, but they be requir by the data subject for the establishment, exercis or defenc of legal claims; 
(d) the data subject have object to process pursuant to articl 21(1) pend the verif whether the legitim ground of the control overrid those of the data subject. 
2. where process have be restrict under paragraph 1, such person data shall, with the except of storage, onli be process with the data subject' consent or for the establishment, exercis or defenc of legal claim or for the protect o... 
3. A data subject who have obtain restrict of process pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be inform by the control befor the restrict of process be lifted. 
1. the data subject shall have the right to receiv the person data concern him or her, which he or she have provid to a controller, in a structured, commonli use and machine-read format and have the right to transmit those data to anoth ... 
(a) the process be base on consent pursuant to point (a) of articl 6(1) or point (a) of articl 9(2) or on a contract pursuant to point (b) of articl 6(1); and 
(b) the process be carri out by autom means. 
2. In exercis hi or her right to data portabl pursuant to paragraph 1, the data subject shall have the right to have the person data transmit directli from one control to another, where technic feasible. 
3. the exercis of the right refer to in paragraph 1 of thi articl shall be without prejudic to articl 17. that right shall not appli to process necessari for the perform of a task carri out in the public interest or in the exercis of... 
4. the right refer to in paragraph 1 shall not advers affect the right and freedom of others. 
1. the data subject shall have the right to object, on ground relat to hi or her particular situation, at ani time to process of person data concern him or her which be base on point (e) or (f) of articl 6(1), includ profil based... 
2. where person data be process for direct market purposes, the data subject shall have the right to object at ani time to process of person data concern him or her for such marketing, which includ profil to the extent that it be ... 
3. where the data subject object to process for direct market purposes, the person data shall no longer be process for such purposes. 
4. At the late at the time of the first commun with the data subject, the right refer to in paragraph 1 and 2 shall be explicitli brought to the attent of the data subject and shall be present clearli and separ from ani other in... 
5. In the context of the use of inform societi services, and notwithstand direct 2002/58/ec, the data subject may exercis hi or her right to object by autom mean use technic specifications. 
6. where person data be process for scientif or histor research purpos or statist purpos pursuant to articl 89(1), the data subject, on ground relat to hi or her particular situation, shall have the right to object to processi... 
1. the data subject shall have the right not to be subject to a decis base sole on autom processing, includ profiling, which produc legal effect concern him or her or similarli significantli affect him or her. 
2. paragraph 1 shall not appli if the decision: 
(a) be necessari for enter into, or perform of, a contract between the data subject and a data controller; 
(b) be authoris by union or member state law to which the control be subject and which also lay down suitabl measur to safeguard the data subject' right and freedom and legitim interests; or 
(c) be base on the data subject' explicit consent. 
3. In the case refer to in point (a) and (c) of paragraph 2, the data control shall implement suitabl measur to safeguard the data subject' right and freedom and legitim interests, at least the right to obtain human intervent on t... 
4. decis refer to in paragraph 2 shall not be base on special categori of person data refer to in articl 9(1), unless point (a) or (g) of articl 9(2) appli and suitabl measur to safeguard the data subject' right and freedom and ... 
1. union or member state law to which the data control or processor be subject may restrict by way of a legisl measur the scope of the oblig and right provid for in articl 12 to 22 and articl 34, a well a articl 5 in so far a ... 
(a) nation security; 
(b) defence; 
(c) public security; 
(d) the prevention, investigation, detect or prosecut of crimin offenc or the execut of crimin penalties, includ the safeguard against and the prevent of threat to public security; 
(e) other import object of gener public interest of the union or of a member state, in particular an import econom or financi interest of the union or of a member state, includ monetary, budgetari and taxat a matters, public heal... 
(f) the protect of judici independ and judici proceedings; 
(g) the prevention, investigation, detect and prosecut of breach of ethic for regul professions; 
(h) a monitoring, inspect or regulatori function connected, even occasionally, to the exercis of offici author in the case refer to in point (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (g); 
(i) the protect of the data subject or the right and freedom of others; 
(j) the enforc of civil law claims. 
2. In particular, ani legisl measur refer to in paragraph 1 shall contain specif provis at least, where relevant, a to: 
(a) the purpos of the process or categori of processing; 
(b) the categori of person data; 
(c) the scope of the restrict introduced; 
(d) the safeguard to prevent abus or unlaw access or transfer; 
(e) the specif of the control or categori of controllers; 
(f) the storag period and the applic safeguard take into account the nature, scope and purpos of the process or categori of processing; 
(g) the risk to the right and freedom of data subjects; and 
(h) the right of data subject to be inform about the restriction, unless that may be prejudici to the purpos of the restriction. 
1. take into account the nature, scope, context and purpos of process a well a the risk of vari likelihood and sever for the right and freedom of natur persons, the control shall implement appropri technic and organisationa... 
2. where proportion in relat to process activities, the measur refer to in paragraph 1 shall includ the implement of appropri data protect polici by the controller. 
3. adher to approv code of conduct a refer to in articl 40 or approv certif mechan a refer to in articl 42 may be use a an element by which to demonstr complianc with the oblig of the controller. 
1. take into account the state of the art, the cost of implement and the nature, scope, context and purpos of process a well a the risk of vari likelihood and sever for right and freedom of natur person pose by the processin... 
2. the control shall implement appropri technic and organis measur for ensur that, by default, onli person data which be necessari for each specif purpos of the process be processed. that oblig appli to the amount ... 
3. An approv certif mechan pursuant to articl 42 may be use a an element to demonstr complianc with the requir set out in paragraph 1 and 2 of thi article. 
1. where two or more control jointli determin the purpos and mean of processing, they shall be joint controllers. they shall in a transpar manner determin their respect respons for complianc with the oblig under thi reg... 
2. the arrang refer to in paragraph 1 shall duli reflect the respect role and relationship of the joint control vis-à-vi the data subjects. the essenc of the arrang shall be make avail to the data subject. 
3. irrespect of the term of the arrang refer to in paragraph 1, the data subject may exercis hi or her right under thi regul in respect of and against each of the controllers. 
1. where articl 3(2) applies, the control or the processor shall design in write a repres in the union. 
2. thi oblig shall not appli to: 
(a) process which be occasional, do not include, on a larg scale, process of special categori of data a refer to in articl 9(1) or process of person data relat to crimin convict and offenc refer to in articl 10, and... 
(b) a public author or body. 
3. the repres shall be establish in one of those member state where the data subject be and whose person data be process in relat to the offer of good or servic to them, or whose behaviour be monitored. 
4. the repres shall be mandat by the control or processor to be address in addit to or instead of the control or the processor by, in particular, supervisori author and data subjects, on all issu relat to processing, for ... 
5. the design of a repres by the control or processor shall be without prejudic to legal action which could be initi against the control or the processor themselves. 
1. where process be to be carri out on behalf of a controller, the control shall use onli processor provid suffici guarante to implement appropri technic and organis measur in such a manner that process will meet the ... 
2. the processor shall not engag anoth processor without prior specif or gener write authoris of the controller. In the case of gener write authorisation, the processor shall inform the control of ani intend chang concern t... 
3. process by a processor shall be govern by a contract or other legal act under union or member state law, that be bind on the processor with regard to the control and that set out the subject-matt and durat of the processing, the na... 
(a) process the person data onli on document instruct from the controller, includ with regard to transfer of person data to a third countri or an intern organisation, unless requir to do so by union or member state law to whic... 
(b) ensur that person authoris to process the person data have commit themselv to confidenti or be under an appropri statutori oblig of confidentiality; 
(c) take all measur requir pursuant to articl 32; 
(d) respect the condit refer to in paragraph 2 and 4 for engag anoth processor; 
(e) take into account the natur of the processing, assist the control by appropri technic and organis measures, insofar a thi be possible, for the fulfil of the controller' oblig to respond to request for exercis the... 
(f) assist the control in ensur complianc with the oblig pursuant to articl 32 to 36 take into account the natur of process and the inform avail to the processor; 
(g) at the choic of the controller, delet or return all the person data to the control after the end of the provis of servic relat to processing, and delet exist copi unless union or member state law requir storag of the per... 
(h) make avail to the control all inform necessari to demonstr complianc with the oblig laid down in thi articl and allow for and contribut to audits, includ inspections, conduct by the control or anoth auditor man... 
with regard to point (h) of the first subparagraph, the processor shall immedi inform the control if, in it opinion, an instruct infring thi regul or other union or member state data protect provisions. 
4. where a processor engag anoth processor for carri out specif process activ on behalf of the controller, the same data protect oblig a set out in the contract or other legal act between the control and the processor a ... 
5. adher of a processor to an approv code of conduct a refer to in articl 40 or an approv certif mechan a refer to in articl 42 may be use a an element by which to demonstr suffici guarante a refer to in parag... 
6. without prejudic to an individu contract between the control and the processor, the contract or the other legal act refer to in paragraph 3 and 4 of thi articl may be based, in whole or in part, on standard contractu claus referred... 
7. the commiss may lay down standard contractu claus for the matter refer to in paragraph 3 and 4 of thi articl and in accord with the examin procedur refer to in articl 93(2). 
8. A supervisori author may adopt standard contractu claus for the matter refer to in paragraph 3 and 4 of thi articl and in accord with the consist mechan refer to in articl 63. 
9. the contract or the other legal act refer to in paragraph 3 and 4 shall be in writing, includ in electron form. 
10. without prejudic to articl 82, 83 and 84, if a processor infring thi regul by determin the purpos and mean of processing, the processor shall be consid to be a control in respect of that processing. 
1. each control and, where applicable, the controller' representative, shall maintain a record of process activ under it responsibility. that record shall contain all of the follow information: 
(a) the name and contact detail of the control and, where applicable, the joint controller, the controller' repres and the data protect officer; 
(b) the purpos of the processing; 
(c) a descript of the categori of data subject and of the categori of person data; 
(d) the categori of recipi to whom the person data have be or will be disclos includ recipi in third countri or intern organisations; 
(e) where applicable, transfer of person data to a third countri or an intern organisation, includ the identif of that third countri or intern organis and, in the case of transfer refer to in the second subparagraph... 
(f) where possible, the envisag time limit for erasur of the differ categori of data; 
(g) where possible, a gener descript of the technic and organis secur measur refer to in articl 32(1). 
2. each processor and, where applicable, the processor' repres shall maintain a record of all categori of process activ carri out on behalf of a controller, containing: 
(a) the name and contact detail of the processor or processor and of each control on behalf of which the processor be acting, and, where applicable, of the controller' or the processor' representative, and the data protect officer; 
(b) the categori of process carri out on behalf of each controller; 
(c) where applicable, transfer of person data to a third countri or an intern organisation, includ the identif of that third countri or intern organis and, in the case of transfer refer to in the second subparagraph... 
(d) where possible, a gener descript of the technic and organis secur measur refer to in articl 32(1). 
3. the record refer to in paragraph 1 and 2 shall be in writing, includ in electron form. 
4. the control or the processor and, where applicable, the controller' or the processor' representative, shall make the record avail to the supervisori author on request. 
5. the oblig refer to in paragraph 1 and 2 shall not appli to an enterpris or an organis employ few than 250 person unless the process it carri out be like to result in a risk to the right and freedom of data subjects, ... 
1. take into account the state of the art, the cost of implement and the nature, scope, context and purpos of process a well a the risk of vari likelihood and sever for the right and freedom of natur persons, the control an... 
(a) the pseudonymis and encrypt of person data; 
(b) the abil to ensur the ongo confidentiality, integrity, avail and resili of process system and services; 
(c) the abil to restor the avail and access to person data in a time manner in the event of a physic or technic incident; 
(d) a process for regularli testing, assess and evalu the effect of technic and organis measur for ensur the secur of the processing. 
2. In assess the appropri level of secur account shall be take in particular of the risk that be present by processing, in particular from accident or unlaw destruction, loss, alteration, unauthoris disclosur of, or access to per... 
3. adher to an approv code of conduct a refer to in articl 40 or an approv certif mechan a refer to in articl 42 may be use a an element by which to demonstr complianc with the requir set out in paragraph 1 of t... 
4. the control and processor shall take step to ensur that ani natur person act under the author of the control or the processor who have access to person data do not process them except on instruct from the controller, unless h... 
1. In the case of a person data breach, the control shall without undu delay and, where feasible, not late than 72 hour after have becom awar of it, notifi the person data breach to the supervisori author compet in accord with ... 
2. the processor shall notifi the control without undu delay after becom awar of a person data breach. 
3. the notif refer to in paragraph 1 shall at least: 
(a) describ the natur of the person data breach includ where possible, the categori and approxim number of data subject concern and the categori and approxim number of person data record concerned; 
(b) commun the name and contact detail of the data protect offic or other contact point where more inform can be obtained; 
(c) describ the like consequ of the person data breach; 
(d) describ the measur take or propos to be take by the control to address the person data breach, including, where appropriate, measur to mitig it possibl advers effects. 
4. where, and in so far as, it be not possibl to provid the inform at the same time, the inform may be provid in phase without undu further delay. 
5. the control shall document ani person data breaches, compris the fact relat to the person data breach, it effect and the remedi action taken. that document shall enabl the supervisori author to verifi complianc with this... 
1. when the person data breach be like to result in a high risk to the right and freedom of natur persons, the control shall commun the person data breach to the data subject without undu delay. 
2. the commun to the data subject refer to in paragraph 1 of thi articl shall describ in clear and plain languag the natur of the person data breach and contain at least the inform and the recommend provid for in point (... 
3. the commun to the data subject refer to in paragraph 1 shall not be requir if ani of the follow condit be met: 
(a) the control have implement appropri technic and organis protect measures, and that those measur be appli to the person data affect by the person data breach, in particular those that render the person data unintell... 
(b) the control have take subsequ measur which ensur that the high risk to the right and freedom of data subject refer to in paragraph 1 be no longer like to materialise; 
(c) it would involv disproportion effort. In such a case, there shall instead be a public commun or similar measur wherebi the data subject be inform in an equal effect manner. 
4. If the control have not alreadi commun the person data breach to the data subject, the supervisori authority, have consid the likelihood of the person data breach result in a high risk, may requir it to do so or may decid tha... 
1. where a type of process in particular use new technologies, and take into account the nature, scope, context and purpos of the processing, be like to result in a high risk to the right and freedom of natur persons, the control sha... 
2. the control shall seek the advic of the data protect officer, where designated, when carri out a data protect impact assessment. 
3. A data protect impact assess refer to in paragraph 1 shall in particular be requir in the case of: 
(a) a systemat and extens evalu of person aspect relat to natur person which be base on autom processing, includ profiling, and on which decis be base that produc legal effect concern the natur person or similar... 
(b) process on a larg scale of special categori of data refer to in articl 9(1), or of person data relat to crimin convict and offenc refer to in articl 10; or 
(c) a systemat monitor of a publicli access area on a larg scale. 
4. the supervisori author shall establish and make public a list of the kind of process oper which be subject to the requir for a data protect impact assess pursuant to paragraph 1. the supervisori author shall commun ... 
5. the supervisori author may also establish and make public a list of the kind of process oper for which no data protect impact assess be required. the supervisori author shall commun those list to the board. 
6. prior to the adopt of the list refer to in paragraph 4 and 5, the compet supervisori author shall appli the consist mechan refer to in articl 63 where such list involv process activ which be relat to the offer... 
7. the assess shall contain at least: 
(a) a systemat descript of the envisag process oper and the purpos of the processing, including, where applicable, the legitim interest pursu by the controller; 
(b) an assess of the necess and proportion of the process oper in relat to the purposes; 
(c) an assess of the risk to the right and freedom of data subject refer to in paragraph 1; and 
(d) the measur envisag to address the risks, includ safeguards, secur measur and mechan to ensur the protect of person data and to demonstr complianc with thi regul take into account the right and legitim interest... 
8. complianc with approv code of conduct refer to in articl 40 by the relev control or processor shall be take into due account in assess the impact of the process oper perform by such control or processors, in part... 
9. where appropriate, the control shall seek the view of data subject or their repres on the intend processing, without prejudic to the protect of commerci or public interest or the secur of process operations. 
10. where process pursuant to point (c) or (e) of articl 6(1) have a legal basi in union law or in the law of the member state to which the control be subject, that law regul the specif process oper or set of oper in questio... 
11. where necessary, the control shall carri out a review to ass if process be perform in accord with the data protect impact assess at least when there be a chang of the risk repres by process operations. 
1. the control shall consult the supervisori author prior to process where a data protect impact assess under articl 35 indic that the process would result in a high risk in the absenc of measur take by the control to mi... 
2. where the supervisori author be of the opinion that the intend process refer to in paragraph 1 would infring thi regulation, in particular where the control have insuffici identifi or mitig the risk, the supervisori author... 
3. when consult the supervisori author pursuant to paragraph 1, the control shall provid the supervisori author with: 
(a) where applicable, the respect respons of the controller, joint control and processor involv in the processing, in particular for process within a group of undertakings; 
(b) the purpos and mean of the intend processing; 
(c) the measur and safeguard provid to protect the right and freedom of data subject pursuant to thi regulation; 
(d) where applicable, the contact detail of the data protect officer; 
(e) the data protect impact assess provid for in articl 35; and 
(f) ani other inform request by the supervisori authority. 
4. member state shall consult the supervisori author dure the prepar of a propos for a legisl measur to be adopt by a nation parliament, or of a regulatori measur base on such a legisl measure, which relat to processing. 
5. notwithstand paragraph 1, member state law may requir control to consult with, and obtain prior authoris from, the supervisori author in relat to process by a control for the perform of a task carri out by the control... 
1. the control and the processor shall design a data protect offic in ani case where: 
(a) the process be carri out by a public author or body, except for court act in their judici capacity; 
(b) the core activ of the control or the processor consist of process oper which, by virtu of their nature, their scope and/or their purposes, requir regular and systemat monitor of data subject on a larg scale; or 
(c) the core activ of the control or the processor consist of process on a larg scale of special categori of data pursuant to articl 9 and person data relat to crimin convict and offenc refer to in articl 10. 
2. A group of undertak may appoint a singl data protect offic provid that a data protect offic be easili access from each establishment. 
3. where the control or the processor be a public author or body, a singl data protect offic may be design for sever such author or bodies, take account of their organis structur and size. 
4. In case other than those refer to in paragraph 1, the control or processor or associ and other bodi repres categori of control or processor may or, where requir by union or member state law shall, design a data pro... 
5. the data protect offic shall be design on the basi of profession qualiti and, in particular, expert knowledg of data protect law and practic and the abil to fulfil the task refer to in articl 39. 
6. the data protect offic may be a staff member of the control or processor, or fulfil the task on the basi of a servic contract. 
7. the control or the processor shall publish the contact detail of the data protect offic and commun them to the supervisori authority. 
1. the control and the processor shall ensur that the data protect offic be involved, properli and in a time manner, in all issu which relat to the protect of person data. 
2. the control and processor shall support the data protect offic in perform the task refer to in articl 39 by provid resourc necessari to carri out those task and access to person data and process operations, and to mainta... 
3. the control and processor shall ensur that the data protect offic do not receiv ani instruct regard the exercis of those tasks. He or she shall not be dismiss or penalis by the control or the processor for perform hi ... 
4. data subject may contact the data protect offic with regard to all issu relat to process of their person data and to the exercis of their right under thi regulation. 
5. the data protect offic shall be bound by secreci or confidenti concern the perform of hi or her tasks, in accord with union or member state law. 
6. the data protect offic may fulfil other task and duties. the control or processor shall ensur that ani such task and duti do not result in a conflict of interests. 
1. the data protect offic shall have at least the follow tasks: 
(a) to inform and advis the control or the processor and the employe who carri out process of their oblig pursuant to thi regul and to other union or member state data protect provisions; 
(b) to monitor complianc with thi regulation, with other union or member state data protect provis and with the polici of the control or processor in relat to the protect of person data, includ the assign of responsibiliti... 
(c) to provid advic where request a regard the data protect impact assess and monitor it perform pursuant to articl 35; 
(d) to cooper with the supervisori authority; 
(e) to act a the contact point for the supervisori author on issu relat to processing, includ the prior consult refer to in articl 36, and to consult, where appropriate, with regard to ani other matter. 
2. the data protect offic shall in the perform of hi or her task have due regard to the risk associ with process operations, take into account the nature, scope, context and purpos of processing. 
1. the member states, the supervisori authorities, the board and the commiss shall encourag the draw up of code of conduct intend to contribut to the proper applic of thi regulation, take account of the specif featur of the vari... 
2. associ and other bodi repres categori of control or processor may prepar code of conduct, or amend or extend such codes, for the purpos of specifi the applic of thi regulation, such a with regard to: 
(a) fair and transpar processing; 
(b) the legitim interest pursu by control in specif contexts; 
(c) the collect of person data; 
(d) the pseudonymis of person data; 
(e) the inform provid to the public and to data subjects; 
(f) the exercis of the right of data subjects; 
(g) the inform provid to, and the protect of, children, and the manner in which the consent of the holder of parent respons over child be to be obtained; 
(h) the measur and procedur refer to in articl 24 and 25 and the measur to ensur secur of process refer to in articl 32; 
(i) the notif of person data breach to supervisori author and the commun of such person data breach to data subjects; 
(j) the transfer of person data to third countri or intern organisations; or 
(k) out-of-court proceed and other disput resolut procedur for resolv disput between control and data subject with regard to processing, without prejudic to the right of data subject pursuant to articl 77 and 79. 
3. In addit to adher by control or processor subject to thi regulation, code of conduct approv pursuant to paragraph 5 of thi articl and have gener valid pursuant to paragraph 9 of thi articl may also be adher to by contr... 
4. A code of conduct refer to in paragraph 2 of thi articl shall contain mechan which enabl the bodi refer to in articl 41(1) to carri out the mandatori monitor of complianc with it provis by the control or processor which ... 
5. associ and other bodi refer to in paragraph 2 of thi articl which intend to prepar a code of conduct or to amend or extend an exist code shall submit the draft code, amend or extens to the supervisori author which be comp... 
6. where the draft code, or amend or extens be approv in accord with paragraph 5, and where the code of conduct concern do not relat to process activ in sever member states, the supervisori author shall regist and pub... 
7. where a draft code of conduct relat to process activ in sever member states, the supervisori author which be compet pursuant to articl 55 shall, befor approv the draft code, amend or extension, submit it in the procedur ... 
8. where the opinion refer to in paragraph 7 confirm that the draft code, amend or extens compli with thi regulation, or, in the situat refer to in paragraph 3, provid appropri safeguards, the board shall submit it opinion to... 
9. the commiss may, by way of implement acts, decid that the approv code of conduct, amend or extens submit to it pursuant to paragraph 8 have gener valid within the union. those implement act shall be adopt in accordance... 
10. the commiss shall ensur appropri public for the approv code which have be decid a have gener valid in accord with paragraph 9. 
11. the board shall collat all approv code of conduct, amend and extens in a regist and shall make them publicli avail by way of appropri means. 
1. without prejudic to the task and power of the compet supervisori author under articl 57 and 58, the monitor of complianc with a code of conduct pursuant to articl 40 may be carri out by a bodi which have an appropri level of exp... 
2. A bodi a refer to in paragraph 1 may be accredit to monitor complianc with a code of conduct where that bodi has: 
(a) demonstr it independ and expertis in relat to the subject-matt of the code to the satisfact of the compet supervisori authority; 
(b) establish procedur which allow it to ass the elig of control and processor concern to appli the code, to monitor their complianc with it provis and to period review it operation; 
(c) establish procedur and structur to handl complaint about infring of the code or the manner in which the code have been, or be being, implement by a control or processor, and to make those procedur and structur transpar to... 
(d) demonstr to the satisfact of the compet supervisori author that it task and duti do not result in a conflict of interests. 
3. the compet supervisori author shall submit the draft criterion for accredit of a bodi a refer to in paragraph 1 of thi articl to the board pursuant to the consist mechan refer to in articl 63. 
4. without prejudic to the task and power of the compet supervisori author and the provis of chapter viii, a bodi a refer to in paragraph 1 shall, subject to appropri safeguards, take appropri action in case of infring of ... 
5. the compet supervisori author shall revok the accredit of a bodi a refer to in paragraph 1 if the condit for accredit be not, or be no longer, met or where action take by the bodi infring thi regulation. 
6. thi articl shall not appli to process carri out by public author and bodies. 
1. the member states, the supervisori authorities, the board and the commiss shall encourage, in particular at union level, the establish of data protect certif mechan and of data protect seal and marks, for the purpos of dem... 
2. In addit to adher by control or processor subject to thi regulation, data protect certif mechanisms, seal or mark approv pursuant to paragraph 5 of thi articl may be establish for the purpos of demonstr the exis... 
3. the certif shall be voluntari and avail via a process that be transparent. 
4. A certif pursuant to thi articl do not reduc the respons of the control or the processor for complianc with thi regul and be without prejudic to the task and power of the supervisori author which be compet ... 
5. A certif pursuant to thi articl shall be issu by the certif bodi refer to in articl 43 or by the compet supervisori authority, on the basi of criterion approv by that compet supervisori author pursuant to articl ... 
6. the control or processor which submit it process to the certif mechan shall provid the certif bodi refer to in articl 43, or where applicable, the compet supervisori authority, with all inform and access to its... 
7. certif shall be issu to a control or processor for a maximum period of three year and may be renewed, under the same conditions, provid that the relev requir continu to be met. certif shall be withdrawn, a applicabl... 
8. the board shall collat all certif mechan and data protect seal and mark in a regist and shall make them publicli avail by ani appropri means. 
1. without prejudic to the task and power of the compet supervisori author under articl 57 and 58, certif bodi which have an appropri level of expertis in relat to data protect shall, after inform the supervisori autho... 
(a) the supervisori author which be compet pursuant to articl 55 or 56; 
(b) the nation accredit bodi name in accord with regul (ec) No 765/2008 of the european parliament and of the council21f in accord with en-iso/iec 17065/2012 and with the addit requir establish by the supervisori aut... 
2. certif bodi refer to in paragraph 1 shall be accredit in accord with paragraph 1 onli where they have: 
(a) demonstr their independ and expertis in relat to the subject-matt of the certif to the satisfact of the compet supervisori authority; 
(b) undertaken to respect the criterion refer to in articl 42(5) and approv by the supervisori author which be compet pursuant to articl 55 or 56 or by the board pursuant to articl 63; 
(c) establish procedur for the issuing, period review and withdraw of data protect certification, seal and marks; 
(d) establish procedur and structur to handl complaint about infring of the certif or the manner in which the certif have been, or be being, implement by the control or processor, and to make those procedur and struct... 
(e) demonstrated, to the satisfact of the compet supervisori authority, that their task and duti do not result in a conflict of interests. 
3. the accredit of certif bodi a refer to in paragraph 1 and 2 shall take place on the basi of criterion approv by the supervisori author which be compet pursuant to articl 55 or 56 or by the board pursuant to articl 63. i... 
4. the certif bodi refer to in paragraph 1 shall be respons for the proper assess lead to the certif or the withdraw of such certif without prejudic to the respons of the control or processor for comp... 
5. the certif bodi refer to in paragraph 1 shall provid the compet supervisori author with the reason for grant or withdraw the request certification. 
6. the requir refer to in paragraph 3 of thi articl and the criterion refer to in articl 42(5) shall be make public by the supervisori author in an easili access form. the supervisori author shall also transmit those requirem... 
7. without prejudic to chapter viii, the compet supervisori author or the nation accredit bodi shall revok an accredit of a certif bodi pursuant to paragraph 1 of thi articl where the condit for the accredit be n... 
8. the commiss shall be empow to adopt deleg act in accord with articl 92 for the purpos of specifi the requir to be take into account for the data protect certif mechan refer to in articl 42(1). 
9. the commiss may adopt implement act lay down technic standard for certif mechan and data protect seal and marks, and mechan to promot and recognis those certif mechanisms, seal and marks. those implementin... 
1. A transfer of person data to a third countri or an intern organis may take place where the commiss have decid that the third country, a territori or one or more specifi sector within that third country, or the intern org... 
2. when assess the adequaci of the level of protection, the commiss shall, in particular, take account of the follow elements: 
(a) the rule of law, respect for human right and fundament freedoms, relev legislation, both gener and sectoral, includ concern public security, defence, nation secur and crimin law and the access of public author to personal... 
(b) the exist and effect function of one or more independ supervisori author in the third countri or to which an intern organis be subject, with respons for ensur and enforc complianc with the data protecti... 
(c) the intern commit the third countri or intern organis concern have enter into, or other oblig aris from legal bind convent or instrument a well a from it particip in multilater or region sy... 
3. the commission, after assess the adequaci of the level of protection, may decide, by mean of implement act, that a third country, a territori or one or more specifi sector within a third country, or an intern organis ensur a... 
4. the commiss shall, on an ongo basis, monitor develop in third countri and intern organis that could affect the function of decis adopt pursuant to paragraph 3 of thi articl and decis adopt on the basi of... 
5. the commiss shall, where avail inform reveals, in particular follow the review refer to in paragraph 3 of thi article, that a third country, a territori or one or more specifi sector within a third country, or an international... 
On duli justifi imper ground of urgency, the commiss shall adopt immedi applic implement act in accord with the procedur refer to in articl 93(3). 
6. the commiss shall enter into consult with the third countri or intern organis with a view to remedi the situat give rise to the decis make pursuant to paragraph 5. 
7. A decis pursuant to paragraph 5 of thi articl be without prejudic to transfer of person data to the third country, a territori or one or more specifi sector within that third country, or the intern organis in question pursua... 
8. the commiss shall publish in the offici journal of the european union and on it websit a list of the third countries, territori and specifi sector within a third countri and intern organis for which it have decid that an ... 
9. decis adopt by the commiss on the basi of articl 25(6) of direct 95/46/ec shall remain in forc until amended, replac or repeal by a commiss decis adopt in accord with paragraph 3 or 5 of thi article. 
1. In the absenc of a decis pursuant to articl 45(3), a control or processor may transfer person data to a third countri or an intern organis onli if the control or processor have provid appropri safeguards, and on conditi... 
2. the appropri safeguard refer to in paragraph 1 may be provid for, without requir ani specif authoris from a supervisori authority, by: 
(a) a legal bind and enforc instrument between public author or bodies; 
(b) bind corpor rule in accord with articl 47; 
(c) standard data protect claus adopt by the commiss in accord with the examin procedur refer to in articl 93(2); 
(d) standard data protect claus adopt by a supervisori author and approv by the commiss pursuant to the examin procedur refer to in articl 93(2); 
(e) an approv code of conduct pursuant to articl 40 togeth with bind and enforc commit of the control or processor in the third countri to appli the appropri safeguards, includ a regard data subjects' rights; or 
(f) an approv certif mechan pursuant to articl 42 togeth with bind and enforc commit of the control or processor in the third countri to appli the appropri safeguards, includ a regard data subjects' rights. 
3. subject to the authoris from the compet supervisori authority, the appropri safeguard refer to in paragraph 1 may also be provid for, in particular, by: 
(a) contractu claus between the control or processor and the controller, processor or the recipi of the person data in the third countri or intern organisation; or 
(b) provis to be insert into administr arrang between public author or bodi which includ enforc and effect data subject rights. 
4. the supervisori author shall appli the consist mechan refer to in articl 63 in the case refer to in paragraph 3 of thi article. 
5. authoris by a member state or supervisori author on the basi of articl 26(2) of direct 95/46/ec shall remain valid until amended, replac or repealed, if necessary, by that supervisori authority. decis adopt by the commiss ... 
1. the compet supervisori author shall approv bind corpor rule in accord with the consist mechan set out in articl 63, provid that they: 
(a) be legal bind and appli to and be enforc by everi member concern of the group of undertakings, or group of enterpris engag in a joint econom activity, includ their employees; 
(b) expressli confer enforc right on data subject with regard to the process of their person data; and 
(c) fulfil the requir laid down in paragraph 2. 
2. the bind corpor rule refer to in paragraph 1 shall specifi at least: 
(a) the structur and contact detail of the group of undertakings, or group of enterpris engag in a joint econom activ and of each of it members; 
(b) the data transfer or set of transfers, includ the categori of person data, the type of process and it purposes, the type of data subject affect and the identif of the third countri or countri in question; 
(c) their legal bind nature, both intern and externally; 
(d) the applic of the gener data protect principles, in particular purpos limitation, data minimisation, limit storag periods, data quality, data protect by design and by default, legal basi for processing, process of special cate... 
(e) the right of data subject in regard to process and the mean to exercis those rights, includ the right not to be subject to decis base sole on autom processing, includ profil in accord with articl 22, the right to lo... 
(f) the accept by the control or processor establish on the territori of a member state of liabil for ani breach of the bind corpor rule by ani member concern not establish in the union; the control or the processor shall b... 
(g) how the inform on the bind corpor rules, in particular on the provis refer to in point (d), (e) and (f) of thi paragraph be provid to the data subject in addit to articl 13 and 14; 
(h) the task of ani data protect offic design in accord with articl 37 or ani other person or entiti in charg of the monitor complianc with the bind corpor rule within the group of undertakings, or group of enterpris engag... 
(i) the complaint procedures; 
(j) the mechan within the group of undertakings, or group of enterpris engag in a joint econom activ for ensur the verif of complianc with the bind corpor rules. such mechan shall includ data protect audit and me... 
(k) the mechan for report and record chang to the rule and report those chang to the supervisori authority; 
(l) the cooper mechan with the supervisori author to ensur complianc by ani member of the group of undertakings, or group of enterpris engag in a joint econom activity, in particular by make avail to the supervisori authority... 
(m) the mechan for report to the compet supervisori author ani legal requir to which a member of the group of undertakings, or group of enterpris engag in a joint econom activ be subject in a third countri which be like ... 
(n) the appropri data protect train to personnel have perman or regular access to person data. 
3. the commiss may specifi the format and procedur for the exchang of inform between controllers, processor and supervisori author for bind corpor rule within the mean of thi article. those implement act shall be adopte... 
1. In the absenc of an adequaci decis pursuant to articl 45(3), or of appropri safeguard pursuant to articl 46, includ bind corpor rules, a transfer or a set of transfer of person data to a third countri or an intern organ... 
(a) the data subject have explicitli consent to the propos transfer, after have be inform of the possibl risk of such transfer for the data subject due to the absenc of an adequaci decis and appropri safeguards; 
(b) the transfer be necessari for the perform of a contract between the data subject and the control or the implement of pre-contractu measur take at the data subject' request; 
(c) the transfer be necessari for the conclus or perform of a contract conclud in the interest of the data subject between the control and anoth natur or legal person; 
(d) the transfer be necessari for import reason of public interest; 
(e) the transfer be necessari for the establishment, exercis or defenc of legal claims; 
(f) the transfer be necessari in order to protect the vital interest of the data subject or of other persons, where the data subject be physic or legal incap of give consent; 
(g) the transfer be make from a regist which accord to union or member state law be intend to provid inform to the public and which be open to consult either by the public in gener or by ani person who can demonstr a legitim ... 
where a transfer could not be base on a provis in articl 45 or 46, includ the provis on bind corpor rules, and none of the derog for a specif situat pursuant to point (a) to (g) of thi paragraph be applicable, a transf... 
2. A transfer pursuant to point (g) of paragraph 1 shall not involv the entireti of the person data or entir categori of the person data contain in the register. where the regist be intend for consult by person have a legitim ... 
3. point (a), (b) and (c) of the first subparagraph and the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 shall not appli to activ carri out by public author in the exercis of their public powers. 
4. the public interest refer to in point (d) of paragraph 1 shall be recognis in union law or in the law of the member state to which the control be subject. 
5. In the absenc of an adequaci decision, union or member state law may, for import reason of public interest, expressli set limit to the transfer of specif categori of person data to a third countri or an intern organisation. memb... 
6. the control or processor shall document the assess a well a the suitabl safeguard refer to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 of thi articl in the record refer to in articl 30. 
1. each member state shall provid for one or more independ public author to be respons for monitor the applic of thi regulation, in order to protect the fundament right and freedom of natur person in relat to processing... 
2. each supervisori author shall contribut to the consist applic of thi regul throughout the union. for that purpose, the supervisori author shall cooper with each other and the commiss in accord with chapter vii. 
3. where more than one supervisori author be establish in a member state, that member state shall design the supervisori author which be to repres those author in the board and shall set out the mechan to ensur complianc by the... 
4. each member state shall notifi to the commiss the provis of it law which it adopt pursuant to thi chapter, by … [two year from the date of entri into forc of thi regulation] at the late and, without delay, ani subsequ amend a... 
1. each supervisori author shall act with complet independ in perform it task and exercis it power in accord with thi regulation. 
2. the member or member of each supervisori author shall, in the perform of their task and exercis of their power in accord with thi regulation, remain free from extern influence, whether direct or indirect, and shall neither seek no... 
3. member or member of each supervisori author shall refrain from ani action incompat with their duti and shall not, dure their term of office, engag in ani incompat occupation, whether gain or not. 
4. each member state shall ensur that each supervisori author be provid with the human, technic and financi resources, premis and infrastructur necessari for the effect perform of it task and exercis of it powers, includ tho... 
5. each member state shall ensur that each supervisori author choos and have it own staff which shall be subject to the exclus direct of the member or member of the supervisori author concerned. 
6. each member state shall ensur that each supervisori author be subject to financi control which do not affect it independ and that it have separate, public annual budgets, which may be part of the overal state or nation budget. 
1. member state shall provid for each member of their supervisori author to be appoint by mean of a transpar procedur by: 
– their parliament; 
– their government; 
– their head of state; or 
– an independ bodi entrust with the appoint under member state law. 
2. each member shall have the qualifications, experi and skills, in particular in the area of the protect of person data, requir to perform it duti and exercis it powers. 
3. the duti of a member shall end in the event of the expiri of the term of office, resign or compulsori retirement, in accord with the law of the member state concerned. 
4. A member shall be dismiss onli in case of seriou misconduct or if the member no longer fulfil the condit requir for the perform of the duties. 
1. each member state shall provid by law for all of the following: 
(a) the establish of each supervisori authority; 
(b) the qualif and elig condit requir to be appoint a member of each supervisori authority; 
(c) the rule and procedur for the appoint of the member or member of each supervisori authority; 
(d) the durat of the term of the member or member of each supervisori author of no less than four years, except for the first appoint after … [the date of entri into forc of thi regulation], part of which may take place for a shorter peri... 
(e) whether and, if so, for how mani term the member or member of each supervisori author be elig for reappointment; 
(f) the condit govern the oblig of the member or member and staff of each supervisori authority, prohibit on actions, occup and benefit incompat therewith dure and after the term of offic and rule govern the cessati... 
2. the member or member and the staff of each supervisori author shall, in accord with union or member state law, be subject to a duti of profession secreci both dure and after their term of office, with regard to ani confidenti informat... 
1. each supervisori author shall be compet for the perform of the task assign to and the exercis of the power confer on it in accord with thi regul on the territori of it own member state. 
2. where process be carri out by public author or privat bodi act on the basi of point (c) or (e) of articl 6(1), the supervisori author of the member state concern shall be competent. In such case articl 56 do not apply. 
3. supervisori author shall not be compet to supervis process oper of court act in their judici capacity. 
1. without prejudic to articl 55, the supervisori author of the main establish or of the singl establish of the control or processor shall be compet to act a lead supervisori author for the cross-bord process carri out b... 
2. By derog from paragraph 1, each supervisori author shall be compet to handl a complaint lodg with it or a possibl infring of thi regulation, if the subject matter relat onli to an establish in it member state or substant... 
3. In the case refer to in paragraph 2 of thi article, the supervisori author shall inform the lead supervisori author without delay on that matter. within a period of three week after be inform the lead supervisori author shall de... 
4. where the lead supervisori author decid to handl the case, the procedur provid in articl 60 shall apply. the supervisori author which inform the lead supervisori author may submit to the lead supervisori author a draft for a d... 
5. where the lead supervisori author decid not to handl the case, the supervisori author which inform the lead supervisori author shall handl it accord to articl 61 and 62. 
6. the lead supervisori author shall be the sole interlocutor of the control or processor for the cross-bord process carri out by that control or processor. 
1. without prejudic to other task set out under thi regulation, each supervisori author shall on it territory: 
(a) monitor and enforc the applic of thi regulation; 
(b) promot public awar and understand of the risks, rules, safeguard and right in relat to processing. activ address specif to child shall receiv specif attention; 
(c) advise, in accord with member state law, the nation parliament, the government, and other institut and bodi on legisl and administr measur relat to the protect of natur persons' right and freedom with regard to p... 
(d) promot the awar of control and processor of their oblig under thi regulation; 
(e) upon request, provid inform to ani data subject concern the exercis of their right under thi regul and, if appropriate, cooper with the supervisori author in other member state to that end; 
(f) handl complaint lodg by a data subject, or by a body, organis or associ in accord with articl 80, and investigate, to the extent appropriate, the subject matter of the complaint and inform the complain of the progress and the... 
(g) cooper with, includ share inform and provid mutual assist to, other supervisori author with a view to ensur the consist of applic and enforc of thi regulation; 
(h) conduct investig on the applic of thi regulation, includ on the basi of inform receiv from anoth supervisori author or other public authority; 
(i) monitor relev developments, insofar a they have an impact on the protect of person data, in particular the develop of inform and commun technolog and commerci practices; 
(j) adopt standard contractu claus refer to in articl 28(8) and point (d) of articl 46(2); 
(k) establish and maintain a list in relat to the requir for data protect impact assess pursuant to articl 35(4); 
(l) give advic on the process oper refer to in articl 36(2); 
(m) encourag the draw up of code of conduct pursuant to articl 40 and provid an opinion and approv such code of conduct which provid suffici safeguards, pursuant to articl 40(5); 
(n) encourag the establish of data protect certif mechan and of data protect seal and mark pursuant to articl 42(1), and approv the criterion of certif pursuant to articl 42(5); 
(o) where applicable, carri out a period review of certif issu in accord with articl 42(7); 
(p) draft and publish the criterion for accredit of a bodi for monitor code of conduct pursuant to articl 41 and of a certif bodi pursuant to articl 43; 
(q) conduct the accredit of a bodi for monitor code of conduct pursuant to articl 41 and of a certif bodi pursuant to articl 43; 
(r) authoris contractu claus and provis refer to in articl 46(3); 
(s) approv bind corpor rule pursuant to articl 47; 
(t) contribut to the activ of the board; 
(u) keep intern record of infring of thi regul and of measur take in accord with articl 58(2); and 
(v) fulfil ani other task relat to the protect of person data. 
2. each supervisori author shall facilit the submiss of complaint refer to in point (f) of paragraph 1, by measur such a a complaint submiss form which may also be complet electronically, without exclud other mean of communica... 
3. the perform of the task of each supervisori author shall be free of charg for the data subject and, where applicable, for the data protect officer. 
4. where request be manifestli unfound or excessive, in particular becaus of their repetit character, the supervisori author may charg a reason fee base on administr costs, or refus to act on the request. the supervisori authori... 
1. each supervisori author shall have all of the follow investig powers: 
(a) to order the control and the processor, and, where applicable, the controller' or the processor' repres to provid ani inform it requir for the perform of it tasks; 
(b) to carri out investig in the form of data protect audits; 
(c) to carri out a review on certif issu pursuant to articl 42(7); 
(d) to notifi the control or the processor of an alleg infring of thi regulation; 
(e) to obtain, from the control and the processor, access to all person data and to all inform necessari for the perform of it tasks; 
(f) to obtain access to ani premis of the control and the processor, includ to ani data process equip and means, in accord with union or member state procedur law. 
2. each supervisori author shall have all of the follow correct powers: 
(a) to issu warn to a control or processor that intend process oper be like to infring provis of thi regulation; 
(b) to issu reprimand to a control or a processor where process oper have infring provis of thi regulation; 
(c) to order the control or the processor to compli with the data subject' request to exercis hi or her right pursuant to thi regulation; 
(d) to order the control or processor to bring process oper into complianc with the provis of thi regulation, where appropriate, in a specifi manner and within a specifi period; 
(e) to order the control to commun a person data breach to the data subject; 
(f) to impos a temporari or definit limit includ a ban on processing; 
(g) to order the rectif or erasur of person data or restrict of process pursuant to articl 16, 17 and 18 and the notif of such action to recipi to whom the person data have be disclos pursuant to articl 17(2) and 19; 
(h) to withdraw a certif or to order the certif bodi to withdraw a certif issu pursuant to articl 42 and 43, or to order the certif bodi not to issu certif if the requir for the certif be not or ar... 
(i) to impos an administr fine pursuant to articl 83, in addit to, or instead of measur refer to in thi paragraph, depend on the circumst of each individu case; 
(j) to order the suspens of data flow to a recipi in a third countri or to an intern organisation. 
3. each supervisori author shall have all of the follow authoris and advisori powers: 
(a) to advis the control in accord with the prior consult procedur refer to in articl 36; 
(b) to issue, on it own initi or on request, opinion to the nation parliament, the member state govern or, in accord with member state law, to other institut and bodi a well a to the public on ani issu relat to the protecti... 
(c) to authoris process refer to in articl 36(5), if the law of the member state requir such prior authorisation; 
(d) to issu an opinion and approv draft code of conduct pursuant to articl 40(5); 
(e) to accredit certif bodi pursuant to articl 43; 
(f) to issu certif and approv criterion of certif in accord with articl 42(5); 
(g) to adopt standard data protect claus refer to in articl 28(8) and in point (d) of articl 46(2); 
(h) to authoris contractu claus refer to in point (a) of articl 46(3); 
(i) to authoris administr arrang refer to in point (b) of articl 46(3); 
(j) to approv bind corpor rule pursuant to articl 47. 
4. the exercis of the power confer on the supervisori author pursuant to thi articl shall be subject to appropri safeguards, includ effect judici remedi and due process, set out in union and member state law in accord with the... 
5. each member state shall provid by law that it supervisori author shall have the power to bring infring of thi regul to the attent of the judici author and where appropriate, to commenc or engag otherwis in legal procee... 
6. each member state may provid by law that it supervisori author shall have addit power to those refer to in paragraph 1, 2 and 3. the exercis of those power shall not impair the effect oper of chapter vii. 
1. the lead supervisori author shall cooper with the other supervisori author concern in accord with thi articl in an endeavour to reach consensus. the lead supervisori author and the supervisori author concern shall excha... 
2. the lead supervisori author may request at ani time other supervisori author concern to provid mutual assist pursuant to articl 61 and may conduct joint oper pursuant to articl 62, in particular for carri out investigatio... 
3. the lead supervisori author shall, without delay, commun the relev inform on the matter to the other supervisori author concerned. It shall without delay submit a draft decis to the other supervisori author concern fo... 
4. where ani of the other supervisori author concern within a period of four week after have be consult in accord with paragraph 3 of thi article, express a relev and reason object to the draft decision, the lead superviso... 
5. where the lead supervisori author intend to follow the relev and reason object made, it shall submit to the other supervisori author concern a revis draft decis for their opinion. that revis draft decis shall be subject... 
6. where none of the other supervisori author concern have object to the draft decis submit by the lead supervisori author within the period refer to in paragraph 4 and 5, the lead supervisori author and the supervisori author... 
7. the lead supervisori author shall adopt and notifi the decis to the main establish or singl establish of the control or processor, a the case may be and inform the other supervisori author concern and the board of the deci... 
8. By derog from paragraph 7, where a complaint be dismiss or rejected, the supervisori author with which the complaint be lodg shall adopt the decis and notifi it to the complain and shall inform the control thereof. 
9. where the lead supervisori author and the supervisori author concern agre to dismiss or reject part of a complaint and to act on other part of that complaint, a separ decis shall be adopt for each of those part of the matter. ... 
10. after be notifi of the decis of the lead supervisori author pursuant to paragraphs7 and 9, the control or processor shall take the necessari measur to ensur complianc with the decis a regard process activ in the con... 
11. where, in except circumstances, a supervisori author concern have reason to consid that there be an urgent need to act in order to protect the interest of data subjects, the urgenc procedur refer to in articl 66 shall apply. 
12. the lead supervisori author and the other supervisori author concern shall suppli the inform requir under thi articl to each other by electron means, use a standardis format. 
1. supervisori author shall provid each other with relev inform and mutual assist in order to implement and appli thi regul in a consist manner, and shall put in place measur for effect cooper with one another. mut... 
2. each supervisori author shall take all appropri measur requir to repli to a request of anoth supervisori author without undu delay and no late than one month after receiv the request. such measur may include, in particular, t... 
3. request for assist shall contain all the necessari information, includ the purpos of and reason for the request. inform exchang shall be use onli for the purpos for which it be requested. 
4. the request supervisori author shall not refus to compli with the request unless: 
(a) it be not compet for the subject-matt of the request or for the measur it be request to execute; or 
(b) complianc with the request would infring thi regul or union or member state law to which the supervisori author receiv the request be subject. 
5. the request supervisori author shall inform the request supervisori author of the result or, a the case may be, of the progress of the measur take in order to respond to the request. the request supervisori author shall provide... 
6. request supervisori author shall, a a rule, suppli the inform request by other supervisori author by electron means, use a standardis format. 
7. request supervisori author shall not charg a fee for ani action take by them pursuant to a request for mutual assistance. supervisori author may agre on rule to indemnifi each other for specif expenditur aris from the provisi... 
8. where a supervisori author do not provid the inform refer to in paragraph 5 within one month of receiv the request of anoth supervisori authority, the request supervisori author may adopt a provision measur on the territ... 
9. the commiss may, by mean of implement acts, specifi the format and procedur for mutual assist refer to in thi articl and the arrang for the exchang of inform by electron mean between supervisori authorities, and bet... 
1. the supervisori author shall, where appropriate, conduct joint oper includ joint investig and joint enforc measur in which member or staff from the supervisori author of other member state be involved. 
2. where the control or processor have establish in sever member state or where a signific number of data subject in more than one member state be like to be substanti affect by process operations, a supervisori author of... 
3. A supervisori author may, in accord with member state law, and with the second supervisori authority' authorisation, confer powers, includ investig power on the second supervisori authority' member or staff involv in join... 
4. where, in accord with paragraph 1, staff of a second supervisori author oper in anoth member state, the member state of the host supervisori author shall assum respons for their actions, includ liability, for ani damage... 
5. the member state in whose territori the damag be caus shall make good such damag under the condit applic to damag caus by it own staff. the member state of the second supervisori author whose staff have caus damag to ani p... 
6. without prejudic to the exercis of it right vis-à-vi third parti and with the except of paragraph 5, each member state shall refrain, in the case provid for in paragraph 1, from request reimburs from anoth member state in rela... 
7. where a joint oper be intend and a supervisori author do not, within one month, compli with the oblig laid down in the second sentenc of paragraph 2 of thi article, the other supervisori author may adopt a provision measur... 
1. the board shall issu an opinion where a compet supervisori author intend to adopt ani of the measur below. To that end, the compet supervisori author shall commun the draft decis to the board, when it: 
(a) aim to adopt a list of the process oper subject to the requir for a data protect impact assess pursuant to articl 35(4); 
(b) concern a matter pursuant to articl 40(7) whether a draft code of conduct or an amend or extens to a code of conduct compli with thi regulation; 
(c) aim to approv the criterion for accredit of a bodi pursuant to articl 41(3) or a certif bodi pursuant to articl 43(3); 
(d) aim to determin standard data protect claus refer to in point (d) of articl 46(2) and articl 28(8); 
(e) aim to authoris contractu claus refer to in point (a) of articl 46(3); or 
(f) aim to approv bind corpor rule within the mean of articl 47. 
2. ani supervisori authority, the chair of the board or the commiss may request that ani matter of gener applic or produc effect in more than one member state be examin by the board with a view to obtain an opinion, in particular wh... 
3. In the case refer to in paragraph 1 and 2, the board shall issu an opinion on the matter submit to it provid that it have not alreadi issu an opinion on the same matter. that opinion shall be adopt within eight week by simpl majorit... 
4. supervisori author and the commiss shall, without undu delay, commun by electron mean to the board, use a standardis format ani relev information, includ a the case may be a summari of the facts, the draft decision, the... 
5. the chair of the board shall, without undue, delay inform by electron means: 
(a) the member of the board and the commiss of ani relev inform which have be commun to it use a standardis format. the secretariat of the board shall, where necessary, provid translat of relev information; and 
(b) the supervisori author refer to, a the case may be, in paragraph 1 and 2, and the commiss of the opinion and make it public. 
6. the compet supervisori author shall not adopt it draft decis refer to in paragraph 1 within the period refer to in paragraph 3. 
7. the supervisori author refer to in paragraph 1 shall take utmost account of the opinion of the board and shall within two week after receiv the opinion, electron commun to the chair of the board whether it maintain or will ame... 
8. where the supervisori author concern inform the chair of the board within the period refer to in paragraph 7 of thi articl that it do not intend to follow the opinion of the board, in whole or in part, provid the relev grounds, a... 
1. In order to ensur the correct and consist applic of thi regul in individu cases, the board shall adopt a bind decis in the follow cases: 
(a) where, in a case refer to in articl 60(4), a supervisori author concern have rais a relev and reason object to a draft decis of the lead author or the lead author have reject an object a be not relev or reason... 
(b) where there be conflict view on which of the supervisori author concern be compet for the main establishment; 
(c) where a compet supervisori author do not request the opinion of the board in the case refer to in articl 64(1), or do not follow the opinion of the board issu under articl 64. In that case, ani supervisori author concern or ... 
2. the decis refer to in paragraph 1 shall be adopt within one month from the referr of the subject-matt by a two-third major of the member of the board. thi period may be extend by a further month on account of the complex of t... 
3. where the board have be unabl to adopt a decis within the period refer to in paragraph 2, it shall adopt it decis within two week follow the expir of the second month refer to in paragraph 2 by a simpl major of the memb... 
4. the supervisori author concern shall not adopt a decis on the subject matter submit to the board under paragraph 1 dure the period refer to in paragraph 2 and 3. 
5. the chair of the board shall notify, without undu delay, the decis refer to in paragraph 1 to the supervisori author concerned. It shall inform the commiss thereof. the decis shall be publish on the websit of the board without ... 
6. the lead supervisori author or, a the case may be, the supervisori author with which the complaint have be lodg shall adopt it final decis on the basi of the decis refer to in paragraph 1 of thi article, without undu delay a... 
1. In except circumstances, where a supervisori author concern consid that there be an urgent need to act in order to protect the right and freedom of data subjects, it may, by way of derog from the consist mechan refer t... 
2. where a supervisori author have take a measur pursuant to paragraph 1 and consid that final measur need urgent be adopted, it may request an urgent opinion or an urgent bind decis from the board, give reason for request such... 
3. ani supervisori author may request an urgent opinion or an urgent bind decision, a the case may be, from the board where a compet supervisori author have not take an appropri measur in a situat where there be an urgent need to a... 
4. By derog from articl 64(3) and 65(2), an urgent opinion or an urgent bind decis refer to in paragraph 2 and 3 of thi articl shall be adopt within two week by simpl major of the member of the board. 
1. the european data protect board (the 'board') be herebi establish a a bodi of the union and shall have legal personality. 
2. the board shall be repres by it chair. 
3. the board shall be compos of the head of one supervisori author of each member state and of the european data protect supervisor, or their respect representatives. 
4. where in a member state more than one supervisori author be respons for monitor the applic of the provis pursuant to thi regulation, a joint repres shall be appoint in accord with that member state' law. 
5. the commiss shall have the right to particip in the activ and meet of the board without vote right. the commiss shall design a representative. the chair of the board shall commun to the commiss the activ of the b... 
6. In the case refer to in articl 65, the european data protect supervisor shall have vote right onli on decis which concern principl and rule applic to the union institutions, bodies, offic and agenc which correspond in su... 
1. the board shall act independ when perform it task or exercis it power pursuant to articl 70 and 71. 
2. without prejudic to request by the commiss refer to in point (b) of articl 70(1) and in articl 70(2), the board shall, in the perform of it task or the exercis of it powers, neither seek nor take instruct from anybody. 
1. the board shall ensur the consist applic of thi regulation. To that end, the board shall, on it own initi or, where relevant, at the request of the commission, in particular: 
(a) monitor and ensur the correct applic of thi regul in the case provid for in articl 64 and 65 without prejudic to the task of nation supervisori authorities; 
(b) advis the commiss on ani issu relat to the protect of person data in the union, includ on ani propos amend of thi regulation; 
(c) advis the commiss on the format and procedur for the exchang of inform between controllers, processor and supervisori author for bind corpor rules; 
(d) issu guidelines, recommendations, and best practic on procedur for eras links, copi or replic of person data from publicli avail commun servic a refer to in articl 17 (2); 
(e) examine, on it own initiative, on request of one of it member or on request of the commission, ani question cover the applic of thi regul and issu guidelines, recommend and best practic in order to encourag consist ap... 
(f) issu guidelines, recommend and best practic in accord with point (e) of thi paragraph for further specifi the criterion and condit for decis base on profil pursuant to articl 22(2); 
(g) issu guidelines, recommend and best practic in accord with point (e) of thi paragraph for establish the person data breach and determin the undu delay refer to in articl 33(1) and (2) and for the particular circumstanc... 
(h) issu guidelines, recommend and best practic in accord with point (e) of thi paragraph a to the circumst in which a person data breach be like to result in a high risk to the right and freedom of the natur person refer... 
(i) issu guidelines, recommend and best practic in accord with point (e) of thi paragraph for the purpos of further specifi the criterion and requir for person data transfer base on bind corpor rule adher to by cont... 
(j) issu guidelines, recommend and best practic in accord with point (e) of thi paragraph for the purpos of further specifi the criterion and requir for the person data transfer on the basi of articl 49(1); 
(k) draw up guidelin for supervisori author concern the applic of measur refer to in articl 58(1), (2) and (3) and the fix of administr fine pursuant to articl 83; 
(l) review the practic applic of the guidelines, recommend and best practic refer to in point (e) and (f); 
(m) issu guidelines, recommend and best practic in accord with point (e) of thi paragraph for establish common procedur for report by natur person of infring of thi regul pursuant to articl 54(2); 
(n) encourag the drawing-up of code of conduct and the establish of data protect certif mechan and data protect seal and mark pursuant to articl 40 and 42; 
(o) carri out the accredit of certif bodi and it period review pursuant to articl 43 and maintain a public regist of accredit bodi pursuant to articl 43(6) and of the accredit control or processor establish in third c... 
(p) specifi the requir refer to in articl 43(3) with a view to the accredit of certif bodi under articl 42; 
(q) provid the commiss with an opinion on the certif requir refer to in articl 43(8); 
(r) provid the commiss with an opinion on the the icon refer to in articl 12(7); 
(s) provid the commiss with an opinion for the assess of the adequaci of the level of protect in a third countri or intern organisation, includ for the assess whether a third country, a territori or one or more specifi sect... 
(t) issu opinion on draft decis of supervisori author pursuant to the consist mechan refer to in articl 64(1), on matter submit pursuant to articl 64(2) and to issu bind decis pursuant to articl 65, includ in cas... 
(u) promot the cooper and the effect bilater and multilater exchang of inform and best practic between the supervisori authorities; 
(v) promot common train programm and facilit personnel exchang between the supervisori author and, where appropriate, with the supervisori author of third countri or with intern organisations; 
(w) promot the exchang of knowledg and document on data protect legisl and practic with data protect supervisori author worldwide. 
(x) issu opinion on code of conduct drawn up at union level pursuant to articl 40(9); and 
(y) maintain a publicli access electron regist of decis take by supervisori author and court on issu handl in the consist mechanism. 
2. where the commiss request advic from the board, it may indic a time limit, take into account the urgenc of the matter. 
3. the board shall forward it opinions, guidelines, recommendations, and best practic to the commiss and to the committe refer to in articl 93 and make them public. 
4. the board shall, where appropriate, consult interest parti and give them the opportun to comment within a reason period. the board shall, without prejudic to articl 76, make the result of the consult procedur publicli available. 
1. the board shall draw up an annual report regard the protect of natur person with regard to process in the union and, where relevant, in third countri and intern organisations. the report shall be make public and be transmit ... 
2. the annual report shall includ a review of the practic applic of the guidelines, recommend and best practic refer to in point (l) of articl 70(1) a well a of the bind decis refer to in articl 65. 
1. the board shall take decis by a simpl major of it members, unless otherwis provid for in thi regulation. 
2. the board shall adopt it own rule of procedur by a two-third major of it member and organis it own oper arrangements. 
1. the board shall elect a chair and two deputi chair from amongst it member by simpl majority. 
2. the term of offic of the chair and of the deputi chair shall be five year and be renew once. 
1. the chair shall have the follow tasks: 
(a) to conven the meet of the board and prepar it agenda; 
(b) to notifi decis adopt by the board pursuant to articl 65 to the lead supervisori author and the supervisori author concerned; 
(c) to ensur the time perform of the task of the board, in particular in relat to the consist mechan refer to in articl 63. 
2. the board shall lay down the alloc of task between the chair and the deputi chair in it rule of procedure. 
1. the board shall have a secretariat, which shall be provid by the european data protect supervisor. 
2. the secretariat shall perform it task exclus under the instruct of the chair of the board. 
3. the staff of the european data protect supervisor involv in carri out the task confer on the board by thi regul shall be subject to separ report line from the staff involv in carri out task confer on the european ... 
4. where appropriate, the board and the european data protect supervisor shall establish and publish a memorandum of understand implement thi article, determin the term of their cooperation, and applic to the staff of the european da... 
5. the secretariat shall provid analytical, administr and logist support to the board. 
6. the secretariat shall be respons in particular for: 
(a) the day-to-day busi of the board; 
(b) commun between the member of the board, it chair and the commission; 
(c) commun with other institut and the public; 
(d) the use of electron mean for the intern and extern communication; 
(e) the translat of relev information; 
(f) the prepar and follow-up of the meet of the board; 
(g) the preparation, draft and public of opinions, decis on the settlement of disput between supervisori author and other text adopt by the board. 
1. the discuss of the board shall be confidenti where the board deem it necessary, a provid for in it rule of procedure. 
2. access to document submit to member of the board, expert and repres of third parti shall be govern by regul (ec) No 1049/2001 of the european parliament and of the council22f . 
1. without prejudic to ani other administr or judici remedy, everi data subject shall have the right to lodg a complaint with a supervisori authority, in particular in the member state of hi or her habitu residence, place of work or place ... 
2. the supervisori author with which the complaint have be lodg shall inform the complain on the progress and the outcom of the complaint includ the possibl of a judici remedi pursuant to articl 78. 
1. without prejudic to ani other administr or non-judici remedy, each natur or legal person shall have the right to an effect judici remedi against a legal bind decis of a supervisori author concern them. 
2. without prejudic to ani other administr or non-judici remedy, each data subject shall have the right to a an effect judici remedi where the supervisori author which be compet pursuant to articl 55 and articl 56 do not handl ... 
3. proceed against a supervisori author shall be brought befor the court of the member state where the supervisori author be established. 
4. where proceed be brought against a decis of a supervisori author which be preced by an opinion or a decis of the board in the consist mechanism, the supervisori author shall forward that opinion or decis to the court. 
1. without prejudic to ani avail administr or non-judici remedy, includ the right to lodg a complaint with a supervisori author pursuant to articl 77, each data subject shall have the right to an effect judici remedi where he ... 
2. proceed against a control or a processor shall be brought befor the court of the member state where the control or processor have an establishment. alternatively, such proceed may be brought befor the court of the member state wher... 
1. the data subject shall have the right to mandat a not-for-profit body, organis or associ which have be properli constitut in accord with the law of a member state, have statutori object which be in the public interest, and be ... 
2. member state may provid that ani body, organis or associ refer to in paragraph 1 of thi article, independ of a data subject' mandate, have the right to lodge, in that member state, a complaint with the supervisori author whi... 
1. where a compet court of a member state have inform on proceedings, concern the same subject matter a regard process by the same control or processor, that be pend in a court in anoth member state, it shall contact that court... 
2. where proceed concern the same subject matter a regard process of the same control or processor be pend in a court in anoth member state, ani compet court other than the court first seiz may suspend it proceedings. 
3. where those proceed be pend at first instance, ani court other than the court first seiz may also, on the applic of one of the parties, declin jurisdict if the court first seiz have jurisdict over the action in question and ... 
1. ani person who have suffer materi or non-materi damag a a result of an infring of thi regul shall have the right to receiv compens from the control or processor for the damag suffered. 
2. ani control involv in process shall be liabl for the damag caus by process which infring thi regulation. A processor shall be liabl for the damag caus by process onli where it have not compli with oblig of thi regu... 
3. A control or processor shall be exempt from liabil under paragraph 2 if it prof that it be not in ani way respons for the event give rise to the damage. 
4. where more than one control or processor, or both a control and a processor, be involv in the same process and where they are, under paragraph 2 and 3, respons for ani damag caus by processing, each control or processor shall... 
5. where a control or processor has, in accord with paragraph 4, paid full compens for the damag suffered, that control or processor shall be entitl to claim back from the other control or processor involv in the same processi... 
6. court proceed for exercis the right to receiv compens shall be brought befor the court compet under the law of the member state refer to in articl 79(2). 
1. each supervisori author shall ensur that the imposit of administr fine pursuant to thi articl in respect of infring of thi regul refer to in paragraph 4, 5 and 6 shall in each individu case be effective, proportiona... 
2. administr fine shall, depend on the circumst of each individu case, be impos in addit to, or instead of, measur refer to in point (a) to (h) and (j) of articl 58(2). when decid whether to impos an administr fine... 
(a) the nature, graviti and durat of the infring take into account the natur scope or purpos of the process concern a well a the number of data subject affect and the level of damag suffer by them; 
(b) the intent or neglig charact of the infringement; 
(c) ani action take by the control or processor to mitig the damag suffer by data subjects; 
(d) the degre of respons of the control or processor take into account technic and organis measur implement by them pursuant to articl 25 and 32; 
(e) ani relev previou infring by the control or processor; 
(f) the degre of cooper with the supervisori authority, in order to remedi the infring and mitig the possibl advers effect of the infringement; 
(g) the categori of person data affect by the infringement; 
(h) the manner in which the infring becom know to the supervisori authority, in particular whether, and if so to what extent, the control or processor notifi the infringement; 
(i) in case measur refer to in articl 58(2) have previous be order against the control or processor concern with regard to the same subject-matter, complianc with those measures; 
(j) adher to approv code of conduct pursuant to articl 40 or approv certif mechan pursuant to articl 42; and 
(k) ani other aggrav or mitig factor applic to the circumst of the case, such a financi benefit gained, or loss avoided, directli or indirectly, from the infringement. 
3. If a control or processor intent or negligently, for the same or link process operations, infring sever provis of thi regulation, the total amount of the administr fine shall not exceed the amount specifi for the grav... 
4. infring of the follow provis shall, in acccord with paragraph 2, be subject to administr fine up to 10 000 000 eur, or in the case of an undertaking, up to 2 % of the total worldwid annual turnov of the preced financial... 
(a) the oblig of the control and the processor pursuant to articl 8, 11, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 42 and 43; 
(b) the oblig of the certif bodi pursuant to articl 42 and 43; 
(c) the oblig of the monitor bodi pursuant to articl 41(4). 
5. infring of the follow provis shall, in accord with paragraph 2, be subject to administr fine up to 20 000 000 eur, or in the case of an undertaking, up to 4 % of the total worldwid annual turnov of the preced financi ... 
(a) the basic principl for processing, includ condit for consent, pursuant to articl 5, 6, 7 and 9; 
(b) the data subjects' right pursuant to articl 12 to 22; 
(c) the transfer of person data to a recipi in a third countri or an intern organis pursuant to articl 44 to 49; 
(d) ani oblig pursuant to member state law adopt unter chapter ix; 
(e) non-compli with an order or a temporari or definit limit on process or the suspens of data flow by the supervisori author pursuant to articl 58(2) or failur to provid access in violat of articl 58(1). 
6. non-compli with an order by the supervisori author a refer to in articl 58(2) shall, in acccord with paragraph 2 of thi article, be subject to administr fine up to 20 000 000 eur, or in the case of an undertaking, up to 4 % o... 
7. without prejudic to the correct power of supervisori author pursuant to articl 58(2), each member state may lay down the rule on whether and to what extent administr fine may be impos on public author and bodi established... 
8. the exercis by the supervisori author of it power under thi articl shall be subject to appropri procedur safeguard in accord with union and member state law, includ effect judici remedi and due process. 
9. where the legal system of the member state do not provid for administr fines, thi articl may be appli in such a manner that the fine be initi by the compet supervisori author and impos by compet nation courts, while en... 
1. member state shall lay down the rule on other penalti applic to infring of thi regul in particular for infring which be not subject to administr fine pursuant to articl 83, and shall take all measur necessari to ... 
2. each member state shall notifi to the commiss the provis of it law which it adopt pursuant to paragraph 1, by … [two year from the date of entri into forc of thi regulation] and, without delay, ani subsequ amend affect them. 
1. member state shall by law reconcil the right to the protect of person data pursuant to thi regul with the right to freedom of express and information, includ process for journalist purpos and the purpos of academic, arti... 
2. for process carri out for journalist purpos or the purpos of academ artist or literari expression, member state shall provid for exempt or derog from chapter II (principles), chapter iii (right of the data subject), chapt... 
3. each member state shall notifi to the commiss the provis of it law which it have adopt pursuant to paragraph 2 and, without delay, ani subsequ amend law or amend affect them. 
1. member state may, by law or by collect agreements, provid for more specif rule to ensur the protect of the right and freedom in respect of the process of employees' person data in the employ context, in particular for the pur... 
2. those rule shall includ suitabl and specif measur to safeguard the data subject' human dignity, legitim interest and fundament rights, with particular regard to the transpar of processing, the transfer of person data within a gr... 
3. each member state shall notifi to the commiss those provis of it law which it adopt pursuant to paragraph 1, by … [two year from the date of entri into forc of thi regulation] and, without delay, ani subsequ amend affect them. 
1. process for archiv purpos in the public interest, scientif or histor research purpos or statist purposes, shall be subject to appropri safeguards, in accord with thi regulation, for the right and freedom of the data su... 
2. where person data be process for scientif or histor research purpos or statist purposes, union or member state law may provid for derog from the right refer to in articl 15, 16, 18 and 21 subject to the condit and ... 
3. where person data be process for archiv purpos in the public interest, union or member state law may provid for derog from the right refer to in articl 15, 16, 18, 19, 20 and 21 subject to the condit and safeguard refer... 
4. where process refer to in paragraph 2 and 3 serf at the same time anoth purpose, the derog shall appli onli to process for the purpos refer to in those paragraphs. 
1. member state may adopt specif rule to set out the power of the supervisori author laid down in point (e) and (f) of articl 58(1) in relat to control or processor that be subject, under union or member state law or rule establi... 
2. each member state shall notifi to the commiss the rule adopt pursuant to paragraph 1, by … [two year from the date of entri into forc of thi regulation] and, without delay, ani subsequ amend affect them. 
1. where in a member state, church and religi associ or commun apply, at the time of entri into forc of thi regulation, comprehens rule relat to the protect of natur person with regard to processing, such rule may conti... 
2. church and religi associ which appli comprehens rule in accord with paragraph 1 shall be subject to the supervis of an independ supervisori authority, which may be specific, provid that it fulfil the condit laid down... 
1. the power to adopt deleg act be confer on the commiss subject to the condit laid down in thi article. 
2. the deleg of power refer to in articl 12(8) and articl 43(8) shall be confer on the commiss for an indetermin period of time from … [the date of entri into forc of thi regulation]. 
3. the deleg of power refer to in articl 12(8) and articl 43(8) may be revok at ani time by the european parliament or by the council. A decis of revoc shall put an end to the deleg of power specifi in that decision. It shal... 
4. As soon a it adopt a deleg act, the commiss shall notifi it simultan to the european parliament and to the council. 
5. A deleg act adopt pursuant to articl 12(8) and articl 43(8) shall enter into forc onli if no object have be express by either the european parliament or the council within a period of three month of notif of that act to the ... 
1. the commiss shall be assist by a committee. that committe shall be a committe within the mean of regul (eu) No 182/2011. 
2. where refer be make to thi paragraph, articl 5 of regul (eu) No 182/2011 shall apply. 
3. where refer be make to thi paragraph, articl 8 of regul (eu) No 182/2011, in conjunct with articl 5 thereof, shall apply. 
1. direct 95/46/ec be repeal with effect from … [two year from the date of entri into forc of thi regulation]. 
2. refer to the repeal direct shall be constru a refer to thi regulation. refer to the work parti on the protect of individu with regard to the process of person data establish by articl 29 of direct 95/46/e... 
1. By … [4 year after the date of entri into forc of thi regulation] and everi four year thereafter, the commiss shall submit a report on the evalu and review of thi regul to the european parliament and to the council. the report sh... 
2. In the context of the evalu and review refer to in paragraph 1, the commiss shall examine, in particular, the applic and function of: 
(a) chapter V on the transfer of person data to third countri or intern organis with particular regard to decis adopt pursuant to articl 45(3) of thi regul and decis adopt on the basi of articl 25(6) of direct ... 
(b) chapter vii on cooper and consistency. 
3. for the purpos of paragraph 1, the commiss may request inform from member state and supervisori authorities. 
4. In carri out the evalu and review refer to in paragraph 1 and 2, the commiss shall take into account the posit and find of the european parliament, of the council, and of other relev bodi or sources. 
5. the commiss shall, if necessary, submit appropri propos to amend thi regulation, in particular take into account of develop in inform technolog and in the light of the state of progress in the inform society. 
1. thi regul shall enter into forc on the twentieth day follow that of it public in the offici journal of the european union. 
2. It shall appli from … [two year from the date of entri into forc of thi regulation]. 

