






































googl research are learn how machin learn 


googl research are learn 
how machin learn 

cade metz 

On the left be an imag that be put through a neural network train to 

classifi object in imag — for example, to tell whether an imag includ a 

vase or a lemon. On the right be a visual of what one layer in the middl 

of the network detect at each posit of the image. the neural network 

seem to be detect vase-lik pattern and lemon-lik objects. the build 

block of interpret 

san francisco — machin be start to learn task on their own. 

they be identifi faces, recogn spoken words, read medic 

scan and even carri on their own conversations. 

the origin imag and three more visual after it be put through a 

neural network. the first layer be primarili detect edg and color. the 

other layer begin recogn more complex concept like flowers, va and 

lemons. the build block of interpret 

all thi be do through so-cal neural networks, which be complex 

comput algorithm that learn task by analyz vast amount of data. 

but these neural network creat a problem that scientist be tri to 

googl research are learn how machin learn https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/06/technology/google-artificial-intell... 

1 sur 4 08-03-18 à 16:57 



solve: It be not alway easi to tell how the machin arriv at their 

conclusions. 

On tuesday, a team at googl take a small step toward address thi 

issu with the unveil of new research that offer the rough outlin of 

technolog that show how the machin be arriv at their decisions. 

group of neuron automat learn to work togeth to repres concept 

in an image. five group of neuron seem to correspond to flowers, the lip of 

the vase, the bodi of vase, the background, and lemons. A heat map show 

where each neuron group fire on the image. the build block of 

interpret 

“even see part of how a decis be make can give you a lot of 

insight into the possibl way it can fail,” say christoph olah, a 

googl researcher. 

A grow number of a.i. research be now develop way to good 

understand neural networks. jeff clune, a professor at univers of 

wyom who now work in the a.i. lab at the ride-hail compani 

uber, call thi “artifici neuroscience.” 

googl research are learn how machin learn https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/06/technology/google-artificial-intell... 

2 sur 4 08-03-18 à 16:57 



neuron group at two differ layer of the network and the output classes. 

the line show which neuron group support or inhibit late group or output 

classes. for example, a \“lemon\" classif be strongli support by a 

yellow, lemon-i group. the build block of interpret 

understand how these system work will becom more import a 

they make decis now make by humans, like who get a job and how 

a self-driv car respond to emergencies. 

first propos in the 1950s, neural network be meant to mimic the 

web of neuron in the brain. but that be a rough analogy. these 

algorithm be realli seri of mathemat operations, and each 

oper repres a neuron. google’ new research aim to show — 

in a highli visual way — how these mathemat oper perform 

discret tasks, like recogn object in photos. 

A \“vase\" classif be support by the group that repres flowers, the 

lip of the vase and the background. the build block of interpret 

insid a neural network, each neuron work to identifi a particular 

characterist that might show up in a photo, like a line that curv from 

right to left at a certain angl or sever line that merg to form a larg 

shape. googl want to provid tool that show what each neuron be 

tri to identify, which one be success and how their effort 

combin to determin what be actual in the photo — perhap a dog or a 

tuxedo or a bird. 

googl research are learn how machin learn https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/06/technology/google-artificial-intell... 

3 sur 4 08-03-18 à 16:57 



the kind of technolog googl be discuss could also help identifi whi 

a neural network be prone to mistak and, in some cases, explain how it 

learn thi behavior, mr. olah said. other researchers, includ mr. 

clune, believ they can also help minim the threat of “adversari 

examples” — where someon can potenti fool neural network by, 

say, doctor an image. 

research acknowledg that thi work be still in it infancy. jason 

yosinski, who also work in uber’ a.i. lab, which grow out of the 

company’ acquisit of a start-up call geometr intelligence, call 

google’ technolog idea “state of art.” but he warn it may never be 

entir easi to understand the comput mind. 

“to a certain extent, a these network get more complicated, it be go 

to be fundament difficult to understand whi they make decisions,” 

he said. “it be kind of like tri to understand whi human make 

decisions.” 

googl research are learn how machin learn https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/06/technology/google-artificial-intell... 

4 sur 4 08-03-18 à 16:57 


