






































insid chinaâ•ž dystopian dreams: a.i., shame and lot of camera 


insid china’ dystopian dreams: a.i., shame and lot of 
camera 

A video show facial recognit softwar in use at the headquart of the artifici intellig 
compani megvii in beijing.creditgil sabri for the new york time 

zhengzhou, china — In the chines citi of zhengzhou, a polic offic wear facial recognit glass 
spot a heroin smuggler at a train station. 

In qingdao, a citi famou for it german coloni heritage, camera power by artifici intellig help 
the polic snatch two dozen crimin suspect in the midst of a big annual beer festival. 

In wuhu, a fugit murder suspect be identifi by a camera a he bought food from a street vendor. 

with million of camera and billion of line of code, china be build a high-tech authoritarian future. 
beij be embrac technolog like facial recognit and artifici intellig to identifi and track 1.4 
billion people. It want to assembl a vast and unpreced nation surveil system, with crucial help 
from it thrive technolog industry. 

“in the past, it be all about instinct,” say shan jun, the deputi chief of the polic at the railway station in 
zhengzhou, where the heroin smuggler be caught. “if you miss something, you miss it.” 

china be revers the commonli held vision of technolog a a great democratizer, bring peopl more 
freedom and connect them to the world. In china, it have brought control. 

imag 
megvii employe at the company’ offic in beijing.creditgil sabrié for the new york time 

In some cities, camera scan train station for china’ most wanted. billboard-s display show the face of 
jaywalk and list the name of peopl who don’t pay their debts. facial recognit scanner guard the 
entranc to hous complexes. already, china have an estim 200 million surveil camera — four 
time a mani a the unit states. 

such effort supplement other system that track internet use and communications, hotel stays, train and 
plane trip and even car travel in some places. 

even so, china’ ambit outstrip it abilities. technolog in place at one train station or crosswalk may be 
lack in anoth city, or even the next block over. bureaucrat ineffici prevent the creation of a 
nationwid network. 

for the communist party, that may not matter. far from hide their efforts, chines author regularli 
state, and overstate, their capabilities. In china, even the percept of surveil can keep the public in 
line. 

some place be further along than others. invas mass-surveil softwar have be set up in the west to 
track member of the uighur muslim minor and map their relat with friend and family, accord to 
softwar view by the new york times. 

“thi be potenti a total new way for the govern to manag the economi and society,” say martin 
chorzempa, a fellow at the peterson institut for intern economics. 

“the goal be algorithm governance,” he added. 

imag 
polic offic wear a.i.-pow smart glass in luoyang.creditreut 

the shame game 

the intersect south of changhong bridg in the citi of xiangyang use to be a nightmare. car drove fast 
and jaywalk dart into the street. 

then last summer, the polic put up camera link to facial recognit technolog and a big, outdoor 
screen. photo of lawbreak be display alongsid their name and govern i.d. numbers. peopl 
be initi excit to see their face on the board, say guan yue, a spokeswoman, until propaganda outlet 
told them it be punishment. 

“if you be captur by the system and you don’t see it, your neighbor or colleagu will, and they will gossip 
about it,” she said. “that’ too embarrass for peopl to take.” 

china’ new surveil be base on an old idea: onli strong author can bring order to a turbul 

insid china’ dystopian dreams: a.i., shame and lot of camera https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/08/business/china-surveillance-techn... 

1 sur 4 17-07-18 à 19:23 



country. mao zedong take that philosophi to devast ends, a hi top-down rule brought famin and then 
the cultur revolution. 

hi successor also crave order but fear the consequ of totalitarian rule. they form a new 
understand with the chines people. In exchang for polit impotence, they would be mostli left alon 
and allow to get rich. 

It worked. censorship and polic power remain strong, but china’ peopl still found more freedom. that 
new attitud help usher in decad of breakneck econom growth. 

today, that unwritten agreement be break down. 

china’ economi isn’t grow at the same pace. It suffer from a sever wealth gap. after four decad of 
fatter paycheck and good living, it peopl have high expectations. 

imag 
tourist wait to visit the mao mausoleum in beijing, under a pole hold 11 surveil 
cameras.creditgil sabrié for the new york time 

Xi jinping, china’ top leader, have move to solidifi hi power. chang to chines law mean he could rule 
longer than ani leader sinc mao. and he have undertaken a broad corrupt crackdown that could make him 
plenti of enemies. 

for support, he have turn to the mao-era belief in the import of a cult of person and the role of the 
communist parti in everyday life. technolog give him the power to make it happen. 

“reform and open have alreadi failed, but no one dare to say it,” say chines historian zhang lifan, cite 
china’ four-decad post-mao policy. “the current system have creat sever social and econom 
segregation. So now the ruler use the taxpayers’ money to monitor the taxpayers.” 

mr. Xi have launch a major upgrad of the chines surveil state. china have becom the world’ big 
market for secur and surveil technology, with analyst estim the countri will have almost 300 
million camera instal by 2020. chines buyer will snap up more than three-quart of all server 
design to scan video footag for faces, predict ih markit, a research firm. china’ polic will spend an 
addit $30 billion in the come year on techno-en snooping, accord to one expert quot in 
state media. 

govern contract be fuel research and develop into technolog that track faces, cloth and 
even a person’ gait. experiment gadgets, like facial-recognit glasses, have begin to appear. 

judg public chines reaction can be difficult in a countri where the news medium be control by the 
government. still, so far the averag chines citizen appear to show littl concern. errat enforc of 
law against everyth from speed to assault mean the long arm of china’ authoritarian govern 
can feel remot from everyday life. As a result, mani cheer on new attempt at law and order. 

“it’ one of the big intersect in the city,” say wang fukang, a colleg student who volunt a a 
guard at the crosswalk in xiangyang. “it’ import that it stay safe and orderly.” 

imag 
At the shanghai headquart of the artifici intellig start-up yitu, a network of camera 
link to a facial recognit system monitor employe and can track their movement in the 
office.creditgil sabrié for the new york time 

the surveil start-up 

start-up often make a point of insist their employe use their technology. In shanghai, a compani call 
yitu have take that to the extreme. 

the hall of it offic be dot with cameras, look for faces. from desk to break room to exit, employees’ 
path be trace on a televis screen with blue dot lines. the monitor show their come and goings, 
all day, everyday. 

In china, snoop be becom big business. As the countri spend heavili on surveillance, a new gener 
of start-up have risen to meet the demand. 

chines compani be develop global competit applic like imag and voic recognition. yitu 
take first place in a 2017 open contest for facial recognit algorithm held by the unit state 
government’ offic of the director of nation intelligence. A number of other chines compani also 
score well. 

A technolog boom in china be help the government’ surveil ambitions. In sheer scale and 
investment, china alreadi rival silicon valley. between the govern and eager investors, surveil 
start-up have access to plenti of money and other resources. 

insid china’ dystopian dreams: a.i., shame and lot of camera https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/08/business/china-surveillance-techn... 

2 sur 4 17-07-18 à 19:23 



In may, the upstart a.i. compani sensetim rais $620 million, give it a valuat of about $4.5 billion. 
yitu rais $200 million last month. anoth rival, megvii, rais $460 million from investor that includ 
a state-back fund creat by china’ top leadership. 

At a confer in may at an upscal hotel in beijing, china’ security-industri complex offer it vision of 
the future. compani big and small show off facial-recognit secur gate and system that track car 
around citi to local govern officials, tech execut and investors. 

privat compani see big potenti in china’ surveil build-out. china’ public secur market be 
valu at more than $80 billion last year but could be worth even more a the countri build it capabilities, 
say shen xinyang, a former googl data scientist who be now chief technolog offic of eyecool, a start-up. 

“artifici intellig for public secur be actual still a veri insignific portion of the whole market,” he 
said, point out that most equip current in use be “nonintelligent.” 

mani of these busi be alreadi provid data to the government. 

mr. shen told the group that hi compani have surveil system at more than 20 airport and train 
stations, which have help catch 1,000 criminals. eyecool, he said, be also hand over two million facial 
imag each day to a burgeon big-data polic system call skynet. 

At a build complex in xiangyang, a facial-recognit system set up to let resid quickli through 
secur gate add to the police’ collect of photo of local residents, accord to local chines 
communist parti officials. 

wen yangli, an execut at number 1 community, which make the product, say the compani be at work on 
other applications. one would detect when crowd of peopl be clashing. anoth would allow polic to use 
virtual map of build to find out who life where. 

china’ surveil compani be also look to test the appetit for high-tech surveil abroad. yitu 
say it have be expand overseas, with plan to increas busi in region like southeast asia and the 
middl east. 

At home, china be prepar it peopl for next-level surveil technology. A recent state-media 
propaganda film call “amaz china” show off a similar virtual map that provid polic with record of 
util use, say it could be use for predict policing. 

“if there be anomalies, the system send an alert,” a narrat says, a chines polic offic pay a visit to an 
apart with a record of errat util use. the film then quot one of the officers: “no matter which 
corner you escap to, we’ll bring you to justice.” 

imag 
A video show facial recognit softwar in use at the megvii showroom in beijing.creditgil 
sabrié for the new york time 

enter the panopticon 

for technolog to be effective, it doesn’t alway have to work. take china’ facial-recognit glasses. 

polic in the central chines citi of zhengzhou recent show off the spec at a high-spe rail station for 
state medium and others. they snap photo of a policewoman peer from behind the shade lenses. 

but the glass work onli if the target stand still for sever seconds. they have be use mostli to check 
travel for fake identifications. 

china’ nation databas of individu it have flag for watch — includ suspect terrorists, 
criminals, drug traffickers, polit activist and other — includ 20 million to 30 million people, say one 
technolog execut who work close with the government. that be too mani peopl for today’ facial 
recognit technolog to parse, say the executive, who ask not to be identifi becaus the inform 
wasn’t public. 

the system remain more of a digit patchwork than an all-se technolog network. mani file still 
aren’t digitized, and other be on mismatch spreadsheet that can’t be easili reconciled. system that 
polic hope will someday be power by a.i. be current run by team of peopl sort through photo and 
data the old-fashion way. 

take, for example, the crosswalk in xiangyang. the imag don’t appear instantaneously. the billboard often 
show jaywalk from week ago, though author have recent reduc the lag to about five or six days. 
offici say human still sift through the imag to match them to people’ identities. 

still, chines author who be gener mum about secur have embark on a campaign to persuad 
the country’ peopl that the high-tech secur state be alreadi in place. 

insid china’ dystopian dreams: a.i., shame and lot of camera https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/08/business/china-surveillance-techn... 

3 sur 4 17-07-18 à 19:23 



china’ propagandist be fond of stori in which polic use facial recognit to spot want crimin at 
events. An articl in people’ daily, the communist party’ offici newspaper, cover a seri of arrest 
make with the aid of facial recognit at concert of the pop star jacki cheung. the piec refer some 
of the singer’ lyrics: “you be a boundless net of love that easili trap me.” 

In mani places, it works. At the intersect in xiangyang, jaywalk have decreased. At the build complex 
where number 1 community’ facial-recognit gate system have be installed, a problem with bike theft 
ceas entirely, accord to build management. 

imag 
An outdoor screen in xiangyang display photo of jaywalk alongsid their name and i.d. 
numbers. the idea be to embarrass offend into compliance.creditgil sabrié for the new 
york time 

“the whole point be that peopl don’t know if they’r be monitored, and that uncertainti make peopl 
more obedient,” say mr. chorzempa, the peterson institut fellow. 

He describ the approach a a panopticon, the idea that peopl will follow the rule precis becaus they 
don’t know whether they be be watched. 

In zhengzhou, polic be happi to explain how just the thought of the facial recognit glass could get 
crimin to confess. 

mr. shan, the zhengzhou railway station deputi polic chief, cite the time hi depart grab a heroin 
smuggler. while question the suspect, mr. shan said, polic pull out the glass and told the man that 
what he say didn’t matter. the glass could give them all the inform they needed. 

“becaus he be afraid of be found out by the advanc technology, he confessed,” say mr. shan, add 
that the suspect have swallow 60 small pack of heroin. 

“we didn’t even use ani interrog techniques,” mr. shan said. “he simpli give it all up.” 

comment 

the time need your voice. We welcom your on-top commentary, critic and expertise. 

carolyn zhang contribut report from zhengzhou. 

A version of thi articl appear in print on juli 9, 2018, on page A1 of the new york edit with the 
headline: with camera and a.i., china close it grip. order reprint | today’ paper | subscrib 

the all-new dealbook 

our columnist andrew ross sorkin and hi time colleagu help you make sens of major busi and 
polici headlin — and the power-brok who shape them. 

insid china’ dystopian dreams: a.i., shame and lot of camera https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/08/business/china-surveillance-techn... 

4 sur 4 17-07-18 à 19:23 


