






































EE time - intel probe man-machin 'trust' 


junko yoshida, chief intern 
correspond 
8/24/2017 11:00 AM edt 

8 comment post a comment 

tweet 

blog 

intel probe man-machin ‘trust’ 

accept of a self- 
drive car isn't just a 
question of trust 
versu control. whi 
should I want one? 
what valu and 

benefit do it deliver? 

In hope of play a leadership role in the come era of driverless cars, intel be make a 
gutsi move. the chip giant be initi qualit studi toward solv the etern human- 
machin quandary: can you ever trust a machine? 

and if so, would the machin have to look like darryl hannah? 

intel recent conduct a qualit studi with 10 volunt with no previou exposur to 
driverless cars. the subject be invit to the company’ chandler, arizona, campus. test 
proctor ask them to ride in a driverless test car and offer feedback on the experience. 
although admit the sampl be small, intel cheer share with report some of the 
nugget — and a few surpris — that emerg from the study. intel rep told u that they 
hope to verifi the result in a seri of larg test to be conduct in differ geograph 
regions. 

intel have recent conduct car & rider trust study. (source: intel) 

first off, the skeptic on my shoulder found it slightli preposter for a semiconductor 
compani to conduct a socio-psycholog studi focu on an object a touchy-fe a 
“trust.” 

My first instinct be that a studi do by a compani whose vest interest be convinc 
peopl to use it [driverless] technolog have littl credibility. ani conclus could be 
dismiss a suspect and self-serving. 

On the other hand, I found myself applaud intel for deal head-on with the thorniest 
issu of driverless cars: will driverless car ever gain passengers’ trust? Do consum 
realli want thi stuff? 

these be question that most technologist avoid. they see such issu a outsid their 
engin domain and responsibilities. 

mike demler, senior analyst at the linley group, agreed. “first of all, i’d give credit to intel 
for do this. ten peopl be by no mean a statist signific sample, but the human 
aspect of autonom transport have be larg ignored. too mani compani — 
google, for exampl — be too prone to fall in love with their technolog without take 
human factor into consideration.” 

shareshar 84 

EE time - intel probe man-machin 'trust' http://www.eetimes.com/author.asp?section_id=36&doc_id=1332188&pr... 

1 sur 4 28/08/2017 19:29 



seven key area of tension 
intel be fulli awar that peopl “are downright scar of robot cars,” a they put it. the 
compani quot a recent american automobil associ study, which found that 75% of 
american be afraid to ride in self-driv cars. 

inevitably, it be incumb upon technolog compani such a intel to educ the medium 
and consum and demonstr that autonom car are, indeed, safe. In that sense, 
consum test like thi be good public relations. 

ask about the methodolog of the study, jack weast, chief system architect of intel 
autonom drive group, explain that first, intel take it time pre-brief the volunteers, 
explain how sensor and sensor fusion work and what make the car drive itself. dure 
the ride, a safeti driver insid a vehicl kept hi hand off the steer wheel. He be not 
allow to speak. participants, in the back seat, be ask to say whatev pop into 
their heads. their comment and behavior be captur on audio and video. after the ride, 
intel do anoth interview. 

As weast told us, the studi found “seven key area of tension” in the man-machin 
interaction. they unfold in differ scenarios, while participants’ comment be often 
somewhat contradictory. 

1. can a driverless car handl roundabouts? 
the first and the most obviou area of tension be in the area of “human versu machin 
judgment.” particip be uneasi about a driverless car’ judgment when the car need 
to handl difficult situat such a roundabout or other driver cut off the driverless 
car. their repeat question was: “how do a machin make thi sort of judgment?” On the 
other hand, volunt express the belief that self-driv vehicl should be safer 
becaus they elimin human error. 

2. how do I tell a driverless car where exactli in a mall to drop me off? 
particip like have free time in their own person space. but they be also concern 
about “a lack of assistance, a lack of accountability,” say weast. they asked, “nobodi be 
monitor this?” have no driver in the car be also unnerv to some participants. with 
no driver, they wonder how to tell the car a specif entranc and a specif dropoff point. 
pictur a big shop mall, say weast. the driverless car may have the address of the 
mall, but not the right entranc where the passeng want to go. “when it get closer to the 
destination, especi near the drop-off, we must have a way to fine-tun the car to respond 
to the passenger’ request.” 

3. put a sock in it, hal 
particip appreci know what the driverless car be do dure their ride. however, 
they also thought that there be too much information. “stop bother me, it’ not important” 
or “i’d like to take a nap.” 

next page: voice, context, gestur 

4. whi a steer wheel? 
for mani people, it’ not easi to give up control of the vehicle. see a steer wheel 
turn by itself — sometim in a veri abrupt way — make some volunt anxious. they 
even discuss the benefit of remov these legaci instrument so that they won’t get 
nervous. participants, however, appreci other new tricks, such a use their own mobil 
devic to summon a vehicl and unlock it, explain weast. “for them, it be a new form of 
control.” 

5. prove it to me that it’ work 
particip be abl to see how a driverless car be work by watch statist on an in- 
vehicl display. but they often ignor the display to look outside, watch the road, and 
confirm that the driverless car is, well, driving, say weast. “rather than usual data such a 
mile per gallon, we may need someth els — a proof — to satisfi passeng show 
how the driverless car be work well.” 

6. alexa impact: can I talk to it? 
while particip be comfort by the car’ human “voice,” mani wondered, “can I talk to 
the car?” particip wonder if the driverless car would listen — and obey — when they 
want to chang a rout or stop the car becaus they, or their kids, be feel sick. some 
particip be obvious use to have smart speaker like amazon echo to which they 
can ask question to and expect an answer, explain weast. 

7. should a driverless car follow rule to a T? 

EE time - intel probe man-machin 'trust' http://www.eetimes.com/author.asp?section_id=36&doc_id=1332188&pr... 

2 sur 4 28/08/2017 19:29 



particip becom awar of nuanc differ between a machin and a human when it 
come to the interpret of safety. while acknowledg their own not-so-saf drive 
behavior, “mani particip conclud that bore be safe,” say weast. 

voice, context, gestur 
ask about takeaway from the study, weast explain that particip like it voic 
interface, but they also want to talk to the car. “especi when a car come close to a 
destination, we need a tool to fine-tune, make a vehicl understand a passenger’ needs.” 
more importantly, he added, “voic may not be enough. peopl want to point to a certain 
thing and tell the car, ‘take me there.’” 

so, beyond process natur languag and understand the context, note weast, the 
car may have to understand “gesture.” 

phil magney, founder and princip advisor for vision system intellig (vsi), told us, “in 
the autom vehicl space, there be realli two track to consider.” 

one be activ ada (from level 1 to level 3), he noted. “in these vehicles, trust be with the 
driver becaus they be alway in the loop. In these deployments, trust be built up gradual 
but will not be an issu that prevent adopt of these features.” 

He added, “in thi categori of increment automation, hmi be critic for well-known issu of 
monitor driver state and readiness. how the car commun with the driver will be 
adapt through ota updat to the hmi functions.” 

next page: in-vehicl vs. out-of-vehicl trust 

in-vehicl vs. out-of-vehicl trust 
the second market be the commerci level 4 autom vehicl wherein the driver be out of 
the loop or not present at all. magney stressed, “here be where the challeng lie for human 
trust, and trust concern not onli the passengers, but surround actor a well 
(passeng in other vehicles, pedestrian on foot, cyclists, etc.).” 

He explained, “in-vehicl trust with the passeng be go to be critical. nobodi realli 
know how big thi problem will be. It be too earli to tell.” 

“the intel sampl be veri small and the result be contradictory, so it be veri hard to 
know what the right solut will be.” 

magney added, “out-of-vehicl trust be not talk about but be veri important. for example, 
human-driven car be alway commun with other actor through signals, horns, and 
human visual contact. take the driver out of the loop and commun with actor be 
challeng becaus you cannot make eye contact with a driver. for example, a pedestrian at 
a cross often proce to cross onc visual contact be make with the driver. so, in L4 
driverless vehicles, there need to be a way for that vehicl to signal it intent to the 
outsid actors.” 

In short, magney be say that the automot industri will need sever iter of trial and 
error befor it can build a reason in-vehicl trust with passengers. when it come to out- 
of-vehicl trust, though, noth be readi yet. 

multipl dimens of trust 
Of course, a I note before, trust be a high bar. it’ not simpl to build a trust relationship 
between me and a 3,000-pound, 70-mph robot. 

EE time - intel probe man-machin 'trust' http://www.eetimes.com/author.asp?section_id=36&doc_id=1332188&pr... 

3 sur 4 28/08/2017 19:29 



email thi print comment 

for example, trust isn’t limit to technic design for the man-machin interfac (although I 
understand that be intel’ main concern). the issu be deepli relat to other question like: 
Do I trust intel? Do I trust the softwar — million of line of code — run in thi driverless 
car? Do I trust the design of thi autonom car? are regul do enough to protect 
passeng like me? when I have an accid in a driverless car, be the law on my side? all 
of these social and legal factor will play into build trust between me and My mother the 
car. 

the linley group’ demler also wonder if intel’ studi start “in the wrong place.” 

the focu of intel’ studi be on the passeng experi in a driverless car under a 
scenario like a ride-hail service. but demler suggested, “I would have start by ask a 
more fundament question that intel onli briefli touch on: ‘if you could have a car that 
drive itself, would you want one?’” 

whi should I want one? 
demler said, “accept of a self-driv car isn’t just a question of trust versu control. 
whi should I want one? what valu and benefit do it deliver? these type of question 
be critic for ani product development.” 

He stressed, “but thi be where we too often see the technologist’ bia come into play, in just 
assum their invent be a good thing. from a product develop point of view, it’ 
critic to first establish the customer’ wants. I haven’t heard anyon in autonom vehicl 
develop start from that basis. In all the project of self-driv car penetration, what if 
peopl just don’t want one?” 

demler sum up: “if you identifi want first, then demonstr that your product can 
deliv on those wants, trust come naturally. In thi intel test, it’ sort of like take peopl at 
an amus park and ask them how they like the rides. yeah, you’ll get differ 
respons to the experiences, but what do you realli learn that will contribut to product 
success?” 

— junko yoshida, chief intern correspondent, EE time 

copyright © 2017 ubm electronics, A aspencor company, all right reserved. privaci polici | term of 
servic 

EE time - intel probe man-machin 'trust' http://www.eetimes.com/author.asp?section_id=36&doc_id=1332188&pr... 

4 sur 4 28/08/2017 19:29 


