






































Is there a smarter path to artifici intelligence? some expert hope So 


Is there a smarter path to artifici 
intelligence? some expert hope So 

benjamin grosof be the chief scientist at kyndi, a silicon 
valley start-up that be use a decades-old program 
languag to develop softwar that can gener facts, 
concept and infer from small amount of 
data.creditjason henri for the new york time 

for the past five years, the hottest thing in artifici intellig have 
be a branch know a deep learning. the grandli name statist 
technique, put simply, give comput a way to learn by process 
vast amount of data. thank to deep learning, comput can easili 
identifi face and recogn spoken words, make other form of 
humanlik intellig suddenli seem within reach. 

compani like google, facebook and microsoft have pour money 
into deep learning. start-up pursu everyth from cancer cure to 
back-offic autom trumpet their deep learn expertise. and the 
technology’ percept and pattern-match abil be be 
appli to improv progress in field such a drug discoveri and self- 
drive cars. 

but now some scientist be ask whether deep learn be realli so 
deep after all. 

In recent conversations, onlin comment and a few lengthi essays, a 
grow number of a.i. expert be warn that the infatu with 
deep learn may well breed myopia and overinvest now — and 
disillusion later. 

“there be no real intellig there,” say michael I. jordan, a professor 
at the univers of california, berkeley, and the author of an essay 
publish in april intend to temper the lofti expect 
surround a.i. “and I think that trust these brute forc algorithm 
too much be a faith misplaced.” 

the danger, some expert warn, be that a.i. will run into a technic wall 
and eventu face a popular backlash — a familiar pattern in artifici 
intellig sinc that term be coin in the 1950s. with deep learn 
in particular, research said, the concern be be fuel by the 
technology’ limits. 

deep learn algorithm train on a batch of relat data — like 
pictur of human face — and be then fed more and more data, which 
steadili improv the software’ pattern-match accuracy. although 
the techniqu have spawn successes, the result be larg confin to 

Is there a smarter path to artifici intelligence? some expert hope So https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/20/technology/deep-learning-artificial... 

1 sur 6 27-06-18 à 13:44 



field where those huge data set be avail and the task be well 
defined, like label imag or translat speech to text. 

imag 

kyndi’ offic in san mateo, calif. the company’ focu on 
the reason side of artifici intellig distinguish it 
from the branch know a deep learning, in which 
comput train themselv by process massiv amount 
of data.creditjason henri for the new york time 

the technolog struggl in the more open terrain of intellig — 
that is, meaning, reason and common-sens knowledge. while deep 
learn softwar can instantli identifi million of words, it have no 
understand of a concept like “justice,” “democracy” or “meddling.” 

research have show that deep learn can be easili fooled. 
scrambl a rel hand of pixels, and the technolog can mistak a 
turtl for a rifl or a park sign for a refrigerator. 

In a wide read articl publish earli thi year on arxiv.org, a site for 
scientif papers, gari marcus, a professor at new york university, 
pose the question: “i deep learn approach a wall?” He wrote, 
“a be so often the case, the pattern extract by deep learn be 
more superfici than they initi appear.” 

If the reach of deep learn be limited, too much money and too mani 
fine mind may now be devot to it, say oren etzioni, chief execut 
of the allen institut for artifici intelligence. “we run the risk of 
miss other import concept and path to advanc a.i.,” he said. 

Is there a smarter path to artifici intelligence? some expert hope So https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/20/technology/deep-learning-artificial... 

2 sur 6 27-06-18 à 13:44 



amid the debate, some research groups, start-up and comput 
scientist be show more interest in approach to artifici 
intellig that address some of deep learning’ weaknesses. for one, 
the allen institute, a nonprofit lab in seattle, announc in februari 
that it would invest $125 million over the next three year larg in 
research to teach machin to gener common-sens knowledg — an 
initi call project alexandria. 

while that program and other effort vary, their common goal be a 
broader and more flexibl intellig than deep learning. and they be 
typic far less data hungry. they often use deep learn a one 
ingredi among other in their recipe. 

“we’r not anti-deep learning,” say yejin choi, a research at the 
allen institut and a comput scientist at the univers of 
washington. “we’r tri to rais the sight of a.i., not critic tools.” 

those other, non-deep learn tool be often old techniqu 
employ in new ways. At kyndi, a silicon valley start-up, comput 
scientist be write code in prolog, a program languag that 
date to the 1970s. It be design for the reason and knowledg 
represent side of a.i., which process fact and concepts, and 
tri to complet task that be not alway well defined. deep learn 
come from the statist side of a.i. know a machin learning. 

benjamin grosof, an a.i. research for three decades, join kyndi in 
may a it chief scientist. mr. grosof say he be impress by kyndi’ 
work on “new way of bring togeth the two branch of a.i.” 

kyndi have be abl to use veri littl train data to autom the 
gener of facts, concept and inferences, say ryan welsh, the 
start-up’ chief executive. 

the kyndi system, he said, can train on 10 to 30 scientif document of 
10 to 50 page each. onc trained, kyndi’ softwar can identifi 
concept and not just words. 

In work for three larg govern agenc that it declin to disclose, 
kyndi have be ask it system to answer thi typic question: ha a 
technolog be “demonstr in a laboratori setting”? the kyndi 
program, mr. welsh said, can accur infer the answer, even when 
that phrase do not appear in a document. 

imag 

Is there a smarter path to artifici intelligence? some expert hope So https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/20/technology/deep-learning-artificial... 

3 sur 6 27-06-18 à 13:44 



Is there a smarter path to artifici intelligence? some expert hope So https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/20/technology/deep-learning-artificial... 

4 sur 6 27-06-18 à 13:44 



ryan welsh, the chief executive, say kyndi’ technolog 
could read a long scientif document, and infer the 
concepts, more than 275 time faster than a human 
analyst.creditjason henri for the new york time 

and kyndi’ read and score softwar be fast. A human analyst, mr. 
welsh said, might take two hour on averag to read a lengthi scientif 
document, and perhap read 1,000 in a year. kyndi’ technolog can 
read those 1,000 document in seven hours, he said. 

kyndi serf a a tireless digit assistant, identifi the document 
and passag that requir human judgment. “the goal be increas the 
product of the human analysts,” mr. welsh said. 

kyndi and other be bet that the time be final right to take on 
some of the more daunt challeng in a.i. that echo the trajectori 
of deep learning, which make littl progress for decad befor the 
recent explos of digit data and ever-fast comput fuel leap 
in perform of it so-cal neural networks. those network be 
digit layer loos analog to biolog neurons. the “deep” refer 
to mani layers. 

there be other hope sign in the beyond-deep-learn camp. 
vicarious, a start-up develop robot that can quickli switch from 
task to task like humans, publish promis research in the journal 
scienc last fall. it a.i. technolog learn from rel few 
exampl to mimic human visual intelligence, use data 300 time 
more effici than deep learn models. the system also broke 
through the defens of captchas, the squiggli letter identif test 
on websit meant to foil softwar intruders. 

vicarious, whose investor includ elon musk, jeff bezo and mark 
zuckerberg, be a promin exampl of the entrepreneuri pursuit of 
new path in a.i. 

“deep learn have give u a glimps of the promis land, but we 
need to invest in other approaches,” say dileep george, an a.i. expert 
and co-found of vicarious, which be base in union city, calif. 

the pentagon’ research arm, the defens advanc research project 
agency, have propos a program to seed univers research and 
provid a noncommerci network for share idea on technolog to 
emul human common-sens reasoning, where deep learn fall 
short. If approved, the program, machin common sense, would start 
thi fall and most like run for five years, with total fund of about 
$60 million. 

“thi be a high-risk project, and the problem be big than ani one 
compani or research group,” say david gunning, who manag 
darpa’ person assist program, which end a decad ago and 
produc the technolog that becom apple’ siri. 

Is there a smarter path to artifici intelligence? some expert hope So https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/20/technology/deep-learning-artificial... 

5 sur 6 27-06-18 à 13:44 



follow steve lohr on twitter: @stevelohr. 

A version of thi articl appear in print on june 21, 2018, on page B1 of 
the new york edit with the headline: research seek smarter 
path to a.i.. order reprint | today’ paper | subscrib 

ocasio-cortez upset a top hous democrat 

1. 

how mckinsey lost it way in south africa 

2. 

who Is alexandria ocasio-cortez? 

3. 

sotomayor deliv sharp dissent in travel ban case 

4. 

Is there a smarter path to artifici intelligence? some expert hope So https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/20/technology/deep-learning-artificial... 

6 sur 6 27-06-18 à 13:44 


