






































itâ•ž true: fals new spread faster and wider. and human are to blame. 


it’ true: fals new spread faster 
and wider. and human are to 
blame. 

steve lohr 

research at the massachusett institut of technolog examin true and 

fals news stori post on twitter from the social network’ found in 

2006 through 2017. mark makela for the new york time 

what if the scourg of fals news on the internet be not the result of 

russian oper or partisan zealot or computer-control bots? 

what if the main problem be us? 

peopl be the princip culprits, accord to a new studi examin 

the flow of stori on twitter. and people, the study’ author also say, 

prefer fals news. 

As a result, fals news travel faster, farther and deeper through the 

social network than true news. 

the researchers, from the massachusett institut of technology, found 

that those pattern appli to everi subject they studied, not onli 

polit and urban legends, but also business, scienc and technology. 

it’ true: fals new spread faster and wider. and human are to blame. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/08/technology/twitter-fake-news-rese... 

1 sur 7 09-03-18 à 20:18 



fals claim be 70 percent more like than the truth to be share on 

twitter. true stori be rare retweet by more than 1,000 people, 

but the top 1 percent of fals stori be routin share by 1,000 to 

100,000 people. and it take true stori about six time a long a fals 

one to reach 1,500 people. 

mani fals stori post in 2014’ third quarter involv a patent 

lawsuit between appl and samsung. 

mani fals stori at end of 2016 involv the novemb 2015 terror 

attack in paris. 

tweet contain fals claim 

mani fals stori at end of 2016 involv the novemb 2015 

terrorist attack in paris. 

it’ true: fals new spread faster and wider. and human are to blame. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/08/technology/twitter-fake-news-rese... 

2 sur 7 09-03-18 à 20:18 



mani fals stori post in 2014’ third quarter involv a patent 

lawsuit between appl and samsung. 

softwar robot can acceler the spread of fals stories. but the m.i.t. 

researchers, use softwar to identifi and weed out bots, found that 

with or without the bots, the result be essenti the same. 

“it’ sort of dishearten at first to realiz how much we human be 

responsible,” say sinan aral, a professor at the m.i.t. sloan school of 

manag and an author of the study. “it’ not realli the robot that 

be to blame.” 

here be other find from the research. 

cover the histori of twitter 

the research, publish on thursday in scienc magazine, examin 

true and fals news stori post on twitter from the social network’ 

found in 2006 through 2017. the study’ author track 126,000 

stori tweet by roughli three million peopl more than 4.5 million 

times. “news” and “stories” be defin broadli — a claim of fact — 

regardless of the source. and the studi explicitli avoid the term “fake 

news,” which, the author write, have becom “irredeem polar in 

our current polit and medium climate.” 

the stori be classifi a true or false, use inform from six 

it’ true: fals new spread faster and wider. and human are to blame. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/08/technology/twitter-fake-news-rese... 

3 sur 7 09-03-18 à 20:18 



independ fact-check organ includ snopes, politifact 

and factcheck.org. To ensur that their analysi held up in gener — 

not just on claim that drew the attent of fact-check group — the 

research enlist student to annot a true or fals more than 

13,000 other stori that circul on twitter. again, a tilt toward 

falsehood be clear. 

the way inform flow onlin — and, occasionally, spread rapidli 

like a viru — have be studi for decades. there have also be 

small studi examin how true and fals news and rumor 

propag across social networks. but expert in network analysi say 

the m.i.t. studi be larg in scale and well designed. 

“the comprehens be import here, span the entir histori 

of twitter,” say jon kleinberg, a comput scientist at cornel 

university. “and thi studi shine a spotlight on the open question of 

the success of fals inform online.” 

tweet contain fals claim 

it’ true: fals new spread faster and wider. and human are to blame. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/08/technology/twitter-fake-news-rese... 

4 sur 7 09-03-18 à 20:18 



tweet contain fals claim 

novelti win retweet 

the m.i.t. research point to factor that contribut to the appeal 

of fals news. appli standard text-analysi tools, they found that 

fals claim be significantli more novel than true one — mayb not a 

surprise, sinc falsehood be make up. 

the study’ author also explor the emot evok by fals and true 

stories. the goal, say soroush vosoughi, a postdoctor research at 

the m.i.t. media lab and the lead author, be to find clue about what 

be “in the natur of human that make them like to share fals news.” 

the studi analyz the sentiment express by user in repli to 

claim post on twitter. As a measur tool, the research use a 

system creat by canada’ nation research council that associ 

english word with eight emotions. fals claim elicit repli 

express great surpris and disgust. true news inspir more 

anticipation, sad and joy, depend on the natur of the stories. 

two stories: one true, one fals 

it’ true: fals new spread faster and wider. and human are to blame. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/08/technology/twitter-fake-news-rese... 

5 sur 7 09-03-18 à 20:18 



the research provid an exampl of two busi stories, and how 

much more time it take the true one to reach 200 retweets. the 

exampl also show the judgment call make by fact-check 

organizations. 

• In 2014, the fashion chain zara introduc children’ pajama with 

horizont stripe and a gold star. the compani say the design be 

inspir by what a cowboy sheriff would wear. but twitter user post 

messag say the pajama resembl nazi concentr camp 

uniforms. snopes: true. time to reach 200 retweets: 7.3 hours. 

• In 2016, a websit republish a portion of a satir articl about 

how the chick-fil-a restaur chain have decid to begin a “we don’t 

like black either” market campaign to stir up controversi and boost 

sales. It come after the company’ presid do say he oppos gay 

marriage. snopes: false. time to 200 retweets: 4.2 hours. 

what can be done? 

the m.i.t. research say that understand how fals news spread 

be a first step toward curb it. they conclud that human behavior 

play a larg role in explain the phenomenon, and mention possibl 

interventions, like good labeling, to alter behavior. 

for all the concern about fals news, there be littl certainti about it 

influenc on people’ belief and actions. A recent studi of the brows 

histori of thousand of american adult in the month befor the 2016 

elect found that fals news account for onli a small portion of the 

total news peopl consumed. “we have to be veri care about make 

the infer that fake news have a big impact,” say duncan watts, a 

princip research at microsoft research. 

anoth author of the m.i.t. study, deb roy, former chief medium 

scientist at twitter, be engag in a project to improv the health of the 

inform ecosystem. In fall 2016, mr. roy, an associ professor at 

the m.i.t. media lab, becom a founder and the chairman of cortico, a 

nonprofit that be develop tool to measur public convers 

onlin to gaug attribut like share attention, varieti of opinion and 

receptivity. the idea be that improv the abil to measur such 

attribut would lead to good decision-mak that would counteract 

it’ true: fals new spread faster and wider. and human are to blame. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/08/technology/twitter-fake-news-rese... 

6 sur 7 09-03-18 à 20:18 



misinformation. 

mr. roy acknowledg the challeng in tri to not onli alter 

individu behavior but also in enlist the support of big internet 

platform like facebook, google, youtub and twitter, and medium 

companies. 

“polarization,” he said, “ha turn out to be a great busi model.” 

it’ true: fals new spread faster and wider. and human are to blame. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/08/technology/twitter-fake-news-rese... 

7 sur 7 09-03-18 à 20:18 


