






































julia dressel '17' thesi receiv nation attent for crime-predict research 


julia dressel '17' thesi receiv 
nation attent for crime- 
predict research 

by gabriel onat | 1/24/18 2:10am 

softwar use to predict if a defend will reoffend may be less 
accur than previous believed, accord to julia dressel ’17’ senior 
thesi research that have recent receiv nation attention. 

dressel and comput scienc professor hani farid conduct research 
on risk-assess softwar know a compa — short for 
correct offend manag profil for altern sanction 
— and discov that human be equal a success a algorithm 
in predict defendants’ risk of commit futur crimes. 

the algorithm be use in variou court throughout the nation to predict 
if a defend will commit a crime in the future, specif within two 
years, farid said. 

He add the result predict be then use by the court to 
determin prison sentences, bail amount and parol eligibility. 

“it’ pretti signific in way that affect people’ livelihood,” farid 
said. “thi be not recommend music or movi to you; thi be 
decid whether you’r go to be incarcer or not.” 

dressel say she found herself think about pursu a thesi in 
comput scienc dure her junior spring. 

she add that she be look to integr her two majors, comput 
scienc and women’s, gender and sexual studies, in order to research 
technolog and bias. after read a propublica report expos racial 
bia in the compa software, she be inspir to work with 
algorithms. 

dressel say she reach out to farid, who then agre to research with 
her a part of her senior thesis. they begin test algorithms, 
compar their accuraci with compa and human predictions, she 
said. 

farid add that they expos their algorithm to a differ number of 
factor to tri to understand how they would make predictions. 

meanwhile, accord to farid, the pair ask peopl to make 
predict on defend via amazon mechan turk, an onlin 

julia dressel '17' thesi receiv nation attent for crime-predict r... http://www.thedartmouth.com/article/2018/01/crime-predicting-algorith... 

1 sur 3 06-06-18 à 19:20 



survey sourc site in which user be paid to answer questions. these 
peopl survey be give a paragraph with seven piec of 
inform on the variou defendants, which do not includ their race. 
the particip be ask to predict whether or not each defend 
be at high risk of commit a crime within two years. 

what they found, farid and dressel both said, be surprising. the 
human predict be about 67 percent accurate, roughli the same a 
dressel and farid’ algorithm and compas. both compa and their 
algorithms’ accuraci be at about 65 percent, farid said. 

accord to equivant, the compani that develop and own 
compas, the commerci algorithm us six factor to determin risk, 
includ age, sex and prior convictions, but like dressel and farid’ 
work, do not includ race. 

farid and dressel then decid to test their algorithm use few 
factor to determin risk. they found that by use onli two — age and 
prior convict — the accuraci of their algorithm remain the same 
a compas’ and the human predictions. 

through their applic of few factor and human predictions, they 
conclud that “if you be young and have commit a lot of crimes, 
you be high-risk,” farid explained. 

He add that the opposit be also true — old individu with few 
convict be consid low-risk. 

becaus peopl untrain and unfamiliar with crimin justic be 
predict defendants’ risk of commit crime at the same rate a 
compas, the overal result lead farid and dressel to express concern 
that court may not have enough inform to know how to weigh the 
algorithm’ predictions. 

despit the findings, dressel say peopl may still favor the algorithm 
becaus they have the percept of be automat good than 
human prediction. she add that peopl who may not be familiar with 
how the system work be quick to assum that a machin be more 
accur and object than a person. 

farid add that whether use algorithm or human judgment, 
predict the futur be veri hard, which be whi use predict to 
determin outcom like sentenc or parol be a big issu that need 
to be addressed. 

“should you be penal becaus an algorithm think you may commit 
a crime in the future?” he said. 

farid also add that the research he conduct with dressel be not 
meant to tell court to stop use algorithms, object measur and 
data to sentenc defendants. rather, he said, he and dressel believ in a 

julia dressel '17' thesi receiv nation attent for crime-predict r... http://www.thedartmouth.com/article/2018/01/crime-predicting-algorith... 

2 sur 3 06-06-18 à 19:20 



state respons of transparency, in which if the state be set on use 
algorithm to determin how much time a defend serves, then the 
state should be abl to explain to the defend how the court come to 
it decision. 

dressel say that her research with farid be meant to show that the 
accuraci of algorithm should not be take for granted. 

“we need to test them and regul them and make sure they be 
actual accur befor implement them into the crimin justic 
system,” she said. 

julia dressel '17' thesi receiv nation attent for crime-predict r... http://www.thedartmouth.com/article/2018/01/crime-predicting-algorith... 

3 sur 3 06-06-18 à 19:20 


