






































lensless camera captur highli detail 3D imag 


An experiment camera can produc extrem detail imag 

without even use a lens. 

scientist from the univers of california, berkeley have creat 

an easy-to-build lensless camera that produc 3D imag from 

a singl 2D image. 

“the diffusercam can, in a singl shot, captur 3D inform 

in a larg volum with high resolution,” research team leader 

laura waller, ph.d., an associ professor from the univers 

of california, berkeley, say in a statement. “we think the 

camera could be use for self-driv cars, where the 3D 

inform can offer a sens of scale, or it could be use with 

machin learn algorithm to perform face detection, track 

peopl or automat classifi objects.” 

the compact and inexpens camera—cal the diffusercam 

—consist of onli a diffus place on top of an imag sensor. 

the research found that the prototyp could be use to 

reconstruct 100 million voxel or 3D pixels, from a 1.3- 

kenni 

walter 

lensless camera captur highli detail 3D imag https://www.rdmag.com/article/2017/12/lensless-camera-captures-highly... 

1 sur 3 31-12-17 à 13:11 



megapixel imag without ani scanning. 

“our new camera be a great exampl of what can be 

accomplish with comput imaging—an approach that 

examin how hardwar and softwar can be use togeth to 

design imag systems,” waller said. “we make a concert 

effort to keep the hardwar extrem simpl and inexpensive. 

“although the softwar be veri complicated, it can also be easili 

replic or distributed, allow other to creat thi type of 

camera at home,” she added. 

A diffusercam can be creat use ani type of imag sensor. It 

can imag object that rang from microscop in scale to the 

size of a human being. the camera offer a resolut in the 

ten of micron rang when imag object closer to the 

sensor. while the resolut decreas when imag a scene 

farther away from the sensor, it be still high enough to 

distinguish that one person be stand sever foot closer to the 

camera than anoth person. 

the camera captur how much light be strike a pixel on the 

imag sensor, a well a the angl from which the light hit the 

pixel. 

light field camera have be limit in spatial resolut until 

now becaus some spatial inform be lose while the 

direct inform be collected. the microlen array use in 

the camera be also expens and must be custom for a 

particular camera or optic compon use for imaging. 

the research use variou item includ privaci glass 

stickers, scotch tape and plastic confer badg holder to 

improv on tradit light field camera capabl by use 

compress sens to avoid the typic loss of resolut that 

come with microlen arrays. 

“I want to see if we could achiev the same imag 

capabl use simpl and cheap hardware,” waller said. “if 

we have good algorithms, could the care designed, 

expens microlen array be replac with a plastic surfac 

with a random pattern such a a bumpi piec of plastic?” 

the research be now attempt to elimin the need to 

acquir a few imag of a move point of light to calibr the 

softwar prior to imag by use the raw data for calibration. 

they also want to improv the accuraci of the softwar and 

make the 3D reconstruct faster. 

the research plan to initi use the camera to watch 

microscop neuron activ in live mous without a microscope. 

eventually, the camera could be use in a number of 

lensless camera captur highli detail 3D imag https://www.rdmag.com/article/2017/12/lensless-camera-captures-highly... 

2 sur 3 31-12-17 à 13:11 



applic involv 3D capture. 

the studi be publish in optica. 

bmw strike solid-st batteri 
develop deal for electr vehicl 

• 

avatar — the critic paramet in 

need of improv for vehicl propuls 

batteri be cost per kwh and a recharg time 

artifici intellig help reduc 
construct injuri 

• 

avatar — I have some experi in the 

construct industri and I think the 

research overlook the fact that younger, 

key to immun system' memori reveal 
• 

avatar — whi dont they have a 

gene therapi now? what' hold them up? 

they could'v have ab aid cure alreadi if they 

r&d market pulse: microsoft foldabl 
tablet could Be on horizon 

• 

avatar — I have exactli no interest in "video 

articles". lose'em. If you can't read, go 

elsewhere. 

r&d magazin 

0 comment r&d magazin login1 

share sort by best 

log IN with OR sign UP with disqu 

start the discussion… 

? 

recommend 

lensless camera captur highli detail 3D imag https://www.rdmag.com/article/2017/12/lensless-camera-captures-highly... 

3 sur 3 31-12-17 à 13:11 


