













































research new 

contact 
jani eitner | fraunhofer-gesellschaft, munich | commun | phone +49 89 1205-1333 | presse@zv.fraunhofer.d 
katharina strohmeier | fraunhof institut for product system and design technolog ipk | phone +49 30 39006-331 | 
pascalstrass 8 - 9 | 10587 berlin | www.ipk.fraunhofer.d | katharina.strohmeier@ipk.fraunhofer.d 

februari 2018 || page 1 | 4 

autom in agricultur 
lightweight robot harvest cucumb 
automation-intens sector such a the automot industri be not the onli 
one to reli on robots. In more and more agricultur settings, autom 
system be supersed strenuou manual labor. As part of the eu’ catch 
project, the fraunhof institut for product system and design technolo- 
gy ipk be develop and test a dual-arm robot for the autom harves- 
ting of cucumbers. thi lightweight solut have the potenti to keep crop 
cultiv commerci viabl in germany. 

In germany, cucumb destin for pickl jar be harvest by hand with the aid of 
“cucumb flyers” – farm vehicl with wing-lik attachments. season worker lie on 
their stomach on the vehicle’ wing and pluck the ripe cucumbers. thi labor-intens 
and energy-sap type of manual harvest be increasingli becom uneconomical. 
In addition, the per-unit cost of harvest have risen sinc germani introduc a 
minimum wage. mani of the country’ agricultur region consequ face an 
uncertain future; cucumb farm have alreadi begin reloc to eastern europ 
and india. there be thu an urgent need for improv harvest technolog to 
maintain the econom viabil of cucumb farm in germany. expert from 
fraunhof ipk in berlin, along with other german and spanish researchers, be study- 
ing the potenti for autom cucumb harvest in the scope of the EU project 
catch, which stand for “cucumb gather – green field experiments.” project 
partner be the leibniz institut for agricultur engin and bioeconomi in 
germani and the csic-upm centr for autom and robot (car) in spain. 

catch research want to develop and test a dual-arm robot system consist of 
inexpens lightweight modules. the ultim aim: thi system could be use for 
autom cucumb farm and other agricultur applications. the robot picker 
would have to be cost-effective, high-perform and dependable. even in advers 
weather, it would need to be capabl of first identifi ripe cucumb and then use 
it two gripper arm to gentli pick and store them. To thi end, cutting-edg control 
method equip the robot with tactil percept and enabl it to adapt to ambient 
conditions. these method also make it possibl for the dual-arm robot system to 
imit human movements. research name want to make sure that the robot do 
not damag crop – or pull them and their root out of the soil. but that be not all. the 
autom harvest must be at least a effici a it experienc human counterpart, 
who can pick a mani a 13 cucumb per minute. 



research new 

februari 2018 || page 2 | 4 

high success rate 

It be a consider challeng to design autonom system capabl of optic and 
tactil sensing, assess and evaluating. the challeng be onli compound by cucum- 
ber harvesting: a robot must identifi green object camouflag by green surround- 
ings. In addition, cucumb be randomli distribut throughout a field, and some be 
conceal by vegetation. vari light condit make the mission all the more 
difficult. It should be possibl to use multispectr camera and intellig imag 
process to help locat cucumb and guid the robot’ gripper arm to pluck them. 
thi part of the catch project be overseen by csic-upm, the spanish project partner. A 
special camera system help ensur that the robot detect and locat approxim 95 
percent of cucumbers, an impress success rate. the goal, of course, be to advanc the 
technolog so that the robot pick all the ripe cucumb to foster growth of new ones. 
fraunhof ipk have develop robot arm with five degre of freedom on the basi of 
hardwar modul develop by igu gmbh in cologne. 

In search of human inspir 

the ipk project expert be task with develop three gripper prototypes: a gripper 
base on vacuum technology, a set of bionic gripper jaw (fin ray®) and a custom 
“cucumb hand” base on openbion robot hands. they be reli on insight 
acquir dure a previou european research project, in which they develop a 
dual-arm robot control system with effici task-ori program for workerbot 
I – a humanoid robot capabl of industri assembly. project expert from ipk be 
enhanc thi system so that it can plan, program and control the behavior of robot 
harvest cucumbers. these preprogram behavior pattern make bimanu 
search possible, mean the robot can look for cucumb a a human would. dr. 
dragoljub surdilovic, a scientist at fraunhof ipk, explains: “the robot can, for exam- 
ple, push leaf to the side use symmetr or asymmetr movements, or congru- 
ent and incongru movements. As a result, it can automat chang direct on 
the fli to approach and then grasp a cucumber.” the researchers’ goal be to creat an 
intellig control system capabl of make judgment calls: assign a certain task to 
a certain gripper arm, monitor cucumb pick and deal with exceptions. 

In juli 2017, the leibniz institut for agricultur engin and bioeconomi use 
variou type of cucumb to conduct initi field test of the robot system at it test 
site. the institut also test harvest new type of cucumb with distinguish 
featur that make them easi to pick. In short, the first round of test valid 
basic functionality. sinc fall 2017, project partner have be conduct addit 
test in a leibniz institut greenhouse. research be especi eager to scrutin the 
extent to which interfer or malfunct affect the effici and robust of the 
system. onc test of the lightweight robot have be completed, project partner will 
strive to make it commerci viable. companies, cucumb farmer and agricultur 



research new 

februari 2018 || page 3 | 4 

associ have express consider interest in the dual-arm robot. In novemb 
2017, the catch project be unveil to the gener public at agritechnica, the 
world’ lead trade fair for agricultur technology. the german agricultur societi 
(dlg e.v.) exhibit the robot at it agritechnica booth, elicit enthusiast feedback 
from agricultur specialist and numer companies. 


the project 

catch – which stand for “cucumb gather – green field experiments” – be 
subsid by the european union’ robot research project echord++ experi 
(the european coordin hub for open robot development). echord++ seek 
to develop robot technolog for the manufactur industry. In addit to 
fraunhof ipk, the catch project partner are: 

• the centr for autom and robot (car) csic-upm in spain 
• the leibniz institut for agricultur engin and bioeconomi 

agricultur vehicl know a “cucumb flyers” enabl a mani a 50 season worker to 

harvest crops. © fraunhof ipk | pictur in color and print quality: www.fraunhofer.de/en/press 



research new 

februari 2018 || page 4 | 4 

the fraunhofer-gesellschaft be the lead organ for appli research in europe. it research activ be conduct by 69 institut 
and research unit at locat throughout germany. the fraunhofer-gesellschaft employ a staff of 24,500, who work with an annual research 
budget total 2.1 billion euros. Of thi sum, 1.9 billion euro be gener through contract research. more than 70 percent of the fraunhofer- 
gesellschaft’ contract research revenu be deriv from contract with industri and from publicli financ research projects. intern collabo- 
ration with excel research partner and innov compani around the world ensur direct access to region of the great import to 
present and futur scientif progress and econom development. 

A prototyp of the dual-arm 

robot system dure the first 

field tests. 

© fraunhof ipk | pictur in 

color and print quality: 

www.fraunhofer.de/en/press 


