






































pressemeldung - universitã¤t osnabrã¼ck 


© universität osnabrück 

particip be seat at the wheel of a 
virtual car drive toward a set of 
obstacl in a suburban setting. A 
collis be unavoidable, and 
particip be onli give the choice, 
which of the two obstacl they would 
spare, and which one they would 
sacrifice. copyright: osnabrueck 
univers 

sie sind hier: startseit > press & öffentlichkeit > presseport > pressemeldung 

pressemeldung 

nr. 145 / 2017 

07. juli 2017 
machin will soon be abl to imit human moral behavior - research result from the institut of cognit scienc at osnabrueck univers 

self-driv car be the first gener of robot that share the same everyday habitat with us. It be therefor necessari to develop rule and expect for autonom system that defin how these system should behav in critic 
situations. the institut of cognit scienc at osnabrueck univers have now publish a studi in frontier in behavior neurosci (http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnbeh.2017.00122/full) that highlight the feasibl of 
incorpor human moral decis into machines, and suggest that autonom vehicl will soon be abl to deal with moral dilemma in road traffic. 

On the polit side, the debat about the feasibl of model human moral decis be be lead by an initi of the german feder depart of transport and digit infrastructur 
(bundesministerium für transport und digital infrastruktur; bmvi), which formul 20 ethic principl for self-driv cars. the studi from osnabrueck now bring empir data to thi 
debate. 

„to be abl to defin rule and guidelines, a two-step process be needed. first, the moral decis of human in critic situat have to be analyz and understood. In the second step, thi 
behavior need to be describ statistically, in order to deriv rule which can then be use by machines“, explain prof. dr. gordon pipa, one of the lead scientist in the study. 

To put both step into practice, the author make use of virtual realiti to observ the behavior of particip in simul traffic situations. To thi end, the particip drove down a road in a 
typic suburban set on a foggi day. In the cours of the experiment, the particip be confront with unavoid dilemma situations, in which humans, anim and/ or inanim 
object be block their way. ethic consider have to be make sinc the particip could alway onli spare one of two obstacles, but have to sacrific the other. the observ 
decis be late statist analyz and translat into rules. the result suggest that in such moral dilemma situations, our moral behavior can be explain by rather simpl model 
base on valu of life which be assign to each human, anim and object. 

leon suetfeld, first author of the study, put it like this: „human moral behavior can be explain and predict with impress precis by compar the valu of life that be associ with 
each human, anim and inanim object. thi show that human moral decis can in principl be explain by rules, and these rule can be adopt by machines.“ 

these new insight from osnabrueck contradict the 8th principl of the bmvi report, which make the assumpt that moral decis cannot be modelled. 

how can thi fundament differ be explained? algorithm can either be base on categor rule or on statist model that put multipl factor in relation. laws, a an example, be 
base on categor rules. In contrast, human behavior and modern artifici intellig (ai) system incorpor statist probabl into their assessments. thi incorpor of statist 
probabl allow both human and AI system to adapt to and evalu new situat that they have never encount before. In their work, suetfeld and colleagu use such a 
methodolog to describ the data. „the rule don’t have to be formul in an abstract manner by a human sit at their desk, but can be deriv and learnt from human behavior directly. 
thi rais the question of whether we should make use of these learnt and conceptu rule in machin a well.“, say suetfeld. 

„now that we have a way of implement moral decis make for machines, two moral dilemma remain“ say prof. dr. peter koenig, anoth co-author of thi public — „first of all, we need to decid on the influenc of moral valu 
on the guidelin for machin behavior. secondly, we need to discu whether or not machin should (always) behav like humans.“ „use virtual realiti to assess ethic decis in road traffic scenarios: applic of value-of-life- 
base model and influenc of time pressure” sind erschienen in „frontier in behavior neuroscience“ (http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnbeh.2017.00122/full) 

more inform for the media: 
prof. dr. gordon pipa, osnabrueck university, 
institut of cognit science, 
wachsbleich 27, 49090 osnabrueck, 
tel: +49 541 969 2277, 
e-mail: gordon.pipa@uni-osnabrueck.d 

leon suetfeld, osnabrueck university, 
institut of cognit science, 
wachsbleich 27, 49090 osnabrueck, 
tel: +49 541 969 7091, 
e-mail: lsuetfel@uni-osnabrueck.d 

pressemeldung - universität osnabrück https://www.uni-osnabrueck.de/presse_oeffentlichkeit/presseportal/pres... 

1 sur 1 17/07/2017 21:09 


