






































mimick the reflex detect abil of the anim visual system for comput detect of move object 


home technolog comput scienc august 22, 2017 

mimick the reflex detect abil of the anim visual system 
for comput detect of move object 
august 22, 2017 

more » 

A fast motion detect algorithm break new ground in the rapid detect of move object in 
video sequences. credit: kaust 

the detect of move object be one of the most fundament and 

import mechan of the anim visual system, have evolv to quickli 

detect both predat and prey. yet reproduc the abil of anim to 

reflex detect move object have remain elusive. 

ganesh sundaramoorthi and hi 

kaust master' student dong lao 

have develop a new approach to 

thi problem use a statistics- 

base comput framework 

that minim the detect time 

for a give level of detect 

accuracy. 

"studi in human and anim 

vision indic that motion play a 

key role in detect object in a 

scene a the anim moves," 

explain sundaramoorthi. 

"research have tri to use motion cue to detect object in video, but so 

far the problem be unsolved." 

the difficulti in detect move object in video stem from the ambigu 

in comput motion between sequenti frames—ther be mani possibl 

motion that could creat the imag sequence—and the essenti infinit 

dimension of the comput problem. detect scheme also have to 

deal with the appar motion of pixel in the image, due to movement of the 

camera or observer, and distinguish thi from object motion. imag nois and 

nuisances, such a chang in light and deform of objects, also add 

to the difficulti of comput and segment motion. 

"we address a fundament problem that may be solv by the anim visual 

system—th tradeoff between speed and accuracy," say sundaramoorthi. 

"for instance, an antelope' visual system must be abl to quickli detect a 

cheetah or it will be eat and can afford a high level of fals detect a 

long a they happen quickly. We be the first to address thi problem in 

comput vision, which be import not onli in model the anim visual 

system, but also in real-world applications, such a robot control and 

featur last comment 

phys.org on facebook 

s’abonn 
1,3 M personn sont abonné à 
phys.org. inscript pour voir qui vo 
ami suivent. 

relev physicsforum post 

forti year on, voyag still hurtl 
through space aug 27, 2017 5 

face scans, robot baggag handler 
—airport of the futur aug 27, 2017 

0 

new way to make steel that be both 
strong and more ductil aug 25, 
2017 5 

kepler satellit discov variabl in 
the seven sister aug 25, 2017 0 

elev zinc and germanium level 
bolster evid for habit 
environ on mar aug 25, 2017 

1 

holograph see through 5 hour ago 

what softwar do you use in your field of study? 

popular 

nanotechnolog physic earth astronomi & space technolog chemistri biolog other scienc 

top 

home 

medic xpress 

search 

help 

faq 

about 

contact 

phys.org account 

sponsor account 

newslett 

rss feed 

featur stori 

latest news 

week' top 

archiv 

iphon ipad app 

android app 

amazon kindl 

mobil version 

connect 

privaci polici term of use© phys.org 2003 - 2017, scienc X network 

mimick the reflex detect abil of the anim visual system for... https://phys.org/news/2017-08-mimicking-reflexive-ability-animal-visual... 

1 sur 3 28/08/2017 19:05 



pleas sign in to add a comment. registr be free, and take less than a minute. read more 

sign in 

click here to reset your password. 
sign in to get notifi via email when new comment be made. 

journal reference: arxiv 

provid by: king abdullah univers of scienc and 

technolog 

feedback to editor 

surveillance." 

lao and sundaramoorthi adapt what be know a the quick detect 

framework in statistics, which convert the problem into a stochast process 

with minimum detect time set accord to a statist detect threshold. 

"the problem be technic challeng becaus the quick detect 

framework be meant for 1D data not for the infinit dimension time seri of 

sequenti video images," say sundaramoorthi. "however, we be abl to 

construct the optim tool need to solv the problem with reason 

speed." 

test of the mathemat framework use a select of video show that 

lao and sundaramoorthi' detect scheme consist beat other state- 

of-the-art method in both speed and accuraci and with further optim 

could one day achiev real-tim object detection. 

explor further: use a camera to spot and track drone 

more information: lao, D. & sundaramoorthi, G. minimum delay move 

object detection. comput vision and pattern recognit arxiv, 

arxiv.org/abs/1605.07369 

aug 27, 2017 

new motherboard or not? aug 26, 2017 

encrypt usb flash drive aug 26, 2017 

what be the softwar that have thi plot style? 
aug 24, 2017 

buy a second-hand laptop aug 24, 2017 

more from comput and technolog 

relat stori recommend for you 

use a camera to spot and track 
drone august 17, 2017 
epfl research have show that a simpl camera can 
detect and track fli drones. plus, the lightweight, energy- 
effici and inexpens technolog could be instal 
directli on the drone themselv and enhanc safeti ... 

softwar that automat recogn 
surfac within complex three- 
dimension imag can benefit 
petroleum extract octob 17, 2016 
the deep crack fault that lie within the earth' crust be 

signific geolog surfac for oil explor and earthquak prediction. A 
team from kaust develop an algorithm that smoothli detect fault and 
other three-dimension ... 

high-frequ chip bring research 
closer to next gener technolog 
august 24, 2017 

novel, high-frequ electron chip potenti capabl of 
transmit ten of gigabit of data per second—a rate that be 
order of magnitud abov the fast internet speed 

avail today—ha be develop by ... 

shop by voic on amazon or googl 
devic could cost you august 24, 2017 
In the name of convenience, amazon and walmart be push 
peopl to shop by just talk to a digit assistant. 

samsung eye reset with new galaxi 

user comment 

3 share 

mimick the reflex detect abil of the anim visual system for... https://phys.org/news/2017-08-mimicking-reflexive-ability-animal-visual... 

2 sur 3 28/08/2017 19:05 


