






































mit enlist hundr of scientist in effort to make comput think more like peopl 


mit enlist hundr of scientist in 
effort to make comput think more 
like peopl 

andi rosen - metro produc 

the massachusett institut of technolog be plan a broad initi 

to seek breakthrough in the field of artifici intelligence, enlist 

hundr of research who will look deepli at the human mind for 

lesson on how to build smarter machines. 

the univers on thursday will announc the launch of the mit 

intellig quest, a multimillion-dollar plan to coordin the 

individu effort of mit’ mani expert from all corner of the campu 

— with the aim of teach comput to think more like the way peopl 

do. 

mit presid rafael reif say more than 200 faculti work in field 

includ brain science, comput engineering, and robot be 

plan to particip in the effort. 

dure a confer call on wednesday, reif say that while those 

scientist be all “smart and terrific,” they be also like “boat on the 

charl river go in differ directions.” 

get talk point in your inbox: 

An afternoon recap of the day’ most import busi news, 

deliv weekdays. 

now, he said, “they be go to work togeth toward a moonshot, and 

that be more than they can do now on their own.” 

while comput have becom highli effect at find pattern and 

learn from them, they can’t do much that we would recogn a 

humanlik intelligence. mit want to chang that. the intellig 

quest program — or mit IQ — will help connect research across 

disciplin and support project in which they work together, a well a 

seek collabor with industry. 

mit enlist hundr of scientist in effort to make comput think m... https://www.bostonglobe.com/business/2018/02/01/mit-enlisting-hundred... 

1 sur 2 02-02-18 à 19:15 



josh tenenbaum, a professor of cognit scienc and comput who 

be work to develop comput algorithm base on the work of the 

brain, say he need the help of hi colleagu in other fields. 

for instance, scientist have long dream of build comput that 

can learn and grow in the same way that child do, he said. but that be 

difficult without a deep knowledg of both how comput work and 

how the mind of child develop. 

“thi be realli about coupl the scienc of intellig and the 

engin — that is, the basic scienc of how intellig work in the 

mind and brain with the quest to engin more powerful, more 

intelligent, more human kind of intellig in machines,” he said. 

mit say it plan to rais money through corpor and other 

donations, in a model similar to an initi it announc last year in 

collabor with ibm. the comput giant pledg $240 million to 

establish a new lab research artifici intelligence. while the new 

intellig quest be a separ initiative, the idea behind it grow out 

mit’ effort to find project for the mit-ibm watson AI lab. 

reif say faculti have ask univers leadership to help coordin 

effort toward major advances. 

andi rosen can be reach at andrew.rosen@globe.com. 

mit enlist hundr of scientist in effort to make comput think m... https://www.bostonglobe.com/business/2018/02/01/mit-enlisting-hundred... 

2 sur 2 02-02-18 à 19:15 


