






































nanoscal logic machin go beyond binari comput 


home nanotechnolog nanophys march 14, 2017 

nanoscal logic machin go beyond binari comput 
march 14, 2017 by lisa zyga featur 

top 

home 

medic xpress 

search 

help 

faq 

about 

contact 

phys.org account 

sponsor account 

newslett 

rss feed 

featur stori 

latest news 

week' top 

archiv 

iphon ipad app 

blackberri app 

android app & widget 

amazon kindl 

mobil version 

connect 

privaci polici term of use© phys.org 2003 - 2017, scienc X network 

thi websit us cooki to ensur you get the best experi on our website. more info 

nanotechnolog physic earth astronomi & space technolog chemistri biolog other scienc 

nanoscal logic machin go beyond binari comput https://phys.org/news/2017-03-nanoscale-logic-machines-binary.html 

1 sur 7 19-03-17 18:29 



oper complet differ than convent logic devic do. instead of reli 

on the binari switch paradigm like that use by transistor in today' computers, 

the new nanoscal logic machin physic simul the problem and take 

advantag of the inher random that govern the behavior of physic 

system at the nanoscale—random that be usual consid a drawback. 

the team of researchers, barbara fresch 

et al., from univers in belgium, italy, 

australia, israel, and the us, have 

publish a paper on the new nanoscal 

logic machin in a recent issu of nano 

letters. 

"our approach show the possibl of a 

new class of tini analog comput that 

can solv comput difficult 

problem by simpl statist algorithm 

run in nanoscal solid-st physic 

devices," coauthor francois remacl at 

the univers of lieg told phys.org. 

the new nanolog machin consist of individu phosphor atom that be 

precis posit and emb in a silicon crystal at a densiti of about 200 

billion atom per squar centimeter. singl electron randomli move in and out of 

the atom due to quantum tunneling. sinc each atom can hold one or two of these 

electrons, and each electron can occupi a few differ energi levels, each atom 

can occupi one of four possibl states. each atom be constantli transit 

between it four state accord to a certain set of probabilities, correspond to 

the random movement of electron tunnel in and out of the atom and chang 

their energi levels. 

the research recogn that thi physic pictur can be use to simul 

phys.org on facebook 

relev physicsforum post 

egyptian statu recent unearth be 
not rams II mar 16, 2017 

astronom observ a die red giant 
star' final act mar 17, 2017 

lhcb observ an except larg 
group of particl mar 17, 2017 

1.3m peopl like this. sign Up to see what your 
friend like. 

likelik 

lhcb observ 5 new particl (excit hadrons) 
1 hour ago 

nanoscal logic machin go beyond binari comput https://phys.org/news/2017-03-nanoscale-logic-machines-binary.html 

2 sur 7 19-03-17 18:29 



certain comput problems. As a proof-of-concept, they look at a rel 

simpl exampl involv the flow of visitor in a maze consist of four room 

connect by gates. the task be to find the optim combin of rate for open 

the gate in order to maxim the time that visitor spend in one particular room. 

solv thi type of problem use convent comput requir a signific 

amount of effort, sinc it typic involv analyz the dynam of visitor in the 

maze to gather inform befor attempt to optim the rate of the gate 

openings. 

however, use the new logic devices, it' possibl to find the solut more directli 

becaus the problem be physic embodi by the atom "hardware" itself. for 

thi particular problem, the topolog of the maze correspond to an atom' states, 

and the movement of visitor correspond to the tunnel of the electrons. 

use scan tunnel spectroscopy, the research could measur the 

electron tunnel rates, and could also control these rate by control the 

voltag to the tip of the microscop along with the distanc between the tip and the 

substrate. So the maze problem becom a problem of find the combin of 

voltag and tip distanc that maxim the time an atom occupi a certain state. 

due to the variabl of single-electron dynamics, each atom have slightli differ 

electron transport properties, which mean some atom have good optim valu 

than others. If the atom be use a switch devices, like transistors, then thi 

variabl would be consid a drawback becaus it could introduc error. but 

here the variabl becom an advantag becaus it allow billion of logic 

devic to be compar against each other to determin which electron transport 

properti help keep the atom in a certain state for the long time. 

utilisez googl adword 

how could we produc a secondari beam of long 
neutral kaon 2 hour ago 

what be pure eigenstate? 9 hour ago 

nuclear decay mar 18, 2017 

problem understand crosssect 

ani think in appli evolutionari algorithm to 
fusion? mar 17, 2017 

more from high energy, nuclear, particl physic 

nanoscal logic machin go beyond binari comput https://phys.org/news/2017-03-nanoscale-logic-machines-binary.html 

3 sur 7 19-03-17 18:29 



the research expect that the result will lead to nanoscal logic devic capabl 

of solv a wide varieti of problem of increas complexity—al by directli 

simul the problem rather than refram them a binari processes. 

"nanoscal and molecular devic use a hardwar for logic have potenti 

mani advantages, from high pack densiti and low-pow dissip to the high 

number of state that can be use to encod information," remacl said. 

"however, their dynam be rule by probabilist law becaus of the fundament 

stochast natur of thermal activ and quantum processes. the most 

straightforward applic be then to use nanoscal devic for the implement 

of probabilist algorithm that requir signific overhead in convent 

determinist hardware. for example, the mere sampl a pseudo-random number 

from a probabl distribut requir hundr of instruct on a modern 

comput while electron tunnel at truli random time be a natur process." 

In the future, the research plan to design other type of nanolog devices, 

whose implement will requir posit the compon with extrem 

precision. 

"on the theoret side, we will continu to develop differ inform 

process paradigm tailor on the physic of nanoscal and molecular systems, 

with special attent to potenti emerg from their quantum nature," 

remacl said. "thi be a fundament effort for turn into use technolog the 

increas abil to control and manipul the matter at the nanoscale. 

experimentally, the big challeng be to achiev full control of the posit of 

dopant atom in the silicon matrix with atom precis and the design of their 

transport characteristics." 

explor further: propos method to caus an atom to emit the same light 

a anoth atom 

more information: barbara fresch et al. "A probabilist finit state logic 

nanoscal logic machin go beyond binari comput https://phys.org/news/2017-03-nanoscale-logic-machines-binary.html 

4 sur 7 19-03-17 18:29 



particl analytical. 

Ad particle.dk 

No big bang? 
quantum... 
phys.org 

$100k graduat 
research prize -... 
Ad bell-labs.com 

journal reference: nano letter 

feedback to editor 

machin realiz experiment on a singl dopant atom." nano letters. doi: 

10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b05149 

© 2017 phys.org 

relat stori recommend for you 

propos method to caus an atom to 
emit the same light a anoth atom 
februari 27, 2017 

(phys.org)—a team of research at princeton univers 
have found a way to caus ani atom to mimic the light 
emiss of ani other atom. In their paper publish in the 

journal physic review letters, the team reveal ... 

nanotub film may resolv longev 
problem of challeng solar cell march 
17, 2017 

five year ago, the world start to talk about third- 
gener solar cell that challeng the tradit silicon 
cell with a cheaper and simpler manufactur process that 

use less energy. 

2455 share 

nanoscal logic machin go beyond binari comput https://phys.org/news/2017-03-nanoscale-logic-machines-binary.html 

5 sur 7 19-03-17 18:29 


