






































neural network allow u to â•ÿread facesâ•ž in a new way 


last september, stanford professor michal kosinski unleash a torrent of controversi when he 

use artifici intellig to attempt to predict peoples’ sexual orient from their faces. now 

he have set himself the challeng of deciph hi subjects’ polit belief with similar software. 

the research be an illustr of what can be do with deep neural network — the type of 

machin learn behind much artifici intelligence, which spot pattern and make 

predict from larg volum of data such a text and images. other imag recognit 

technolog driven by neural network be be develop for us includ read sign for 

autonom drive and automat detect weapon in airport secur scanners. 

neural network have also make technolog like facial analysi significantli more accur in 

recent years. “i’m tri to tell the public that [facial analysi technolog be [already] be 

use by compani and govern to invad privaci at an unpreced scale,” prof kosinski 

says. 

last summer, chines compani begin triall facial recognit softwar to help polic predict 

crime befor they happen. faception, an isra company, sell facial analysi softwar to 

govern for secur uses. 

prof kosinski and hi co-researcher, yilun wang, use a facial analysi softwar call vgg- 

face, design by research at oxford university. andrea vedaldi, one of three oxford 

neural network allow u to ‘read faces’ in a new way https://www.ft.com/content/b387b1a2-de7b-11e7-a0d4-0944c5f49e46 

1 sur 3 06-02-18 à 09:11 



research who design vgg-face, say that the software’ accuraci rate have roughli doubl 

in the last two years. 

prof kosinski and Mr wang extract data from about 35,000 headshot photo take from a US 

date website, translat their attribut into a sequenc of number use vgg-face, and then 

use a comput model to look for correl between sexual and facial features. 

when give five photo of each person, the model accur distinguish between gay and 

straight men — where one be gay and one be not — 91 per cent of the time and between 

lesbian and straight woman in 83 per cent of cases. when give onli one photo of each person, 

the model distinguish between gay and straight men with 81 per cent accuraci and with 74 per 

cent accuraci for woman — compar to 61 per cent and 54 per cent, respectively, when human 

tri the same task. 

the author acknowledg that they have not creat a fool proof “gaydar” that can be appli in 

the real world — nor do they wish to. limit includ the fact that they onli use imag of 

caucasian and that their model’ accuraci drop significantli when give other tasks, such a 

rank the most like to be gay among 1000 randomli select men. 

some be sceptic about the results. prof vedaldi say it be conceiv that “what they be 

show be true” but question whether “thi have proven in a definit matter that it’ actual 

possible” to detect sexual orient from face with neural networks. “mayb in the databas 

there be some unwant bias, that would not exist if they be to collect data in some other 

ways.” 

“neural network be veri good at spot the 

patterns,” say marta kwiatowska, an oxford 

comput scienc professor research their safeti 

risk in self-driv cars. “but they’r not good at 

tell you when they give you [an answer] whether 

[there be actual a correlation] — becaus they may 

be see someth in a pattern that be random.” 

prof kosinski say that spuriou correl be 

“the big risk” and the “main challenge” with hi 

research. He give a hypothet exampl that could 

affect the find for hi next project: “it might be 

that republican tend to take pictur [of their faces] outdoor and democrat indoors, and there 

would be a differ on the bright level.” In thi scenario, the neural network could focu on 

bright rather than facial cues, but would appear to have spot facial links. 

similarly, it be unclear how exactli hi softwar look for sign of sexual and whether it found 

intrins facial characterist that correl with sexual or if it focu mainli on more 

superfici point such a grooming. prof kosinski say that the model look at both fix 

featur such a nose shape and more transient factor such a expressions. 

neural network allow u to ‘read faces’ in a new way https://www.ft.com/content/b387b1a2-de7b-11e7-a0d4-0944c5f49e46 

2 sur 3 06-02-18 à 09:11 



“it would be nice to understand if the network can tell you whi it think the answer be one way or 

another,” say prof vedaldi. “the machin itself be not fulli understood.” 

get neural network to explain how they analys imag be the focu of hi current research — 

and of sever other comput scienc depart and compani work on artifici 

intelligence. 

If research can understand how neural network make decis — through visual cue or of if 

they could identifi exampl that show whi their algorithm chose a particular predict — then 

it will be easi to improv their accuraci and spot biases. 

even so, there be like to be limit to their development. neural network need high qualiti 

data sourc to train on, which simul real world examples, but procur such data can often 

be difficult. they can also be trick by small differ between photos, intent make to 

deceiv models, know a “adversari examples”. 

“I can see way to improv the perform [of visual imag and facial recognit neural 

networks],” say Mr wang. “but I don’t see way to get to 100 per cent.” It could be some time, 

research say, befor neural network can be reliabl use for facial recognit in more 

secur critic fields. 

“I wouldn’t use them to control nuclear missiles,” say prof vedaldi. “but they don’t need to 

[reach crime scene investig levels] to be useful. they just need to be abl to do someth 

systemat on a larg scale to look at the face of thousand of peopl — and all of a sudden 

you have deploy the awesom power of a human brain and multipli that by one thousand.” 

neural network allow u to ‘read faces’ in a new way https://www.ft.com/content/b387b1a2-de7b-11e7-a0d4-0944c5f49e46 

3 sur 3 06-02-18 à 09:11 


