






































new AI can tell if you'r male or femal from the way you smile 


new AI can tell if you'r male or femal 
from the way you smile 

new research detail the differ between male and femal 
smile 
the research give way to AI that can predict a person' sex base 
on their smile 
the AI be the first of it kind that can make the predict base 
on video footag 
previou AI could make the predict after look at a photo of 
a smile 

By maggi o'neil for dailymail.com 

published: 22:24 gmt, 14 march 2018 | updated: 19:18 gmt, 15 march 2018 

new artifici intellig can predict your sex base on your smile. 

research at england' univers of bradford develop the AI after notic 
mark differ between males' and females' smiles. 

they hope to studi the way in which cosmet procedur affect these differ 
a well a how the research appli to transgend peopl in the future. 

their studi be publish in the visual computer: intern journal of 
comput graphics. 

copi link to past in your messag 

new research from the univers of bradford in england give way to artifici 
intellig that can predict a person' sex base on a video of them smiling. 
research map out the differ between male and femal smile for the 
report 

the univers of bradford researchers' new AI platform be a step abov alreadi 
exist technolog that can determin one' sex base on a photograph of their 
smile. 

the new report said: 'although automat gender recognit be alreadi available, 
exist method use static imag and compar fix facial features. 

'the new research be the first to use the dynam movement of the smile to 
automat distinguish between men and women.' 

for the studi the research map out 49 facial landmarks, found mostli 
around the eyes, down the nose and near the mouth. 

'they use these to ass how the face chang a we smile caus by the 
underli muscl movement - includ both chang in distanc between the 
differ point and the "flow" of the smile: how much, how far and how fast the 

new AI can tell if you'r male or femal from the way you smile http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-5501469/new-ai-tell-you... 

1 sur 42 17-03-18 à 08:47 



differ point on the face move a the smile be formed,' the analysi said. 

next the research analyz whether or not there be signific differ 
between woman and men' smiles. 

they conclud that there were, and the scientist learn that women' smile 
be more expansive. 

research professor hassan ugail said: 'anecdotally, woman be thought to be 
more express in how they smile, and our research have born thi out. 

'women definit have broader smiles, expand their mouth and lip area far 
more than men.' 

the team built an algorithm base on their analysis, and it be subsequ 
test use video footag of more than 100 peopl smiling. 

copi link to past in your messag 

the research found that men' smile be less 'expansive' than women's. one of 
the scientist say that woman expand their lip area and mouth more than men 
do when they smile 

'the comput be abl to correctli determin gender in 86 percent of case and 
the team believ the accuraci could easili be improved,' the report said. 

professor ugail confirm that the research think the technolog can get 
better. 

He said: 'we use a fairli simpl machin classif for thi research a we 
be just test the concept, but more sophist AI would improv the 
recognit rates.' 

the studi say the point of the research be to 'enhanc machin learn 
capabilities' but that the research have rais question the team member want to 
investig in the future. 

copi link to past in your messag 

the research want to now studi whether or not cosmet surgeri would impact 
the new ai' prediciton 

'one be how the machin might respond to the smile of a transgend person, and 
the other be the impact of plastic surgeri on recognit rates,' the studi said. 

professor ugail said: 'becaus thi system measur the underli muscl 
movement of the face dure a smile, we believ these dynam will remain the 
same even if extern physic featur change, follow surgery, for example. 

'thi kind of facial recognit could becom a next-gener biometric, a it' 

new AI can tell if you'r male or femal from the way you smile http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-5501469/new-ai-tell-you... 

2 sur 42 17-03-18 à 08:47 



not depend on one featur but on a dynam that' uniqu to an individu and 
would be veri difficult to mimic or alter.' 

elon musk call for regul of AI befor 'it' too late' 

whi are peopl SO worri about ai? 

It be an issu troubl some of the great mind in the world at the moment, 
from bill gate and elon musk. 

spacex and tesla ceo elon musk describ AI a our 'biggest existenti threat' 
and liken it develop a 'summon the demon.' 

He believ super intellig machin could use human a pets. 

professor stephen hawk say it be a 'near certainty' that a major technolog 
disast will threaten human in the next 1,000 to 10,000 years. 

they could steal job 

more than 60 per cent of peopl fear that robot will lead to there be few job 
in the next ten years, accord to a 2016 yougov survey. 

and 27 per cent predict that it will decreas the number of job 'a lot' with 
previou research suggest admin and servic sector worker will be the hardest 
hit. 

As well a pose a threat to our jobs, other expert believ AI could 'go rogue' and 
becom too complex for scientist to understand. 

new AI can tell if you'r male or femal from the way you smile http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-5501469/new-ai-tell-you... 

3 sur 42 17-03-18 à 08:47 



A quarter of the respond predict robot will becom part of everyday life in 
just 11 to 20 years, with 18 per cent predict thi will happen within the next 
decade. 

they could 'go rogue' 

comput scientist professor michael wooldridg say AI machin could becom 
so intric that engin don't fulli understand how they work. 

If expert don't understand how AI algorithm function, they won't be abl to 
predict when they fail. 

thi mean driverless car or intellig robot could make unpredict 'out of 
character' decis dure critic moments, which could put peopl in danger. 

for instance, the AI behind a driverless car could choos to swerv into 
pedestrian or crash into barrier instead of decid to drive sensibly. 

they could wipe out human 

some peopl believ AI will wipe out human completely. 

'eventually, I think human extinct will probabl occur, and technolog will 
like play a part in this,' deepmind' shane legg say in a recent interview. 

He singl out artifici intelligence, or ai, a the 'number 1 risk for thi century.' 

In august last year, musk warn that AI pose more of a threat to human than 
north korea. 

'if you'r not concern about AI safety, you should be. vastli more risk than 
north korea,' the 46-year-old write on twitter. 

'nobodi like be regulated, but everyth (cars, planes, food, drugs, etc) that' 
a danger to the public be regulated. AI should be too.' 

musk have consist advoc for govern and privat institut to 
appli regul on AI technology. 

He have argu that control be necessari in order protect machin from 
advanc out of human control 

most watch new video 

emb most watch video 
<ifram style="width:1px;min-width:100%; 
height:352px" 
src="http://www.dailymail.co.uk/api/most- 
watched-videos/news/dark" frameborder="0" 
scrolling="no"></iframe> 

don't miss 

new AI can tell if you'r male or femal from the way you smile http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-5501469/new-ai-tell-you... 

4 sur 42 17-03-18 à 08:47 


