






































use machin learn to detect softwar vulner 


use machin learn to detect softwar vulner 

juli 24, 2018 by ingrid fadelli, tech xplore 

home 
secur 
juli 24, 2018 

credit: marku spisk on unsplash 

A team of research from r&d compani draper and boston univers develop a new large-scal 
vulner detect system use machin learn algorithms, which could help to discov softwar 
vulner faster and more efficiently. 

hacker and malici user be constantli come up with new way to compromis IT system and 
applications, typic by exploit softwar secur vulnerabilities. softwar vulner be small error 
make by the programm who develop a system that can propag quickly, especi through open- 
sourc softwar or through code reus and adaptation. 

everi year, thousand of these vulner be publicli report to the common vulner and 
exposur databas (cve), while mani other be spot and patch intern by developers. If they be 
not adequ addressed, these vulner can be exploit by attackers, often with devast effects, 
a prove in mani recent high-profil exploits, such a the heartble bug and the wannacri ramsomwar 
cryptoworm. 

generally, exist tool to analyz program can onli detect a limit number of potenti errors, which be 
base on predefin rules. however, the widespread use of open-sourc repositori have open new 
possibl for the develop of techniqu that could reveal code vulner patterns. 

the research from draper and boston have develop a new vulner detect tool that us machin 
learn for autom detect of vulner in c/c++ sourc code, which have alreadi show 
promis results. 

the team compil a larg dataset with million of open-sourc function and label it use three static 
(pre-runtime) analysi tools, name clang, cppcheck and flawfinder, which be design to identifi 
potenti exploits. their dataset includ million of function-level exampl of C and c++ code drawn from 
the sateiv juliet test suite, debian linux distribution, and public git repositori on github. 

"use these datasets, we develop a fast and scalabl vulner detect tool base on deep featur 
represent learn that directli interpret lex sourc code," the research write in their paper. 

As program languag be in some way similar to human languages, the research design a 
vulner detect techniqu that us natur languag process (nlp), an AI strategi that allow 
comput to understand and interpret human language. 

use machin learn to detect softwar vulner https://techxplore.com/news/2018-07-machine-software-vulnerabilities.html 

1 sur 2 03-08-18 à 19:40 



"we leverag feature-extract approach similar to those use for sentenc sentiment classif with 
convolut neural network (cnns) and recurr neural network (rnns) for function-level sourc 
vulner classification," the research explain in their paper. 

they combin nlp with random forest (rm); a power algorithm that creat an ensembl of decis 
tree from randomli select subset of the train dataset and then merg them together, gener 
achiev more accur predictions. 

the research test their tool on both real softwar packag and the nist state IV benchmark dataset. 

"our result demonstr that deep featur represent learn on sourc code be a promis approach 
for autom softwar vulner detection," they wrote. "we appli a varieti of ML techniqu inspir 
by classif problem in the natur languag domain, fine-tun them for our application, and achiev 
the best overal result use featur learn via convolut neural network and classifi with an 
ensembl tree algorithm." 

So far, their work have focu on c/c++ code, but their method could also be appli to ani other 
program language. they specif chose to creat a custom c/c++ lexer a thi would produc a 
simpl and gener represent of function sourc code, which be ideal for machin learn training. 

explor further: what be softwar vulnerabilities, and whi be there so mani of them? 

more information: autom vulner detect in sourc code use deep represent 
learning. arxiv:1807.04320v1 [cs.lg]. arxiv.org/abs/1807.04320 

abstract 
increas number of softwar vulner be discov everi year whether they be report publicli 
or discov intern in proprietari code. these vulner can pose seriou risk of exploit and result 
in system compromise, inform leaks, or denial of service. We leverag the wealth of C and c++ open- 
sourc code avail to develop a large-scal function-level vulner detect system use machin 
learning. To supplement exist label vulner datasets, we compil a vast dataset of million of 
open-sourc function and label it with carefully-select find from three differ static analyz that 
indic potenti exploits. use these datasets, we develop a fast and scalabl vulner detect tool 
base on deep featur represent learn that directli interpret lex sourc code. We evalu our 
tool on code from both real softwar packag and the nist sate IV benchmark dataset. our result 
demonstr that deep featur represent learn on sourc code be a promis approach for autom 
softwar vulner detection. 

© 2018 tech xplore 

use machin learn to detect softwar vulner https://techxplore.com/news/2018-07-machine-software-vulnerabilities.html 

2 sur 2 03-08-18 à 19:40 


