






































use data scienc to tell which of these peopl be lie : newscent 


use data scienc to tell which of these peopl be lie : newscent 

bob marcott 

may 22, 2018 

research in comput scientist ehsan hoque' lab have creat a game that have allow them to analyz more than 1 million frame 
of facial expressions, the larg video dataset so far for understand how to tell if someon be lying. (univers of rochest photo 
/ J. adam fenster) 

someon be fidget in a long line at an airport secur gate. Is that person simpli nervou about the wait? 

Or be thi a passeng who have someth sinist to hide? 

even highli train transport secur administr (tsa) airport secur offic still have a hard time tell whether 
someon be lie or tell the truth – despit the billion of dollar and year of studi that have be devot to the subject. 

now, univers of rochest research be use data scienc and an onlin crowdsourc framework call addr (autom 
dyadic data recorder) to further our understand of decept base on facial and verbal cues. 

they also hope to minim instanc of racial and ethnic profil that tsa critic contend occur when passeng be pull asid 
under the agency’ screen of passeng by observ techniqu (spot) program. 

“basically, our system be like skype on steroids,” say tay sen, a phd student in the lab of ehsan hoque, an assist professor of 
comput science. sen collabor close with karmul hasan, anoth phd student in the group, on two paper in ieee autom 
face and gestur recognit and the proceed of the acm on interactive, mobile, wearabl and ubiquitu technologies. the 
paper describ the framework the lab have use to creat the larg publicli avail decept dataset so far – and whi some smile 
be more deceit than others. 

game reveal the truth behind a smile 

here’ how addr works: two peopl sign up on amazon mechan turk, the crowdsourc internet marketplac that match 
peopl to task that comput be current unabl to do. A video assign one person to be the describ and the other to be the 
interrogator. 

the describ be then show an imag and be instruct to memor a mani of the detail a possible. the comput instruct the 
describ to either lie or tell the truth about what they’v just seen. the interrogator, who have not be privi to the instruct to the 
describer, then ask the describ a set of baselin question not relev to the image. thi be do to captur individu behavior 
differ which could be use to develop a “person model.” the routin question includ “what do you wear yesterday?” — 
to provok a mental state relev to retriev a memori — and “what be 14 time 4?” — to provok a mental state relev to 
analyt memory. 

play the game: can you tell which person be lying? 

“A lot of time peopl tend to look a certain way or show some kind of facial express when they’r rememb things,” sen said. 
“and when they be give a comput question, they have anoth kind of facial expression.” 

they be also question that the wit would have no incent to lie about and that provid a baselin of that individual’ “normal” 
respons when answer honestly. 

and, of course, there be question about the imag itself, to which the wit give either a truth or dishonest response. 

use data scienc to tell which of these peopl be lie : newscent http://www.rochester.edu/newscenter/data-science-facial-expressions-who... 

1 sur 2 01-06-18 à 08:32 



the entir exchang be record on a separ video for late analysis. 

1 million face 

An advantag of thi crowdsourc approach be that it allow research to tap into a far larg pool of research particip – and 
gather data far more quickli – than would occur if particip have to be brought into a lab, hoqu says. not have a standard 
and consist dataset with reliabl ground truth have be the major setback for decept research, he says. with the addr 
framework,th research gather 1.3 million frame of facial express from 151 pair of individu play the game, in a few 
week of effort. more data collect be underway in the lab. 

data scienc be enabl the research to quickli analyz all that data in novel ways. for example, they use autom facial featur 
analysi softwar to identifi which action unit be be use in a give frame, and to assign a numer weight to each. 

the research then use an unsupervis cluster techniqu — a machin learn method that can automat find pattern 
without be assign ani predetermin label or categories. 

“it told u there be basic five kind of smile-rel ‘faces’ that peopl make when respond to questions,” sen said. the one 
most frequent associ with lie be a high intens version of the so-cal duchenn smile involv both cheek/ey and 
mouth muscles. thi be consist with the “dupe delight” theori that “when you’r fool someone, you tend to take delight in it,” 
sen explained. 

more puzzl be the discoveri that honest wit would often contract their eyes, but not smile at all with their mouths. “when 
we go back and replay the videos, we found that thi often happen when peopl be tri to rememb what be in an 
image,” sen said. “thi show they be concentr and tri to recal honestly.” 

the duchenn smile – a smile that extend to the muscl of the eye – be most frequent associ with lying. 
(univers of rochest photo / J. adam fenster) 

wit answer honestli will often contract their eyes, tri to truth recal information. 
(univers of rochest photo / J. adam fenster) 

next step 

So will these find tip off liar to simpli chang their facial expressions? 

not likely. the tell-tal strong duchenn smile associ with lie involv “a cheek muscl you cannot control,” hoqu says. “it be 
involuntary.” 

the research say they’v onli scratch the surfac of potenti find from the data they’r collected. 

hoque, for example, be intrigu by the fact the interrog unknowingli leak uniqu inform when they be be lie to. for 
example, interrog demonstr more polit smile when they be be lie to. In addition, an interrog be more like to return 
a smile by a lie wit than a truth-teller. while more research need to be done, it be clear that look at the interrogators’ data 
reveal use inform and could have implic for how tsa offic be trained. 

“there be also possibl of use languag to further deciph the ambigu within microexpressions.” hasan says. hasan be 
current explor thi space. 

“in the end, we still want human to make the final decision,” hoqu says. “but a they be interrogating, it be import to provid 
them with some object metric that they could use to further inform their decisions.” 

kurti haut, zachari teicher, minh tran, matthew levin, and yime yang – all student in the hoqu lab – also contribut to the 
research. 

tags: data science, depart of comput science, ehsan hoque, featured-post-side, research find 

category: featur 

use data scienc to tell which of these peopl be lie : newscent http://www.rochester.edu/newscenter/data-science-facial-expressions-who... 

2 sur 2 01-06-18 à 08:32 


