






































We could build an artifici brain right now - ieee spectrum 


large-scal brainlik system be possibl with exist technology—if we’r 
will to spend the money 

advertis 

(/static/special- 

report-can-we- 

copy-the-brain) 

be have a moment. 

artifici neural network algorithm like deep 

learning, which be veri loos base on the way the 

human brain operates, now allow digit comput to 

perform such extraordinari feat a translat 

language, hunt for subtl pattern in huge amount 

of data, and beat the best human player at go. 

brain-inspir comput 

but even a engin continu to push thi mighti 

comput strategy, the energi effici of digit 

comput be fast approach it limits. our data 

center and supercomput alreadi draw 

megawatts—som 2 percent of the electr 

consum in the unit state go to data center 

alone. the human brain, by contrast, run quit well on about 20 watts, which repres the power 

produc by just a fraction of the food a person eat each day. If we want to keep improv computing, 

we will need our comput to becom more like our brains. 

henc the recent focu on neuromorph technology, which promis to move comput beyond simpl 

neural network and toward circuit that oper more like the brain’ neuron and synapsi do. the 

develop of such physic brainlik circuitri be actual pretti far along. work at my lab and other 

around the world over the past 35 year have lead to artifici neural compon like synapsi and 

dendrit that respond to and produc electr signal much like the real thing. 

so, what would it take to integr these build block into a brain-scal computer? In 2013, Bo marr, a 

former graduat student of mine at georgia tech, and I 

and 

conclud that it should be possibl to build a silicon version of the human cerebr cortex with the 

transistor technolog then in production. what’ more, the result machin would take up less than a 

cubic meter of space and consum less than 100 watts, not too far from the human brain. 

look at the best engin and neurosci 

knowledg of the time (http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnins.2013.00118/full) 

that be not to say creat such a comput would be easy. the system we envis would still requir a 

few billion dollar to design and build, includ some signific packag innov to make it 

compact. there be also the question of how we would program and train the computer. neuromorph 

research be still struggl to understand how to make thousand of artifici neuron work togeth 

and how to translat brainlik activ into use engin applications. 

still, the fact that we can envis such a system mean that we may not be far off from smaller-scal 

chip that could be use in portabl and wearabl electronics. these gadget demand low power 

We could build an artifici brain right now - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/we-could-build-an-artificial-brain-right-now 

1 sur 7 07/08/2017 19:41 



photo: dan saeling 

consumption, and so a highli energy-effici neuromorph chip—even if it take on onli a subset of 

comput tasks, such a signal processing—could be revolutionary. exist capabilities, like speech 

recognition, could be extend to handl noisi environments. We could even imagin futur 

smartphon conduct real-tim languag translat between you and the person you’r talk to. 

think of it thi way: In the 40 year sinc the first signal-process integr circuits, moore’ law have 

improv energi effici by roughli a factor of 1,000. the most brainlik neuromorph chip could 

dwarf such improvements, potenti drive down power consumpt by anoth factor of 100 million. 

that would bring comput that would otherwis need a data center to the palm of your hand. 

will be one in which we build analogu for all the essenti 

function compon of the brain: the synapses, which connect neuron and allow them to receiv and 

respond to signals; the dendrites, which combin and perform local comput on those incom 

signals; and the core, or soma, region of each neuron, which integr input from the dendrit and 

transmit it output on the axon. 

the ultim brainlik machin 

simpl version of all these basic compon have alreadi be implement in silicon. the start 

point for such work be the same metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor, or mosfet, that be 

use by the billion to build the logic circuitri in modern digit processors. 

these devic have a lot in common with neurons. neuron oper use voltage-control barriers, 

and their electr and chemic activ depend primarili on channel in which ion move between the 

We could build an artifici brain right now - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/we-could-build-an-artificial-brain-right-now 

2 sur 7 07/08/2017 19:41 



interior and exterior of the cell—a smooth, analog process that involv a steadi buildup or declin 

instead of a simpl on-off operation. 

mosfet be also voltag control and oper by the movement of individu unit of charge. and 

when mosfet be oper in the “subthreshold” mode, below the voltag threshold use to digit 

switch between on and off, the amount of current flow through the devic be veri small—less than a 

thousandth of what be see in the typic switch of digit logic gates. 

the notion that subthreshold transistor physic could be use to build brainlik circuitri origin with 

carver mead of caltech, who help revolution the field of very-large-scal circuit design in the 1970s. 

mead point out that chip design fail to take advantag of a lot of interest behavior—and thu 

information—when they use transistor onli for digit logic. the process, he 

[pdf], 

essenti involv “take all the beauti physic that be built into...transistors, mash it down to a 1 

or 0, and then pain build it back up with and and OR gate to reinvent the multiply.” A more 

“physical” or “physics-based” comput could execut more comput per unit energi than it digit 

counterpart. mead predict such a comput would take up significantli less space a well. 

write in 1990 

(https://web.stanford.edu/group/brainsinsilicon/documents/meadneuromorphelectro.pdf) 

In the interven years, neuromorph engin have make all the basic build block of the brain out 

of silicon with a great deal of biolog fidelity. the neuron’ dendrite, axon, and soma compon can 

all be fabric from standard transistor and other circuit elements. In 2005, for example, ethan 

farquhar, then a ph.d. candidate, and I 

use a set of six mosfet and a hand of capacitors. our model gener electr 

puls that veri close match those in the soma part of a squid neuron, a long-stand experiment 

subject. what’ more, our circuit accomplish thi feat with similar current level and energi 

consumpt to those in the squid’ brain. If we have instead use analog circuit to model the equat 

neuroscientist have develop to describ that behavior, we’d need on the order of 10 time a mani 

transistors. perform those calcul with a digit comput would requir even more space. 

creat a neuron circuit (http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/docu 

/1406175/) 

illustration: jame provost 

We could build an artifici brain right now - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/we-could-build-an-artificial-brain-right-now 

3 sur 7 07/08/2017 19:41 



the floating-g transistor [top left], which can store differ amount of charge, can be use to build a 

“crossbar” array of artifici synapsi [bottom left]. electron version of other neuron components, such a the soma region [right], 

can be make from standard transistor and other circuit components. 

synaps and soma: 

be a littl trickier. A devic that behav like a synaps must have the abil to 

rememb what state it be in, respond in a particular way to an incom signal, and adapt it respons 

over time. 

emul synapsi 

there be a number of potenti approach to build synapses. the most matur one by far be the 

(stls), a 

devic that my colleagu and I at caltech work on in the 1990 while I be a graduat student 

studi under mead. 

single-transistor learn synaps (http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2998687.2998789) 

We first present the stl in 1994, and it becom an import tool for engin who be build 

modern analog circuitry, such a physic neural networks. In neural networks, each node in the network 

have a weight associ with it, and those weight determin how data from differ node be 

combined. the stl be the first devic that could hold a varieti of differ weight and be 

reprogram on the fly. the devic be also nonvolatile, which mean that it rememb it state even 

when not in use—a capabl that significantli reduc how much energi it needs. 

the stl be a type of floating-g transistor, a devic that be use to build memori cell in flash memory. 

In an ordinari mosfet, a gate control the flow of electr through a current-carri channel. A 

floating-g transistor have a second gate that sit between thi electr gate and the channel. thi 

float gate be not directli connect to ground or ani other component. thank to that electr 

isolation, which be enhanc by high-qual silicon-insul interfaces, charg remain in the float 

gate for a long time. the float gate can take on mani differ amount of charg and so have mani 

differ level of electr response, an essenti requisit for creat an artifici synaps capabl of 

vari it respons to stimuli. 

My colleagu and I use the stl to demonstr the first crossbar network, a comput model 

current popular with nanodevic researchers. In thi two-dimension array, devic sit at the 

intersect of input line run north-south and output line run east-west. thi configur be 

use becaus it let you program the connect strength of each “synapse” individually, without 

disturb the other element in the array. 

thank in part to a recent defens advanc research project agenc program call 

, the 

neuromorph engin field have see a surg of research into artifici synapsi built from 

nanodevic such a memristors, resist ram, and phase-chang memori (a well a floating-g 

devices). but it will be hard for these new artifici synapsi to improv on our two-decade-old floating- 

gate arrays. memristor and other novel memori come with program challenges; some have 

devic architectur that make it difficult to target a singl specif devic in a crossbar array. other need 

a dedic transistor in order to be programmed, add significantli to their footprint. becaus 

floating-g memori be programm over a wide rang of values, it can be more easili fine-tun to 

compens for manufactur variat from devic to devic than can mani nanodevices. A number of 

neuromorph research group that tri integr nanodevic into their design have recent come 

around to use floating-g devices. 

synaps 

(http://www.darpa.mil/program/systems-of-neuromorphic-adaptive-plastic-scalable-electronics) 

all these brainlik compon together? In the human brain, of course, neuronsso how will we put 

We could build an artifici brain right now - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/we-could-build-an-artificial-brain-right-now 

4 sur 7 07/08/2017 19:41 



and synapsi be intermingled. neuromorph chip design must take a more integr approach a 

well, with all neural compon on the same chip, tightli mix together. thi be not the case in mani 

neuromorph lab today: To make research project more manageable, differ build block may be 

place in differ areas. synapses, for example, may be releg to an off-chip array. connect may 

be rout through anoth chip call a field-programm gate array, or fpga. 

but a we scale up neuromorph systems, we’ll need to take care that we don’t replic the arrang 

in today’ computers, which lose a signific amount of energi drive bit back and forth between logic, 

memory, and storage. today, a comput can easili consum 10 time the energi to move the data 

need for a multiple-accumul operation—a common signal-process computation—a it do to 

perform the calculation. 

the brain, by contrast, minim the energi cost of commun by keep oper highli local. 

the memori element of the brain, such a synapt strengths, be mix in with the neural compon 

that integr signals. and the brain’ “wires”—th dendrit and axon that extend from neuron to 

transmit, respectively, incom signal and outgo pulses—ar gener fairli short rel to the size 

of the brain, so they don’t requir larg amount of energi to sustain a signal. from anatom data, we 

know that more than 90 percent of neuron connect with onli their near 1,000 or so neighbors. 

anoth big question for the builder of brainlik chip and comput be the algorithm we will run on 

them. even a loos brain-inspir system can have a big advantag over digit systems. In 2004, for 

example, my group use floating-g devic to perform multipl for signal process with just 

1/1,000 the energi and 1/100 the area of a compar digit system. In the year since, other 

research and my group have success demonstr neuromorph approach to mani other 

kind of signal-process calculations. 

but the brain be still 100,000 time a effici a the system in these demonstrations. that’ becaus 

while our current neuromorph technolog take advantag of the neuronlik physic of transistors, it 

doesn’t consid the algorithm the brain us to perform it operations. 

today, we be just begin to discov these physic algorithms—that is, the process that will allow 

brainlik chip to oper with more brainlik efficiency. four year ago, my research group use silicon 

somas, synapses, and dendrit to perform a word-spot algorithm that identifi word in a speech 

waveform. thi physic algorithm exhibit a thousandfold improv in energi effici over 

predict analog signal processing. eventually, by lower the amount of voltag suppli to the chip 

and use small transistors, research should be abl to build chip that parallel the brain in 

effici for a rang of computations. 

when I start in neuromorph research 30 year ago, everyon believ tremend opportun 

would aris from design system that be more like the brain. and indeed, entir industri be now 

be built around brain-inspir AI and deep learning, with applic that promis to transform 

—among other things—our mobil devices, our financi institutions, and how we interact in public 

spaces. 

and yet, these applic reli onli slightli on what we know about how the brain actual works. the 

next 30 year will undoubtedli see the incorpor of more such knowledge. We alreadi have much of 

the basic hardwar we need to accomplish thi neuroscience-to-comput translation. but we must 

develop a good understand of how that hardwar should behave—and what comput scheme 

will yield the great real-world benefits. 

We could build an artifici brain right now - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/we-could-build-an-artificial-brain-right-now 

5 sur 7 07/08/2017 19:41 



consid thi a call to action. We have come pretti far with a veri loos model of how the brain works. 

but neurosci could lead to far more sophist brainlik computers. and what great feat could 

there be than use our own brain to learn how to build new ones? 

thi articl appear in the june 2017 print issu a “A road map for the artifici brain.” 

be a professor of electr and comput engin at 

the georgia institut of technology. 

jennif hasler (http://hasler.ece.gatech.edu/) 

advertis 

special report: can WE copi the brain? 
(/static/special-report-can-we-copy-the-brain) 

previou 
the human 
brain project 
reboots: A 
search engin 
for the brain Is 
in sight 

(/computing/hardware/the-human-brain- 

project-reboots-a-search-engine-for-the- 

brain-is-in-sight) 

next 
neuromorph 

chip are 
destin for 

deep 
learning—or 

obscur 
(/semiconductors/design/neuromorphic- 

chips-are-destined-for-deep-learningor- 

obscurity) 

We could build an artifici brain right now - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/we-could-build-an-artificial-brain-right-now 

6 sur 7 07/08/2017 19:41 



(/aerospace/satellit 

/is-there-a-giant- 

planet-lurking- 

beyond-pluto) 

(/transportation/self- 

driving/the-big- 

problem-with- 

selfdriving-cars-is- 

people) 

(/the-human- 

os/biomed 

/devices/biological- 

computer- 

commands-living- 

cells-to-light-up) 

(/nanoclast 

/semiconductor 

/devic 

/nanoneurons- 

enable- 

neuromorphic-chips- 

for-voice-recognition) 

(/energy/the- 

smarter-grid/the- 

transformers- 

superheroes-of- 

electrical-inventions) 

(/biomedical/devic 

/smart-contact- 

lenses-and-eye- 

implants-will-give- 

doctors-medical- 

insights) 

We could build an artifici brain right now - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/we-could-build-an-artificial-brain-right-now 

7 sur 7 07/08/2017 19:41 


