






































will use artifici intellig To make loan trade one kind Of bia for another? : all tech consid : npr 


download 

transcript 

digit lender be pull in all kind of data, like purchases, sat score and public records. 

will use artifici intellig To make loan trade one kind Of bi... https://www.npr.org/sections/alltechconsidered/2017/03/31/521946210/wi... 

1 sur 10 16-06-18 à 15:47 



tcmake_photo/istockphoto 

the term of the next loan you get might depend less on your credit score and 

more on what a comput program think of your habits. 

digit lend be expect to doubl in size over the next three years, reach 

nearli 10 percent of all loan in the u.s. and europe. there be now some 

2,000 digit startups, mani of which be use artifici intellig to analyz 

the trove of data creat everi day. 

but govern regul be struggl to keep up with the pace of change. 

marc stein, who run underwrite.ai, write algorithm capabl of teach 

themselves. thi be call machin learning, a type of artifici intelligence. 

"shop at amazon, and they use a form of machin learning. that' how 

amazon' recommend system works," he says. 

the program learn from each correl it finds, whether it' determin 

someone' favorit book or if they be lie about their incom on a loan 

application. and use that information, it can predict whether the applic be 

a good risk. 

"if we look at the delta between what peopl say they make and what we 

could verify, that be highli predictive," stein says. 

digit lender be pull in all kind of data, includ purchases, sat score 

and public record like fish licenses. 

As part of the loan applic process, some lender have prospect 

borrow download an app that upload an extraordinari amount of 

will use artifici intellig To make loan trade one kind Of bi... https://www.npr.org/sections/alltechconsidered/2017/03/31/521946210/wi... 

2 sur 10 16-06-18 à 15:47 



inform like daili locat patterns, the punctuat of text messag or 

how mani of their contact have last names. In the credit industry, thi be call 

altern data, and it' mostli use to make decis on short-term, high- 

interest loans. but that' like to chang soon. 

"in 10 years, there will hardli be a credit decis make that do not have 

some flavor of machin learn behind it," say dave girouard, the ceo of 

upstart, an onlin lender. 

arm with self-teach algorithm and new data, upstart be tri to sell it 

technolog to tradit banks. 

"fico and income, which be sort of the sweet spot of what everi consum 

lender in the unit state uses, actual themselv be quit bia against 

people," girouard says. 

govern research have found that fico score hurt young borrow and 

those from foreign counti becaus peopl with low incom be target for 

higher-interest loans. girouard argu that new, smarter data can make 

lend more fair. 

"the variabl we'r introduc to thi model actual be reduc the bia 

inher in most lend systems," he says. "and that' just one way we'r 

actual expand access to credit." 

If artifici intellig can weed out good borrow from bad just by look 

at thing like web brows history, suddenli it doesn't matter if you live in a 

low-incom neighborhood or your famili just immigrated. but it do open the 

door to new, 21st centuri version of redlining. 

will use artifici intellig To make loan trade one kind Of bi... https://www.npr.org/sections/alltechconsidered/2017/03/31/521946210/wi... 

3 sur 10 16-06-18 à 15:47 



Jo ann barefoot, a consult and former regulator, offer thi example: 

"the question of whether the person pay for ga at the pump or go inside," 

she says. "the theori on that be becaus peopl who pay insid be more like 

to be smoker and smoke supposedli be more highli correl with lack of 

creditworthiness." 

but what if you'r just buy m&m or prefer use cash? An algorithm 

doesn't know that. left unchecked, comput could creat all sort of 

unintend bias. 

some compani have correl late-night internet use with bad loan 

repayment. but do that mean night owl should pay a high interest rate? 

there' no evid that thi kind of unfair be happening, but barefoot say 

regul be begin to pay attention. 

"and of cours one of the tough issu therefor be that these new kind of 

model have not yet be test through an econom downturn," she says. 

barefoot worri that in a recession, fail onlin loan could spread through 

the financi system. ultim though, she call digit lend "massiv 

good." regul appear to agre and be just now ask questions. 

charl lane be a report with npr member station wshu. you can follow 

him @_charleslane. 

what Is drive the 'unbank Of america'? 

will use artifici intellig To make loan trade one kind Of bi... https://www.npr.org/sections/alltechconsidered/2017/03/31/521946210/wi... 

4 sur 10 16-06-18 à 15:47 


