






































worldâ•ž largest comput associ affirm oblig of comput profession to use skill for benefit of societi 


world’ largest comput associ affirm 
oblig of comput profession to use skill for 
benefit of societi 

updat acm code of ethic add new principl on adopt 
standard of care a comput system becom integr 
into society’ infrastructur 

new york, juli 17, 2018 – after a two-year process that includ extens input from comput 
profession around the world, acm, the associ for comput machinery, have updat it code of 
ethic and profession conduct. the revis code of ethic address the signific advanc in comput 
technolog and the grow pervas of comput in all aspect of societi sinc it be last updat in 
1992. acm’ code of ethic be consid the standard for the comput profession, and have be adopt 
by comput professionals, organ and technolog compani around the world. acm expect all of 
it nearli 100,000 member from 190 countri to abid by the acm code of ethic and to make a 
commit to engag in ethic profession conduct. 

the acm code of ethic be a collect of principl and guidelin design to help comput profession 
make ethic respons decis in profession practice. It translat broad ethic principl into 
concret statement about profession conduct. thi updat of the acm code of ethic express the 
experiences, values, and aspir of comput profession around the world, and it captur the 
conscienc of the profession. It affirm an oblig of comput professionals, both individu and 
collectively, to use their skill for the benefit of society. 

reflect the preval of comput technolog in our life today, acm’ updat code of ethic add 
new respons for comput profession in leadership role to “recogn and take special care of 
system that becom integr into the infrastructur of society” (principl 3.7). comput system and 
societi evolv in unexpect ways. the origin intent of the system may becom obscur a user adopt the 
system. the updat code of ethic call on comput profession to pay close attent to these chang 
in order to both recogn new ethic respons and to ensur that appropri care be take to protect 
those impact by their systems. 

“the best profession organ make ethic conduct the foundat of their servic to the community, 
and the most tangibl express of that commit be a code of ethics,” say acm presid cherri M. 
pancake. “so much have chang sinc acm releas it last code of ethic in 1992. becaus comput be 
now inextric link into almost everi aspect of society, the action of comput profession have more 
impact than ever before. It be imper that everyon in our field act responsibly.” 

“the code repres the aspir and the conscienc of the profession,” explain donald gotterbarn, 
co-chair of acm’ committe on profession ethic (cope) and professor emeritu at east tennesse state 
university. “the code have not be design a an algorithm for solv ethic problems; rather it serf a 
a basi for ethic decis making. we’v outlin overarch principles, explanations, and guidelin to 
steer decis make base on the understand that the public good be alway the primari consideration.” 

the impetu for updat the acm code of ethic stem from the emerg of new technolog and the 
impact of comput on so mani aspect of daili life. for example, in 1992 when acm previous updat it 
code of ethics, onlin shopping, mobil phone and social medium platform do not exist, and the world wide 
web be in it infancy. today, we reli on these and other system everi day, and the ubiquit natur of 
comput place new respons on the profession who build and maintain these system and 
technologies. 

cope lead the project to updat the acm code of ethic via a transparent, two-year process, seek input 
and direct from comput profession around the world. draft of the propos chang be 
publish in commun of the acm and post on acm’ ethics.acm.org website, and throughout the 
process, acm member and comput profession more broadli be invit to comment, debate, and 
suggest edit to the document. 

found in 1947, acm adopt it first code of conduct in 1972 (which be preced by “guidelin for 
profession conduct in inform processing” in 1966). twenti year later, after the develop of the 
PC and other import innovations, acm significantli revis the earli document a a code of ethic and 
profession conduct. the acm code of ethic have have broad application, and over the year it have be use 
to instruct student enter the profession, a a decis support tool for comput practitioners, a a 
standard for the public to judg the profession of practitioners, a a basi for the code of ethic of other 
intern societies, and a an aid to address legal and ethic issues. 

concurr with the releas of the updat code of ethics, acm be launch the integr project—a seri of 

world’ largest comput associ affirm oblig of computi... https://www.acm.org/media-center/2018/july/acm-updates-code-of-eth 

1 sur 2 18-07-18 à 18:44 



resourc design to aid ethic decis making. the integr project includ case studi demonstr 
how the principl can be appli to specif ethic challenges, and an ask an ethicist advic column to help 
comput profession navig the sometim challeng choic that can aris in the cours of their 
work. 

about acm 

acm, the associ for comput machinery, be the world' larg educ and scientif comput 
society, unit educators, research and profession to inspir dialogue, share resourc and address the 
field' challenges. acm strengthen the comput profession' collect voic through strong leadership, 
promot of the high standards, and recognit of technic excellence. acm support the profession 
growth of it member by provid opportun for life-long learning, career development, and 
profession networking. 

world’ largest comput associ affirm oblig of computi... https://www.acm.org/media-center/2018/july/acm-updates-code-of-eth 

2 sur 2 18-07-18 à 18:44 


