






































world archiv data store in dna of plant could see archiv in seed 


world archiv data store in dna of 
plant could see archiv in seed 

A live librari you can water: plan to 
store data in the dna of plant could see 
all of the world' archiv secur in a 
box of seed 

dna' four-lett code be be use to captur the '1' 
and '0' of binari 
research have incorpor a messag into the dna 
of a tobacco plant 
the approach could lead to new secur long-term data 
storag solut 
A box of seed could store all the world' archiv for 
thousand of year 

By ryan o'har for mailonlin 

published: 17:51 bst, 19 januari 2016 | updated: 17:58 bst, 19 
januari 2016 

imagin store your entir music collect in a hous plant or the 
entir work of shakespear in an area of shrubbery. 

scientist be develop a new techniqu for use seed and plant a 
data repositori by encod inform into their dna. 

they have alreadi incorpor a simpl messag into the dna of a 
plant, but they now hope to expand the idea to store larg amount of 
information. 

scroll down for video 

copi link to past in your messag 

the idea of plant a biolog hard drive might sound far-fetched, but 
scientist be eye seed and plant a potenti data repositori of 
the future, by store data in their dna. stock imag illustr binari 
data store in a dna doubl helix 

In the age of information, we be face a storag crisi a we produc 

world archiv data store in dna of plant could see archiv in seed http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-3406604/a-living-librar... 

1 sur 62 18-05-18 à 19:23 



and record vast amount of data each day. 

all of thi digit data be store in servers, such a google' huge server 
farm in finland and iowa. 

but the data degrad over time, the more it be accessed, mean it have 
to be copi to a new disc periodically, mean more space and 
resources. 

karin ljubic fister, a research at univers medic centr maribor, 
slovenia, believ the solut to thi may be to store inform a 
binari code in the dna of plants. 

copi link to past in your messag 

accord to the researchers, the studi be the first demonstr of 
store data in the dna of a multicellular organ 

she envis a green futur for data storage, in which entir librari 
worth of inform could be store in a singl tree. It be a veri liter 
take on the concept of the 'tree of knowledge'. 

As part of a proof of concept study, research in slovenia transform 
binari data cod for a simpl messag into the dna of a plant. 

store data IN dna 

copi link to past in your messag 

dna be be explor a a storag medium 

research in slovenia conduct a proof of concept study, to store 
data in the dna of a plant. 

they transfer the '1' and '0' of binari into the four base of dna: 
A, G, T and C. 

A be 00; C be 10; G be 01; and T be 11. 

the stretch of synthet dna be assembl letter by letter, and then 
bacteria be use to transfer it to tobacco plants. 

through thi process, the synthet dna, contain the cod 
sequence, be incorpor into the plant' own dna. 

world archiv data store in dna of plant could see archiv in seed http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-3406604/a-living-librar... 

2 sur 62 18-05-18 à 19:23 



new plant be grown contain the modifi dna in everi cell of the 
plant. 

they propos that immens amount of inform can be store 
within the dna of plant and seeds. 

dna be extract from the new plant and sequenced. 

when translat back to binari it contain the origin message. 

karin ljubic fister, a research at univers medic centr maribor, 
slovenia, and one of the research work on the project, have a veri 
liter take on 'the tree of knowledge'. 

speak at the fall wall lab in berlin in 2015, the research 
present their find from their proof-of-concept study. 

she told the audience: 'one simpl tree could provid all of the 
educ data anywher in the world. and of course, all of the larg 
data centr in the world could be potenti replac by thi 
technology.' 

In a recent interview with new scientist, mr fister explain the 
group' green vision for futur data storage: 'imagin walk through a 
park that be actual a library, everi plant, flower and shrub full of 
archiv information. 

'you sit down on a bench, touch your handheld dna reader to a leaf and 
listen to the roll stone directli from it, or choos a novel or watch a 
documentari amid the greenery.' 

By switch the four-lett code of life into the '1' and '0' of binary, 
fister propos that immens amount of inform can be store 
within the dna of plant and seeds. 

explain the technic aspect of the approach, she said: 'A comput 
program be basic a sequenc of 0 and 1s, so we transform thi 
into the four dna 'letters' – A, G, C and T – by turn 00 into A, 10 
into C, 01 into G and 11 into t.' 

onc they have assembl the stretch of synthet dna, assembl it 
letter by letter, they use bacteria to transfer it to tobacco plants. 

through thi process, the synthet dna, contain the cod 
sequence, be incorpor into the plant' own dna. 

copi link to past in your messag 

world archiv data store in dna of plant could see archiv in seed http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-3406604/a-living-librar... 

3 sur 62 18-05-18 à 19:23 



modifi tobacco plant be grown contain the cod message, 
integr within their own dna, so everi cell in the plant contain 
the information. stock imag of tobacco plant 

mr fister and her husband iztok encod a 'hello world' comput 
programm into the dna of the tobacco plant seed use a piec of 
circular dna call a plasmid. 

modifi plant be grown contain the cod message, integr 
within their own dna, so everi cell in the plant contain the 
information. 

To access the information, dna be extract from a cut of the 
plant and sequenc use exist dna analysi methods. 

when the encod program be reconstruct from seedlings, the 
messag 'hello world' appear on the screen with 100 per cent 
accuracy, she say in a recent blog post on the work. 

copi link to past in your messag 

To access information, dna be extract from the plant and sequenc 
use exist dna analysi methods. when the sequenc of dna base 
be translat back into binary, it would show the origin data. stock 
imag of dna sequenc analysi 

accord to fister, the studi be the first demonstr of store 
data in the dna of a multicellular organism. 

however, one of the drawback be that the system be current 'read 
only', with chang to inform requir a whole new plant. 

but in future, advanc in gene edit technolog could make fine 
edit possible, by pinpoint and substitut individu letters. 

the potenti advantag be in the huge storag capabl of dna, 
after all, each cell in the human bodi contain the entir set of 
instruct for make a human packag into bundl of dna. 

'one singl box of seed could store practic all the archiv that be 
current in the world,' she told the audienc in berlin. 

speak at the fall wall lab in berlin in 2015, karin ljubic fister, 
a research at univers medic centr maribor, present find 
from a concept study. her group transform binari data cod for a 
simpl messag into the dna of a plant 

If these biolog hard drive be store in a secur location, such a 

world archiv data store in dna of plant could see archiv in seed http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-3406604/a-living-librar... 

4 sur 62 18-05-18 à 19:23 



the 'doomsday' seed vault in the norwegian arctic, they could last for 
thousand of years. 

the benefit be clear, a dna be incred durabl and can store 
immens amount of inform compar to hardware. 

some comparison estim that one gram of dna could store the 
equival of 14,000 blu-ray discs. 

however, dna be not immun to degradation. If the dna librari be 
store near a sourc of ioniz radiation, such a x-ray and far UV 
light, it could be degrad over time. 

In addition, the biolog tool use by life to read and repair dna can 
read the code incorrectly, or introduc error when repair or copi 
it. 

If histor record be store in plant dna, error could creep into 
the code over time a the plant cell repair their dna. 

ultimately, thi could mean plant end up unconsci rewrit 
human history. 

develop dna data storag 

copi link to past in your messag 

scientist have demonstr the potenti for dna to be use a a 
storag medium for inform 

In 2013, british scientist demonstr the potenti for dna to be 
use a a storag medium for information. 

they be abl to store all 154 of shakespeare' sonnet on to strand of 
synthet dna. 

scientist be then abl to decod the inform and reproduc the 
word of the bard with complet accuracy. 

the same techniqu make it possibl to store a 26 second excerpt from 
martin luther king' 'I have A dream' speech and a photo of the 
cambridgeshir laboratori where the work take place. 

research be also abl to turn a copi of watson and crick' paper 
describ the natur of dna into genet code. 

thi area of research be pave the way to store huge amount of data 
use the same code use by all live things. 

world archiv data store in dna of plant could see archiv in seed http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-3406604/a-living-librar... 

5 sur 62 18-05-18 à 19:23 


