







































12 Ways Eye Movements Give Away Your Secrets


12 Ways Eye Movements Give Away Your
Secrets

Source: Leonardo da Vinci/Public Domain

Staring into the eyes of Mona Lisa is unnerving. Regardless of your vantage point,
Mona Lisa appears to shift her gaze to make eye contact and stare you down. What
nonverbal cues do the movements of her eyes communicate to you? The illusory
movement of Mona Lisa's eyes has struck an emotional chord in onlookers
since Leonardo da Vinci painted this portrait in the early 16th century. 

For eternity, homo sapiens have relied on eye movements to convey and interpret
important nonverbal cues at a conscious and unconscious level. Understanding
eye movements has been key to our evolution and survival for eons. The
eyes of Mona Lisa tap into this innate aspect of our human nature. 

Human beings are the only primates with a large, bright, and highly visible white
part of the eye—which is called the sclera. Why did humans evolve to have more
visible eye whites and to rely on eye movements as a form of nonverbal
communication? The latest scientific research shows that eye movements are key
to our well-being, bonding, and survival. The highly visible sclera makes it possible
for us to easily track saccades and eye movements in others.

What are Saccades?

Source: Pixabay/Free Image

Saccades (link is external) are the eye movements made to receive visual
information and shift the line of vision from one position to another. We rely on

12 Ways Eye Movements Give Away Your Secrets https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-athletes-way/201505/12-...

1 sur 6 05-06-18 à 16:12

lphilippe
Zone de texte 
Plus une liste à la Prévert que quelque chose de sérieux!!!



the accuracy of saccades every millisecond of our lives. During normal day-to-day
conditions, you make about 3-5 saccades per second. This amounts to about a half-
million saccades a day.

Humans intuitively create a narrative based on the nonverbal cues from the
saccadic rhythms, the speed of eye movements, as well as, the amount and angle of
sclera that is exposed at any given moment.

We all know from life experience that the amount of eye white, the angle, and the
directional speed of eye movements plays a primal role in our interpretation of
human interactions. An averted gaze, as well as direct eye contact, can have a wide
range of meanings depending on the circumstance.

In previous Psychology Today blog posts, I've written about "The Neuroscience of
Making Eye Contact" and how "The Whites of Your Eyes Convey Subconscious
Truths." For this post, I've compiled a checklist of "12 Ways Eye Movements Give
Away Your Secrets" based on the latest scientific research.

12 Ways Your Eye Movements Reveal Personal Information

article continues after advertisement

Rapid eye movements indicate impulsive decision-making.1. 
Plodding eyes reflect a wandering mind.2. 
Slow eye movements indicate your level of fatigue.3. 
Tracking eye movements can shift your moral compass,4. 
Gaze cues can reveal your political temperament.5. 
Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep minimizes painful memories of PTSD.6. 
Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep increases positive emotions.7. 
Jerky eye movements can predict neurodegenerative diseases. 8. 
Alterations in eye movements are an early indicator of Alzheimer's.9. 
Involuntary eye movements can diagnose ADHD.10. 
Lack of eye contact is the earliest marker for autism in young infants.11. 
Abnormal eye movements can diagnose mental Illness.12. 

12 Ways Eye Movements Give Away Your Secrets https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-athletes-way/201505/12-...

2 sur 6 05-06-18 à 16:12



Source: DenisNata/Shutterstock

article continues after advertisement

12 Ways Your Eye Movements Reveal Personal Information

1. Rapid eye movements indicate impulsive decision-making.

In a 2014 study (link is external), researchers at Johns Hopkins Medicine reported
that people who are less patient or impulsive tend to move their eyes with greater
speed. When the speed of the volunteers' saccades was compared to their
impulsivity during a test of patience, there was a strong correlation.

The researchers concluded that people who make rapid eye movements tend to be
more impatient. This correlation may be caused by a fundamental link between
how the nervous system evaluates time and reward in controlling movements and
during decision-making processes. 

12 Ways Eye Movements Give Away Your Secrets https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-athletes-way/201505/12-...

3 sur 6 05-06-18 à 16:12



2. Plodding eyes reflect a wandering mind.

A 2010 study (link is external) identified a wandering mind by tracking how the
eyes moved during "mindless reading." Mindless reading occurs when the eyes
continue moving across the page even though the mind is thinking about
something unrelated to the text and not absrorbing the information. 

The researchers at the University of Pittsburgh found that eye movements vary
depending if the reader is paying attention or if his or her mind is wandering.
During normal reading, the eyes tend to zip from one word to the next word. When
someone's mind is wandering, however, the eyes fixate longer on individual words
and plod along the page and the reader generally doesn't absorb the material.

3. Slow eye movements indicate your level of fatigue. 

article continues after advertisement

In 2014, an international team of scientists tracked the various speed of saccadic
movements to create a metric for gauging levels of fatigue. For this study (link is
external) the researchers enlisted medical residents who had to work 24-hour
medical shifts.

The more fatigued someone became, the more slowly their eyes moved as saccadic
speeds diminished. This research reveals that the velocity of your saccadic
movements is an excellent index to objectively measure levels of fatigue.

4. Tracking eye movements can shift your moral compass.

A March 2015 study (link is external) by an international team of researchers
reported that our moral decisions can be influenced by where our eyes are
focused when we make a decision. The researchers used a new experimental
method to track participants' eye movements. They concluded that the processes
needed to reach a moral decision are interlinked with our eye movements and how
we view the world.

5. Gaze cues can reveal your political temperament.

A 2011 study, "The Politics of Attention: Gaze-Cuing Effects are Moderated by
Political Temperament," from Univesity of Nebraska-Lincoln found that liberals
and conservatives had different eye movement repsonses to a visual cue. The
researchers measured both liberals' and conservatives' reaction to "gaze cues,"
which are an indication of a person's tendency to shift his or her attention.

In this study, liberals responded strongly to a visual prompt that shifted their eye
gaze, along with their attention in the direction suggested by a face on a computer
screen. On the other hand, conservatives had less eye movement in response to the
visual prompt and were less likely to shift their gaze or attention. 

6. Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep minimizes painful memories of
PTSD.

A 2011 study (link is external) from University of California, Berkeley found that
time spent in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep can help people with post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) minimize painful memories.The researchers, led
by Matthew Walker, found that during REM sleep, stress chemistry shuts down

12 Ways Eye Movements Give Away Your Secrets https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-athletes-way/201505/12-...

4 sur 6 05-06-18 à 16:12



and the brain processes emotional experiences in a way that can take the edge off
painful memories.

These findings offer a possible explanation as to why people with PTSD have a
hard time recovering from distressing experiences and suffer recurring nightmares
if they are unable to sleep through an REM cycle.

7. Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep increases positive emotions.

A 2009 study (link is external) reported that taking a nap that includes a period of
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep refreshes the brain's empathetic sensitivity for
evaluating human emotions by decreasing a negative bias and amplifying the
recognition of positive emotions. 

The researchers believe their results emphasize the importance of rapid eye
movement sleep as part of a process that increases positive emotions and
maintains optimal levels of social and professional mental health.

8. Jerky eye movements can predict neurodegenerative diseases. 

A 2012 study (link is external) by researchers at University of Southern California
(USC) reported that certain neurological disorders can be identified through the
study of eye movements. Their research provides new insights into how attention
and gaze control are affected by specific neurodegenerative disorders.

Participants in the study simply had to "watch and enjoy" television clips while
their eye movements were tracked and recorded. The eye-tracking data allowed
researchers to decode each individual's neurological state based on his or her eye
movements. Using the eye movement data, they were able to identify older adults
with Parkinson's Disease with 89.6 percent accuracy.

9. Alterations in eye movements are an early indicator of Alzheimer's.

In a 2014 study (link is external), an international team of researchers reported
that tracking the eye movements of individuals as they were reading could be used
to identify impairments in working memory and was an early indication of
Alzheimer’s disease.

The researchers found that patients with a probable diagnosis of Alzheimer's
disease showed less focused visual exploration, including slower eye movements
when they were reading. They also showed longer fixations when processing new
information and had to read sentences a second time in order to grasp the full
meaning and context of a written passage.

10. Involuntary eye movements can diagnose ADHD.

A 2014 study (link is external), published in the journal Vision, reported that
involuntary eye movements accurately reflected the presence of attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). The researchers acknowledge that ADHD is the
most commonly diagnosed—and often misdiagnosed—behavioral disorder in
American children.

They’re hopeful that their research on eye movements can provide an objective
tool for medical professionals to accurately diagnose ADHD. An incorrect ADHD
diagnoses can lead to the overprescription of drugs such as Ritalin, Adderall, and

12 Ways Eye Movements Give Away Your Secrets https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-athletes-way/201505/12-...

5 sur 6 05-06-18 à 16:12



Dexedrine. 

11. Lack of eye contact is the earliest marker for autism in young
infants.

A 2013 study (link is external), published in the journal Nature, found that eye
contact during early infancy may be the earliest indication of autism spectrum
disorder (ASD). Babies typically begin to focus on human faces within the first few
hours of life. Learning how to pick up social cues unconsciously by paying
attention to another person's eyes is key to social conneciton. Children with
autism, however, don't exhibit interest in making eye contact which makes it
difficult to read faces. 

Typically, autism isn't diagnosed until after the age of two when other delays in a
child's social behavior and language skills begin to reveal themselves. Tracking eye
movements offers earlier markers for autism. The sooner autism is diagnosed, the
higher the odds are that the treatment interventions will be effective. 

12. Abnormal eye movements can diagnose mental Illness.

Researchers at the University of Illinois at Chicago are studying (link is external)
how subtle abnormalities in eye movements can be used to diagnose mental illness
and psychiatric disease. They've discovered that irregularities in how the eyes
track a moving object reflect specific defects in the neural circuitry of the brain
that correspond with particular types of mental disorders. For example,
schizophrenic patients tend to have difficulty keeping their eyes focused on slow-
moving objects. 

Eye movement studies provide an inexpensive and non-invasive way to gain a
deeper understanding of different brain abnormalities at the root of
various psychiatric illnesses. Hopefully, in the near future, a better understanding
of eye movements and related brain abnormalities will allow researchers to
identify high-risk individuals earlier and enable specialists to create more targeted
interventions for people with psychiatric disorders and mental illness. 

For more information about research on eye movements and mental illness check
out this YouTube video from UBC.

© 2015 Christopher Bergland. All rights reserved.

Follow me on Twitter @ckbergland (link is external) for updates on The Athlete’s
Way blog posts.

The Athlete’s Way ® is a registered trademark of Christopher Bergland.

12 Ways Eye Movements Give Away Your Secrets https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-athletes-way/201505/12-...

6 sur 6 05-06-18 à 16:12




