











































68 IT Pro  July/August 2017 P u b l i s h e d  b y  t h e  I E E E  C o m p u t e r  S o c i e t y  1520-9202/17/$33.00 © 2017 IEEE

SECURING IT
EDITORS: Rick Kuhn, NIST, kuhn@nist.gov
Tim Weil, Scram Systems, tweil.ieee@gmail.com

Can Blockchain 
Strengthen 
the Internet of 
Things?
Nir Kshetri, University of North Carolina at Greensboro

B
lockchain—a kind of 
distributed ledger tech-
nology—has been de-
scribed in the popu-

lar press as the next big thing. 
Put simply, a blockchain is a data 
structure that makes it possi-
ble to create a tamper-proof dig-
ital ledger of transactions and 
share them. This technology uses 
public-key cryptography to sign 
transactions among parties. The 
transactions are then stored on a 
distributed ledger. The ledger con-
sists of cryptographically linked 
blocks of transactions, which form 
a blockchain (bit.ly/2sgabnq). It is 
impossible or extremely difficult 
to change or remove blocks of data 
that are recorded on the block-
chain ledger.

Regarding the question of whe-
ther blockchain can strengthen  
the Internet of Things (IoT), 
the answer—based on this re-
search—is “maybe.” Observers 
have noted that the blockchain–
IoT combination is powerful 
and is set to transform many in-
dustries.1 For instance, IoT de-
vices can carry out autonomous 

transactions through smart con-
tracts.2 Combined with artificial 
intelligence (AI) and big data sol-
utions, more significant impacts 
can be produced.

A natural question is thus 
what roles can blockchain play in 
strengthening IoT security? To 
demonstrate this problem’s sig-
nificance, consider the follow-
ing example. In October 2016, 
the US-based DNS provider Dyn 
faced cyberattacks. Dyn said the 
attacks originated from “tens of 
millions of IP addresses,”3 and at 
least some of the traffic came from 
IoT devices, including webcams, 
baby monitors, home routers, and 
digital video recorders.4 These IoT 
devices had been infected with 
malware called Mirai, which con-
trols online devices and uses them 
to launch distributed denial-of-
service (DDoS) attacks. The pro-
cess involves phishing emails to 
infect a computer or home net-
work. Then the malware spreads 
to other devices, such as DVRs, 
printers, routers, and Internet-con-
nected cameras employed by stores 
and businesses for surveillance.5

From a security standpoint, a 
main drawback of IoT applica-
tions and platforms is their re-
liance on a centralized cloud. A 
decentralized, blockchain-based 
approach would overcome many 
of the problems associated with 
the centralized cloud approach. 
Some point out that blockchain 
could provide military-grade sec-
urity for IoT devices.6 There is 
no single point of failure or vul-
nerability in blockchain, except 
with the clock needed for time 
stamping.

Considering these observations, 
this column provides insights into 
ways in which blockchain might 
strengthen IoT security.

Incorporating Blockchain 
into IoT Security
Blockchain’s incorporation into 
IoT is being supported through a 
wide variety of measures intended 
to strengthen security. Several 
companies are leading initiatives 
to integrate blockchain into their 
production and supply chains. For 
instance, IBM is using its large 
cloud infrastructure to provide 



 computer.org/ITPro  69

blockchain services for tracking 
high-value items as they move 
across supply chains.

The IBM Watson IoT Platform’s 
built-in capability also allows us-
ers to add selected IoT data to 
private blockchain ledgers that 
can be included in shared trans-
actions. The platform translates 
the data from connected devices 
into the format that blockchain 
contract APIs need. It is not nec-
essary for the blockchain con-
tract to know the specifics of the  
device data. The platform filters 
device events and sends only the 
data that is required to satisfy the 
contract (ibm.co/2rJWCPC). All 
business partners can access and 
supply IoT data in a decentral-
ized fashion and can verify each 
transaction.7 Data is not collect-
ed, stored, or managed centrally. 
Rather, it is protected and shared 
among only the parties involved in 
the transaction.

Startups such as Provenance 
use blockchain to promote trust 
in the supply chain by provid-
ing transparency and visibility 
when the product moves from the 
source to the customer.8 Others 
are creating new business models 
that eliminate the need for cen-
tralized cloud servers. For exam-
ple, Filament, a blockchain-based 
solutions provider for IoT, has 
launched wireless sensors, called 
Taps, that allow communication 
with computers, phones, or tablets 
within 10 miles (bit.ly/2rsxZYf).

Taps create low-power, autono-
mous mesh networks that enable 
companies to manage physical 
mining operations or water flows 
over agricultural fields. Taps don’t 
rely on cloud services. Device 
identification and intercommuni-
cation is secured by a blockchain 
that holds the unique identity of 
each participating node.9 One key 
application is likely to be in the 
next generation of the industrial 

network (the Industrial Internet). 
Filament’s blockchain-based ap-
plications involve sensors con-
nected in a decentralized system 
and use autonomous smart con-
tracts. This means that devices 
communicate securely with each 
other, exchange values, and ex-
ecute actions automatically. For 
instance, Filament’s Tap can be 
attached to drilling rigs in remote 
locations. Based on predefined 
conditions, a rig might know that 
it requires a piece of machinery 
and thus might send a request to 
an autonomous drone.10

Measures are also taken at in-
terorganizational levels. A group 

of technology and financial com-
panies have announced that they 
have formed a group to set a new 
standard for securing IoT appli-
cations using blockchain. Com-
panies joining the group include 
Cisco, Bosch, Bank of New York 
Mellon, Foxconn Technology, Ge-
malto, and blockchain startups 
Consensus Systems, BitSE, and 
Chronicled.11 This group hopes 
to establish a blockchain protocol 
to build IoT devices, applications, 
and networks.12

Identity and Access 
Management Systems
Blockchain-based identity and ac-
cess management systems can be 
leveraged to strengthen IoT secu-
rity. Such systems have already 
been used to securely store in-
formation about goods’ prove-
nance, identity, credentials, and 
digital rights. As long as the orig-
inal information entered is accu-
rate, blockchain’s immutability 

can be achieved.13 In this regard, a 
key challenge that arises in some 
applications is that it is difficult 
to ensure that the properties of 
physical assets, individuals (cre-
dentials), resource use (energy 
and bandwidth through IoT de-
vices), and other relevant events 
are stored securely and reliably. 
This aspect can be handled rela-
tively easily for most IoT devices. 
For instance, a private blockchain 
can be used to store cryptographic  
hashes of individual device firm-
ware. Such a system creates a 
per manent record of device con-
figuration and state. This record 
can be used to verify that a given 

device is genuine and that its soft-
ware and settings have not been 
tampered with or breached. Only 
then is the device allowed to con-
nect to other devices or services.

Returning to the Dyn example, 
IP spoofing attacks were launched 
for the later versions of the Mi-
rai botnet. Blockchain-based 
identity and access management 
systems can provide stronger de-
fense against attacks involving IP 
spoofing or IP address forgery. 
Because it is not possible to al-
ter approved blockchains, it is not 
possible for devices to connect to 
a network by disguising them-
selves by injecting fake signatures 
into the record.14 The earlier ex-
ample involving Filament’s Taps 
illustrates this point.

Cloud vs. Blockchain 
Models
In the cloud model, IoT devices 
are identified, authenticated, and 
connected through cloud servers, 

Blockchain-based identity and access management 
systems can be leveraged to strengthen IoT security.



70 IT Pro  July/August 2017

SECURING IT

where processing and storage are 
often carried out. Even if devices 
are a few feet apart, connections 
between them go through the 
Internet.15

First, IoT networks that have 
high costs are a concern in the 
centralized cloud model. Gartner 
estimated that in 2016, 5.5 million  
new IoT devices were connected 
every day.16 It is estimated that by 
2020, a network capacity that is at 
least 1,000 times the level of 2016 
will be needed.17 The amount of 
communication that needs to 
be handled will increase costs 
exponentially.

Second, even if economic 
and manufacturing challeng-
es are addressed, each block of 
the IoT architecture could act as 
a bottleneck or point of failure 
that can disrupt the entire net-
work.18 For instance, IoT devices 
are vulnerable to DDoS attacks, 
hacking, data theft, and remote 
hijacking. Criminals might also 
hack the system and misuse 
data. If an IoT device connected 
to a server is breached, everyone 
connected to the server could be 
affected.

Consider smart water meters 
and associated risks. Twenty per-
cent of California’s residents have 
smart water meters, which col-
lect data and send alerts on water 
leakage and usage to consumers’ 
phones. Likewise, the Washing-
ton Suburban Sanitary Commis-
sion (WSSC) in Washington, DC, 
is planning to integrate IoT into 
its system. Water-usage data can 
tell criminals when residents are 
not home. Perpetrators can then 
burglarize homes when their resi-
dents are away.19

Third, the centralized cloud 
model is susceptible to manipu-
lation. Collecting real-time data 
does not ensure that the informa-
tion is put to good and appropri-
ate use. Consider the water supply 
system example just discussed. 
If state officials or water service 
companies believe that the evi-
dence might result in high costs or 
lawsuits, they can censor, edit, or 
delete data and analysis. They can 
also manipulate findings. For in-
stance, consider the water crisis in 
the city of Flint, Michigan, which 
began in 2014. Flint authorities 
insisted for months that city water 

was safe to drink.19 Citing official 
documents and findings of re-
searchers who conducted exten-
sive tests, a CNN article asserted 
that Michigan officials might have 
altered sample data to lower the 
city’s water lead level.20 It was re-
ported that the Michigan Depart-
ment of Environmental Quality 
and the city of Flint discarded two 
of the collected samples. A re-
searcher said that the discarded 
samples had high lead levels.  
Including them in the ana lysis 
would have increased the level 
above 15 parts per billion (PPB). 
According to the US Environ-
mental Protection Agency, water 
supply companies are required to 
alert the public and take action 
if lead concentrations exceed the 
“action level” of 15 PPB in drink-
ing water (bit.ly/1qKMLVE).

Blockchain can eliminate many 
of the drawbacks described in  
Table 1. In blockchain, message ex-
changes between devices can be 
treated in a similar way as financial 
transactions in a bitcoin network. 
To exchange messages, devices  
rely on smart contracts. Block-
chain cryptographically signs 

Table 1. How blockchain can address Internet of Things (IoT) challenges.

Challenge Explanation Potential blockchain solution

Costs and capacity 
constraints

It is a challenge to handle exponential 
growth in IoT devices: by 2020, a network 
capacity at least 1,000 times the level of 
2016 will be needed.

No need for a centralized entity: devices can 
communicate securely, exchange value with each 
other, and execute actions automatically through 
smart contracts.

Deficient  
architecture

Each block of IoT architecture acts as a 
bottleneck or point of failure and disrupts 
the entire network; vulnerability to 
distributed denial-of-service attacks, hacking, 
data theft, and remote hijacking also exists. 

Secure messaging between devices: the validity 
of a device’s identity is verified, and transactions 
are signed and verified cryptographically to 
ensure that only a message’s originator could 
have sent it.

Cloud server downtime 
and unavailability of 
services

Cloud servers are sometimes down due to 
cyberattacks, software bugs, power, cooling, 
or other problems. 

No single point of failure: records are on many 
computers and devices that hold identical 
information.

Susceptibility to 
manipulation

Information is likely to be manipulated and 
put to inappropriate uses.

Decentralized access and immutability: malicious 
actions can be detected and prevented.

Devices are interlocked: if one device’s blockchain 
updates are breached, the system rejects it.



 computer.org/ITPro  71

transactions and verifies those 
cryptographic signatures to ensure 
that only the message’s originator 
could have sent it. This can elim-
inate the possibility of man-in-the-
middle, replay, and other attacks.6

Blockchain’s proponents have 
forcefully argued that this new 
technology can save us from 
“another Flint-like contamina-
tion crisis.”19 Projects such as the 
WSSC’s integration of the IoT in 
supply systems can be upgraded 
with sensors such as near-infrared 
reflectance spectroscopy (NIRS) 
to include data on chemical levels. 
If such a system had been installed 
in Michigan, Flint’s water service 
company could have found the 
lead contamination when it ex-
ceeded healthy levels. Blockchain 
can provide the “second layer of 
crisis prevention” in such cases.20

Ensuring Supply  
Chain Security
Blockchain can ensure supply 
chain security (see Figure 1). It 
also makes it possible to contain 
an IoT security breach in a tar-
geted way after discovery of the 
breach. Blockchain can facilitate 

handling and dealing with crisis 
situations such as product recalls 
due to security vulnerabilities. 
Blockchain’s public availability 
means that it is possible to trace 
back every product to the origin 
of the raw materials, and transac-
tions can be linked to identify us-
ers of vulnerable IoT devices.

IoT-linked security crises, such 
as the cyberattacks on Dyn, 
could have been handled better 
if the supply chains had adopted 
blockchain. For instance, Chi-
na-based Hangzhou Xiongmai 
Technologies, which makes In-
ternet-connected cameras and ac-
cessories, recalled its products in 
the US that were vulnerable to the  
Mirai malware. However, it is dif-
ficult to determine the devices’  
owners. Blockchain is suitable for 
complex workflows. It can be used 
to register time, location, price, 
parties involved, and other rel-
evant information when an item 
changes ownership. The tech-
nology can also track raw ma-
terials as they move through the 
supply chain, are transformed 
into circuit boards and electronic  
components, are integrated into 

products, and are sold to custom-
ers. Blockchain can also be used 
to register updates, patches, and 
part replacements applied to any 
product or device throughout its 
lifetime. It is easier to track prog-
ress in addressing vulnerabilities 
and send warnings and notifica-
tions to owners.8

B ased on the evolving mechanisms and forces described here, a prom-
ising future seems likely for the 
use of blockchain in address-
ing IoT security. For instance, 
some of the key security chal-
lenges associated with the cloud 
can be addressed by using the 
decentralized, autonomous, and 
trusted capabilities of blockchain. 
Blockchain’s decentralized and 
consensus-driven struc tures are 
likely to provide more secure ap-
proaches as the network size in-
creases exponentially.

Blockchain enables the verifi-
cation of the attributes it carries. 
Blockchain-based transactions are 
easily auditable. Due primarily to 
this and other features, blockchain 

Device
manufacturers/network

providers

•  Tracing back products
    to the origin of the raw
    material
•  Pinpointing the source
    of problematic parts/
    items

•  Identifying users of vulnerable
    devices
•  Guaranteeing return of products
    in case of recalls
•  Registering updates, patches,
    and part replacements throughout
    the lifetime of a product

Upstream
supply chain partners

Downstream
supply chain partners/

device owners

Figure 1. Blockchain’s role in improving overall security in supply chain networks. With blockchain, it is 
possible to access immutable records for various aspects of transactions involving a product to understand 
key vulnerabilities in the upstream supply chain. This technology can also help strengthen downstream 
supply chain partners’ and device owners’ precautionary and defensive cybersecurity measures.



72 IT Pro  July/August 2017

SECURING IT

can play a key role in tracking the 
sources of insecurity in supply 
chains as well as in handling and 
dealing with crisis situations such 
as product recalls that occur af-
ter safety and security vulnerabili-
ties are found. And as mentioned, 
blockchain-based identity and ac-
cess management systems can ad-
dress key IoT security challenges 
such as those associated with IP 
spoofing. 

Acknowledgments
I thank Jeff Voas for numerous edits 
and suggestions on previous versions 
of this article. Certain commercial en-
tities, equipment, or materials may be 
identified in this document in order to 
describe an experimental procedure or 
concept adequately. Such identification 
is not intended to imply recommenda-
tion or endorsement, nor is it intended 
to imply that the entities, materials, or 
equipment are necessarily the best avail-
able for the purpose.

References
 1. K. Christidis and M. Devetsikiotis, 

“Blockchains and Smart Contracts 
for the Internet of Things,” IEEE 
Access, May 2016, pp. 2292–2303.

 2. Blockchain in Banking: A Measured Ap-
proach, Cognizant Reports, 2016.

 3. “3rd Cyberattack ‘Has Been Re-
solved’ After Hours of Major Out-
ages: Company,” NBC New York, 
21 Oct. 2016; bit.ly/2eYZO46.

 4. N. Perlroth, “Hackers Used New 
Weapons to Disrupt Major Web-
sites Across US,” New York Times, 21 
Oct. 2016; nyti.ms/2eqxHtG.

 5. E. Blumenthal and E. Weise, 
“Hacked Home Devices Caused 
Massive Internet Outage,” USA To-
day, 21 Oct. 2016; usat.ly/2eB5RZA.

 6. J. Coward, “Meet the Visionary 
Who Brought Blockchain to the 
Industrial IoT,” IOT World News, 14 
Dec. 2016; bit.ly/2s8la1w.

 7. A. Kaul, “IBM Watson IoT and Its 
Integration with Blockchain,” Trac-
tica, 1 Aug. 2016; bit.ly/2rsOp2M.

 8. B. Dickson, “Blockchain Could 
Help Fix IoT Security after DDoS 
Attack,” VentureBeat, 29 Oct. 2016; 
bit.ly/2dXNaNO.

 9. B. Dickson, “How Blockchain Can 
Change the Future of IoT,” Venture-
Beat, 20 Nov. 2016; bit.ly/2qXZWXw.

 10. S. Pajot-Phipps, “Energizing the 
Blockchain—A Canadian Perspec-
tive,” Bitcoin Magazine, 26 Jan. 2017; 
bit.ly/2r7IIEc.

 11. J. Brown, “Companies Forge Coop-
erative to Explore Blockchain-Based 
IoT Security,” CioDive, 30 Jan. 2017; 
bit.ly/2quIMfv.

 12. E. Young, “Tech Giants and Block-
chain Startups Unite to Make IoT 
Apps More Secure,” The Cointele-
graph, 30 Jan. 2017; bit.ly/2kNtm7w.

 13. C. Catallini, “How Blockchain Ap-
plications Will Move Beyond Fi-
nance,” Harvard Business Rev., 2 Mar. 
2017; bit.ly/2m2ZIZQ.

 14. S. Kumar, “Not Just for Crypto-
cash: How Blockchain Tech Could 
Help Secure IoT,” IoT Agenda, 13 
Feb. 2017; bit.ly/2m8H9Gr.

 15. A. Banafa, “IoT and Block-
chain Convergence: Benefits and 

Challenges,” IEEE Internet of Things 
newsletter, Jan. 2017; bit.ly/2n1y8jq.

 16. R. Van der Meulen, “Gartner Says 
6.4 Billion Connected ‘Things’ Will 
Be in Use in 2016, Up 30 Percent 
From 2015,” Gartner press release, 
10 Nov. 2015; www.gartner.com 
/newsroom/id/3165317.

 17. S. Waterman, “Industry to Gov-
ernment: Hands Off IoT Secu-
rity,” Fedscoop, 17 Nov. 2016; bit 
.ly/2g4oXYX.

 18. A. Banafa, “A Secure Model of IoT 
with Blockchain,” OpenMind, 21 
Dec. 2016; bit.ly/2j2QUkH.

 19. R. Hackett, “How Blockchains Could 
Save Us from Another Flint-Like 
Contamination Crisis,” Venturebeat, 
25 Feb. 2017; bit.ly/2mx11zp.

 20. D. Debucquoy-Dodley, “Did Mich-
igan Officials Hide the Truth about 
Lead in Flint?” CNN, 14 Jan. 2016; 
cnn.it/2r0aiF9.

Nir Kshetri is a professor of manage-
ment in the Bryan School of Business and 
Economics at the University of North 
Carolina at Greensboro. Contact him at 
nbkshetr@uncg.edu.

IT Professional (ISSN 1520-9202) is published bimonthly by the IEEE 
Computer Society. IEEE Headquarters, Three Park Avenue, 17th Floor, 
New York, NY 10016-5997; IEEE Computer Society Publications Office, 
10662 Los Vaqueros Circle, PO Box 3014, Los Alamitos, CA 90720-1314; 
voice +714 821 8380; fax +714 821 4010; IEEE Computer Society Head-
quarters, 1828 L St. NW, Suite 1202, Washington, DC 20036. Visit www 
.computer.org/subscribe for subscription information.
Postmaster: Send undelivered copies and address changes to IT Pro-
fessional, Membership Processing Dept., IEEE Service Center, 445 Hoes 
Lane, Piscataway, NJ 08854-4141. Periodicals Postage Paid at New York, 
NY, and at additional mailing offices. Canadian GST #125634188. Can-
ada Post Publications Mail Agreement Number 40013885. Return un-
deliverable Canadian addresses to PO Box 122, Niagara Falls, ON L2E 
6S8, Canada. Printed in the USA.
Editorial: Unless otherwise stated, bylined articles, as well as product  
and service descriptions, reflect the author’s or firm’s opinion. Inclusion in 
IT Professional does not necessarily constitute endorse-
ment by the IEEE or the Computer Society. All submis-
sions are subject to editing for style, clarity, and space.


