






































City model created from images alone | ETH Zurich


City model created from images
alone

17.05.2017

ETH scientists have combined millions of images and videos into a
three-dimensional, living model of the city of Zurich. The new
technology has many possible applications – for example, it can
analyse where and when pedestrians are on the move and parking
spaces become free.

Search

Search news
Search the news by:

Further
information
VarCity project website

Parquery website

Spectando website

Casalva website

UniqFEED website

Don't miss the
latest news
Sign up for our newsletter

The three-dimensional model of Zurich was created using image data alone. (Visualisa-

tion: ETH Zurich)

City model created from images alone | ETH Zurich https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/05/city-model-created-from-imag...

1 sur 4 22/05/17 08:26



Researchers at ETH Zurich have developed a technology platform with
which they can create 3D city models using image data alone. The
platform, known as "VarCity", is so versatile that it can use, evaluate, and
automatically combine all possible kinds of image sources: aerial
photographs, 360-degree panoramic images taken with special vehicles,
and even standard photos such as those published by tourists on social
networks and internet platforms. The technology also uses video material
from sources like YouTube and public webcams.

Thanks to machine learning algorithms, the technology can recognise
image content such as buildings, windows and doors, streets, bodies of
water, people, and cars. Without human assistance, the 3D model
"knows", for example, what pavements are and – by evaluating webcam
data – which streets are one-way only.

"Bringing city models to life"
"The whole thing goes so far that we can perform a highly detailed analysis
of traffic flows on the street and also measure pedestrian traffic, even in
real time depending on the application," explains Hayko Riemenschneider,
a postdoc and VarCity project manager in the group led by Luc Van Gool, a
Professor at ETH Zurich's Computer Vision Lab. This makes counting
traffic extremely easy: it can be done exclusively with cameras and no
longer requires sensors to be installed on the road.

Using machine learning algorithms, the

model can differentiate between build-

ings, streets, vegetation, and bodies of

water. (Visualisation: ETH Zurich)

The model also recognises façades

and windows (highlighted in yellow and

red in the buildings to the front left of

the picture). (Visualisation: ETH Zurich)

City model created from images alone | ETH Zurich https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/05/city-model-created-from-imag...

2 sur 4 22/05/17 08:26



"Our technology is dynamic. It brings life, people and vehicles to 3D city
models, which is one of its major advantages over well-known applications
such as Google Street View," says Riemenschneider. The technology was
also devised in line with the principle of "privacy by design", with the
algorithms generating anonymised information based on image data.
Pedestrian flows and vehicle traffic can be shown by avatars, making
VarCity compatible with data privacy.

Large volumes of data evaluated
The researchers developed the computer algorithms for the model over the
past five years as part of a European Research Council (ERC) project (an
ERC Advanced Grant received by ETH Professor Van Gool). To showcase
their work, they have created a 3D model of the city of Zurich, which they
are now presenting in a video as they wrap up the project on schedule.

The VarCity technology is based on the evaluation of huge volumes of
data. "The more images and videos the platform can evaluate, the more
precise the model becomes," says Kenneth Vanhoey, a postdoc in Van
Gool's group. "The aim of our project was to develop the algorithms for
such 3D city models, assuming that the volume of available images and
videos will also increase dramatically in the years ahead."

The scientists use triangulation to create a three-dimensional model from
image data. This requires several pictures of an object from various
angles; an analysis of the distances and angles in the various images then
allows the corner points of the object to be precisely located in the relevant
space.

Simple parking management technology
The researchers are not offering the models themselves as an application,
but the technology behind them has many possible applications, including
in urban and transport planning. The project participants have founded
several startups to market these applications: Spectando offers virtual
building inspections for the real estate market, while Casalva performs
virtual damage analyses on buildings for insurance companies, for
example after extreme weather events such as hailstorms. No special

City model created from images alone | ETH Zurich https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/05/city-model-created-from-imag...

3 sur 4 22/05/17 08:26



Page URL: https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/05/city-model-created-from-images-alone.html
22.05.2017
© 2017 Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich

devices are required for these applications – standard smartphone photos
are sufficient.

ETH spin-off Parquery, that has emerged from the VarCity project, also
uses this technology. The company developed a parking management
system that works exclusively with cameras installed near parking spaces
and does not require parking space sensors. The computer evaluates the
video data in real-time and recognises cars, so it knows which parking
spaces are free and also whether a car has been mistakenly parked
across two spaces. This system was first used in the Swiss city of Locarno,
with further projects in over 30 cities in Switzerland and abroad.

The ETH spin-off UniqFEED uses the methods to identify perimeter
advertising and individual players during television broadcasts of sports
events, allowing it to calculate how long they are visible during the
broadcast and to personalise the perimeter ads for various user groups.

Video: ETH Zurich

City model created from images alone | ETH Zurich https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/05/city-model-created-from-imag...

4 sur 4 22/05/17 08:26


