


















































deep learning a critical appraisal.formatted.pages


Deep Learning:  
A Critical Appraisal 

Gary Marcus  1
New York University 

Abstract 

Although deep learning has historical roots going back decades, neither the term “deep 
learning” nor the approach was popular just over five years ago, when the field was 
reignited by papers such as Krizhevsky, Sutskever and Hinton’s now classic 2012 
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, & Hinton, 2012)deep net model of Imagenet. 

What has the field discovered in the five subsequent years? Against a background of 
considerable progress in areas such as speech recognition, image recognition, and game 
playing, and considerable enthusiasm in the popular press, I present ten concerns for deep 
learning, and suggest that deep learning must be supplemented by other techniques if we 
are to reach artificial general intelligence.  

!   Departments of Psychology and Neural Science, New York University, gary.marcus at nyu.edu. I thank Christina 1
Chen, François Chollet, Ernie Davis, Zack Lipton, Stefano Pacifico, Suchi Saria, and Athena Vouloumanos for 
sharp-eyed comments, all generously supplied on short notice during the holidays at the close of 2017.

  Page !  of !1 27

http://nyu.edu


For most problems where deep learning has enabled 
transformationally better solutions (vision, speech), we've 
entered diminishing returns territory in 2016-2017. 

François Chollet, Google, author of Keras 
neural network library  
December 18, 2017 

‘Science progresses one funeral at a time.' The future 
depends on some graduate student who is deeply suspicious 
of everything I have said. 

Geoff Hinton, grandfather of deep learning 
September 15, 2017 

1. Is deep learning approaching a wall? 

Although deep learning has historical roots going back decades(Schmidhuber, 2015), it 
attracted relatively little notice until just over five years ago. Virtually everything 
changed in 2012, with the publication of  a series of highly influential papers such as 
Krizhevsky, Sutskever and Hinton’s 2012 ImageNet Classification with Deep 
Convolutional Neural Networks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, & Hinton, 2012), which 
achieved state-of-the-art results on the object recognition challenge known as ImageNet 
(Deng et al., ). Other labs were already working on similar work (Cireşan, Meier, Masci, 
& Schmidhuber, 2012). Before the year was out, deep learning made the front page of 
The New York Times , and it rapidly became the best known technique in artificial 2
intelligence, by a wide margin. If the general idea of training neural networks with 
multiple layers was not new, it was, in part because of increases in computational power 
and data, the first time that deep learning truly became practical. 

Deep learning has since yielded numerous state of the art results, in domains such as 
speech recognition, image recognition , and language translation and plays a role in a 
wide swath of current AI applications. Corporations have invested billions of dollars 
fighting for deep learning talent. One prominent deep learning advocate, Andrew Ng, has 
gone so far to suggest that “If a typical person can do a mental task with less than one 
second of thought, we can probably automate it using AI either now or in the near 

 http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/24/science/scientists-see-advances-in-deep-learning-a-part-of-artificial-2
intelligence.html

  Page !  of !2 27

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/24/science/scientists-see-advances-in-deep-learning-a-part-of-artificial-intelligence.html
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/24/science/scientists-see-advances-in-deep-learning-a-part-of-artificial-intelligence.html
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/24/science/scientists-see-advances-in-deep-learning-a-part-of-artificial-intelligence.html
https://papers.nips.cc/paper/4824-imagenet-classification-with-deep-convolutional-neural-networks.pdf
https://papers.nips.cc/paper/4824-imagenet-classification-with-deep-convolutional-neural-networks.pdf


future.” (A, 2016).   A recent New York Times Sunday Magazine article , largely about 3
deep learning, implied that the technique is “poised to reinvent computing itself.” 

Yet deep learning may well be approaching a wall, much as I anticipated earlier, at 
beginning of the resurgence (Marcus, 2012), and as leading figures like Hinton (Sabour, 
Frosst, & Hinton, 2017) and Chollet (2017) have begun to imply in recent months.    

What exactly is deep learning, and what has its shown about the nature of intelligence? 
What can we expect it to do, and where might we expect it to break down? How close or 
far are we from “artificial general intelligence”, and a point at which machines show a 
human-like flexibility in solving unfamiliar problems?  The purpose of this paper is both 
to temper some irrational exuberance and also to consider what we as a field might need 
to move forward. 

This paper is written simultaneously for researchers in the field, and for a growing set of 
AI consumers with less technical background who may wish to understand where the 
field is headed. As such I will begin with a very brief, nontechnical introduction  aimed at 4
elucidating what deep learning systems do well and why (Section 2), before turning to an 
assessment of deep learning’s weaknesses (Section 3) and some fears that arise from 
misunderstandings about deep learning’s capabilities (Section 4), and closing with  
perspective on going forward (Section 5).  

Deep learning is not likely to disappear, nor should it. But five years into the field’s 
resurgence seems like a good moment for a critical reflection, on what deep learning has 
and has not been able to achieve.  

2. What deep learning is, and what it does well 

Deep learning, as it is primarily used, is essentially a statistical technique for classifying 
patterns, based on sample data, using neural networks with multiple layers.  5

 https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/14/magazine/the-great-ai-awakening.html3

 For more technical introduction,  there are many excellent recent  tutorials on deep learning including (Chollet, 4
2017) and (Goodfellow, Bengio, & Courville, 2016), as well as insightful blogs and online resources from Zachary 
Lipton, Chris Olah, and many others.

 Other applications of deep learning beyond classification are possible, too, though currently less popular, and 5
outside of the scope of the current article. These include using deep learning as an alternative to regression, as a 
component in generative models that create (e.g.,) synthetic images, as a tool for compressing images, as a tool for 
learning probability distributions, and (relatedly) as an important technique for approximation known as variational 
inference.

  Page !  of !3 27



Neural networks in the deep learning literature typically consist of a set of input units that 
stand for things like pixels or words, multiple hidden layers (the more such layers, the 
deeper a network is said to be) containing hidden units (also known as nodes or neurons), 
and a set output units, with connections running between those nodes.  In a typical 
application such a network might be trained on a large sets of handwritten digits (these 
are the inputs, represented as images) and labels (these are the outputs) that identify the 
categories to which those inputs belong (this image is a 2, that one is a 3, and so forth). 

 
Over time, an algorithm called back-propagation allows a process called gradient descent 
to adjust the connections between units using a process, such that any given input tends to 
produce the corresponding output. 

Collectively, one can think of the relation between inputs and outputs that a neural 
network learns as a mapping. Neural networks, particularly those with multiple hidden 
layers (hence the term deep) are remarkably good at learning input-output mappings, 

Such systems are commonly described as neural networks because the input nodes, 
hidden nodes, and output nodes can be thought of as loosely analogous to biological 
neurons, albeit greatly simplified, and the connections between nodes can be thought of 
as in some way reflecting connections between neurons. A longstanding question, outside 
the scope of the current paper, concerns the degree to which artificial neural networks are 
biologically plausible. 

Most deep learning networks make heavy use of a technique called  convolution (LeCun, 
1989), which constrains the neural connections in the network such that they innately 
capture a property known as translational invariance. This is essentially the idea that an 
object can slide around an image while maintaining its identity; a circle in the top left can 
be presumed, even absent direct experience) to be the same as a circle in the bottom right. 

  Page !  of !4 27

Input layer Output layer
Hidden layers

...
... ...

...



Deep learning is also known for its ability to self-generate intermediate representations, 
such as internal units that may respond to things like horizontal lines, or more complex 
elements of pictorial structure.   

In principle, given infinite data, deep learning systems are powerful enough to represent 
any finite deterministic “mapping” between any given set of inputs and a set of 
corresponding outputs, though in practice whether they can learn such a mapping 
depends on many factors. One common concern is getting caught in local minima, in 
which a systems gets stuck on a suboptimal solution, with no better solution nearby in the 
space of solutions being searched. (Experts use a variety of techniques to avoid such 
problems, to reasonably good effect). In practice, results with large data sets are often 
quite good, on a wide range of potential mappings. 

In speech recognition, for example, a neural network learns a mapping between a set of 
speech sounds, and set of labels (such as words or phonemes). In object recognition, a 
neural network learns a mapping between a set of images and a set of labels (such that, 
for example, pictures of cars are labeled as cars). In DeepMind’s Atari game system 
(Mnih et al., 2015), neural networks learned mappings between pixels and joystick 
positions.  

Deep learning systems are most often used as classification system in the sense that the 
mission of a typical network is to decide which of a set of categories (defined by the 
output units on the neural network) a given input belongs to. With enough imagination, 
the power of classification is immense; outputs can represent words, places on a Go 
board, or virtually anything else.   

In a world with infinite data, and infinite computational resources, there might be little 
need for any other technique.  

3. Limits on the scope of deep learning 

Deep learning’s limitations begin with the contrapositive: we live in a world in which 
data are never infinite. Instead, systems that rely on deep learning frequently have to 
generalize beyond the specific data that they have seen, whether to a new pronunciation 
of a word or to an image that differs from one that the system has seen before, and where 
data are less than infinite, the ability of formal proofs to guarantee high-quality 
performance is more limited. 

  Page !  of !5 27



As discussed later in this article, generalization can be thought of as coming in two 
flavors, interpolation between known examples, and  extrapolation, which requires going 
beyond a space of known training examples (Marcus, 1998a).    

For neural networks to generalize well, there generally must be a large amount of data, 
and the test data must be similar to the training data, allowing new answers to be 
interpolated in between old ones. In Krizhevsky et al’s paper (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, & 
Hinton, 2012), a nine layer convolutional neural network with 60 million parameters and 
650,000 nodes was trained on roughly a million distinct examples drawn from 
approximately one thousand categories.   6

This sort of brute force approach worked well in the very finite world of ImageNet, into 
which all stimuli can be classified into a comparatively small set of categories. It also 
works well in stable domains like speech recognition in which exemplars are mapped in 
constant way onto a limited set of speech sound categories, but for many reasons deep 
learning cannot be considered (as it sometimes is in the popular press) as a general 
solution to artificial intelligence. 

Here are ten challenges faced by current deep learning systems: 

3.1. Deep learning thus far is data hungry   

Human beings can learn abstract relationships in a few trials. If I told you that a schmister 
was a sister over the age of 10 but under the age of 21, perhaps giving you a single 
example, you could immediately infer whether you had any schmisters, whether your best 
friend had a schmister, whether your children or parents had any schmisters, and so forth. 
(Odds are, your parents no longer do, if they ever did, and you could rapidly draw that 
inference, too.)  

In learning what a schmister is, in this case through explicit definition, you rely not on 
hundreds or thousands or millions of training examples, but on a capacity to represent 
abstract relationships between algebra-like variables. 

Humans can learn such abstractions, both through explicit definition and more implicit 
means (Marcus, 2001). Indeed even  7-month old infants can do so, acquiring learned 
abstract language-like rules from a small number of unlabeled examples, in just two 

 Using a common technique known as data augmentation, each example was actually presented along with its label 6
in a many different locations, both in its original form and in mirror reversed form. A second type of data 
augmentation varied the brightness of the images, yielding still more examples for training, in order to train the 
network to recognize images with different intensities. Part of the art of machine learning involves knowing what 
forms of data augmentation will and won’t help within a given system.

  Page !  of !6 27



minutes (Marcus, Vijayan, Bandi Rao, & Vishton, 1999). Subsequent work by Gervain 
and colleagues (2012) suggests that newborns are capable of similar computations. 

Deep learning currently lacks a mechanism for learning abstractions through explicit, 
verbal definition, and works best when there are thousands, millions or even billions of 
training examples, as in DeepMind’s work on board games and Atari. As Brenden Lake 
and his colleagues have recently emphasized in a series of papers, humans are far more 
efficient in learning complex rules than deep learning systems are (Lake, Salakhutdinov, 
& Tenenbaum, 2015; Lake, Ullman, Tenenbaum, & Gershman, 2016). (See also related 
work by George et al (2017), and my own work with Steven Pinker on children’s 
overregularization errors in comparison to neural networks (Marcus et al., 1992).)  

Geoff Hinton has also worried about deep learning’s reliance on large numbers of labeled 
examples, and expressed this concern in his recent work on capsule networks with his 
coauthors (Sabour et al., 2017) noting that convolutional neural networks (the most 
common deep learning architecture) may face “exponential inefficiencies that may lead to 
their demise. A good candidate is the difficulty that convolutional nets have in 
generalizing to novel viewpoints [ie perspectives on object in visual recognition tasks]. 
The ability to deal with translation[al invariance] is built in, but for the other ... [common 
type of] transformation we have to chose between replicating feature detectors on a grid 
that grows exponentially ... or increasing the size of the labelled training set in a similarly 
exponential way.”   

In problems where data are limited, deep learning often is not an ideal solution. 

3.2.Deep learning thus far is shallow and has limited capacity for 
transfer 

Although deep learning is capable of some amazing things, it is important to realize that 
the word “deep” in deep learning refers to a technical, architectural property (the large 
number of hidden layers used in a modern neural networks, where there predecessors 
used only one) rather than a conceptual one (the representations acquired by such 
networks don’t, for example, naturally apply to abstract concepts like “justice”, 
“democracy” or “meddling”). 

Even more down-to-earth concepts like “ball” or “opponent” can lie out of reach. 
Consider for example DeepMind’s Atari game work (Mnih et al., 2015) on deep 
reinforcement learning, which combines deep learning with reinforcement learning (in 
which a learner tries to maximize reward). Ostensibly, the results are fantastic: the system 
meets or beats human experts on a large sample of games using a single set of 
“hyperparameters” that govern properties such as the rate at which a network alters its 
weights, and no advance knowledge about specific games, or even their rules.  But it is 

  Page !  of !7 27



easy to wildly overinterpret what the results show. To take one example, according to a 
widely-circulated video of the system learning to play the brick-breaking Atari game 
Breakout, “after 240 minutes of training, [the system] realizes that digging a tunnel 
thought the wall is the most effective technique to beat the game”.  

But the system has learned no such thing; it doesn’t really understand what a tunnel, or 
what a wall is; it has just learned specific contingencies for particular scenarios. Transfer 
tests — in which the deep reinforcement learning system is confronted with scenarios 
that differ in minor ways from the one ones on which the system was trained show that 
deep reinforcement learning’s solutions are often extremely superficial. For example, a 
team of researchers at Vicarious showed that a more efficient successor technique, 
DeepMind’s Atari system [Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic; also known as A3C], 
failed on a variety of minor perturbations to Breakout (Kansky et al., 2017) from the 
training set, such as moving the Y coordinate (height) of the paddle, or inserting a wall 
midscreen. These demonstrations make clear that  it is misleading to credit deep 
reinforcement learning with inducing concept like wall or paddle; rather, such remarks 
are what comparative (animal) psychology sometimes call overattributions. It’s not that 
the Atari system genuinely learned a concept of wall that was robust but rather the system 
superficially approximated breaking through walls within a narrow set of highly trained 
circumstances.    7

My own team of researchers at a startup company called Geometric Intelligence (later 
acquired by Uber) found similar results as well, in the context of a slalom game, In 2017, 
a team of researchers at Berkeley and OpenAI has shown that it was not difficult to 
construct comparable adversarial examples in a variety of games, undermining not only 
DQN (the original DeepMind algorithm) but also A3C and several other related 
techniques (Huang, Papernot, Goodfellow, Duan, & Abbeel, 2017). 

Recent experiments by Robin Jia and Percy Liang (2017) make a similar point, in a 
different domain: language. Various neural networks were trained on a question 
answering task known as SQuAD (derived from the Stanford Question Answering 
Database), in which the goal is to highlight the words in a particular passage that 
correspond to a given question. In one sample, for instance, a trained system correctly, 
and impressively, identified the quarterback on the winning of Super Bowl XXXIII as 
John Elway, based on a short paragraph. But Jia and Liang showed the mere insertion of 
distractor sentences (such as a fictional one about the alleged victory of Google’s Jeff 

 In the same paper, Vicarious proposed an alternative to deep learning called schema networks (Kansky et al., 2017) 7
that can handle a number of variations in the Atari game Breakout, albeit apparently without the multi-game 
generality of DeepMind’s Atari system. 

  Page !  of !8 27



Dean in another Bowl game ) caused performance to drop precipitously. Across sixteen 8
models, accuracy dropped from a mean of 75% to a mean of 36%.  

As is so often the case, the patterns extracted by deep learning are more superficial than 
they initially appear. 

3.3.Deep learning thus far has no natural way to deal with 
hierarchical structure 

To a linguist like Noam Chomsky, the troubles Jia and Liang documented would be 
unsurprising. Fundamentally, most current deep-learning based language models 
represent sentences as mere sequences of words, whereas Chomsky has long argued that 
language has a hierarchical structure, in which larger structures are recursively 
constructed out of smaller components.  (For example, in the sentence the teenager who 
previously crossed the Atlantic set a record for flying around the world, the main clause is 
the teenager set a record for flying around the world, while the embedded clause who 
previously crossed the Atlantic is an embedded clause that specifies which teenager.) 

In the 80’s Fodor and Pylyshyn (1988)expressed similar concerns, with respect to an 
earlier breed of neural networks. Likewise, in (Marcus, 2001), I conjectured that single 
recurrent neural networks (SRNs; a forerunner to today’s more sophisticated  deep 
learning based recurrent neural networks, known as RNNs; Elman, 1990) would have 
trouble systematically representing and extending recursive structure to various kinds of 
unfamiliar sentences (see the cited articles for more specific claims about which types).  

Earlier this year, Brenden Lake and Marco Baroni (2017) tested whether such pessimistic 
conjectures continued to hold true. As they put it in their title, contemporary neural nets 
were “Still not systematic after all these years”. RNNs could “generalize well when the 
differences between training and test ...  are small [but] when generalization requires 
systematic compositional skills, RNNs fail spectacularly”.  

Similar issues are likely to emerge in other domains, such as planning and motor control, 
in which complex hierarchical structure is needed, particular when a system is likely to 
encounter novel situations. One can see indirect evidence for this in the struggles with 
transfer in Atari games mentioned above, and more generally in the field of robotics, in 
which systems generally fail to generalize abstract plans well in novel environments. 

 Here’s the full Super Bowl passage; Jia and Liang’s distractor sentence that confused the model is at the end. 8
Peyton Manning became the first quarterback ever to lead two different teams to multiple Super Bowls. He is also 
the oldest quarterback ever to play in a Super Bowl at age 39. The past record was held by John Elway, who led the 
Broncos to victory in Super Bowl XXXIII at age 38 and is currently Denver’s Executive Vice President of Football 
Operations and General Manager. Quarterback Jeff Dean had jersey number 37 in Champ Bowl XXXIV.

  Page !  of !9 27



The core problem, at least at present, is that deep learning learns correlations between 
sets of features that are themselves “flat” or nonhierachical, as if in a simple, unstructured 
list, with every feature on equal footing. Hierarchical structure (e.g., syntactic trees that 
distinguish between main clauses and embedded clauses in a sentence) are not inherently 
or directly represented in such systems, and as a result deep learning systems are forced 
to use a variety of proxies that are ultimately inadequate, such as the sequential position 
of a word presented in a sequences.  

Systems like Word2Vec (Mikolov, Chen, Corrado, & Dean, 2013) that represent 
individuals words as vectors have been modestly successful; a number of systems that 
have used clever tricks  
try to represent complete sentences in deep-learning compatible vector spaces (Socher, 
Huval, Manning, & Ng, 2012). But, as Lake and Baroni’s experiments make clear.  
recurrent networks continue limited in their capacity to represent and generalize rich 
structure in a faithful manner. 

3.4.Deep learning thus far has struggled with open-ended inference  
If you can’t represent nuance like the difference between “John promised Mary to leave” 
and “John promised to leave Mary”, you can’t draw inferences about who is leaving 
whom, or what is likely to happen next. Current machine reading systems have achieved 
some degree of success in tasks like SQuAD, in which the answer to a given  
question is explicitly contained within a text, but far less success in tasks in which 
inference goes beyond what is explicit in a text, either by combining multiple sentences 
(so called multi-hop inference) or by combining explicit sentences with background 
knowledge that is not stated in a specific text selection.  Humans, as they read texts, 
frequently derive wide-ranging inferences that are both novel and only implicitly 
licensed, as when they, for example, infer the intentions of a character based only on 
indirect dialog.  

Altough Bowman and colleagues (Bowman, Angeli, Potts, & Manning, 2015; Williams, 
Nangia, & Bowman, 2017) have taken some important steps in this direction, there is, at 
present, no deep learning system that can draw open-ended inferences based on real-
world knowledge with anything like human-level accuracy. 

3.5.Deep learning thus far is not sufficiently transparent  
The relative opacity of “black box” neural networks has been a major focus of discussion 
in the last few years (Samek, Wiegand, & Müller, 2017; Ribeiro, Singh, & Guestrin, 
2016). In their current incarnation, deep learning systems have millions or even billions 
of parameters, identifiable to their developers not in terms of the sort of human 

  Page !  of !10 27



interpretable labels that canonical programmers use (“last_character_typed”) but only in 
terms of their geography within a complex network (e.g., the activity value of the ith node 
in layer j in network module k). Although some strides have been in visualizing the 
contributions of individuals nodes in complex networks (Nguyen, Clune, Bengio, 
Dosovitskiy, & Yosinski, 2016), most observers would acknowledge that neural networks 
as a whole remain something of a black box.  

How much that matters in the long run remains unclear (Lipton, 2016). If systems are 
robust and self-contained enough it might not matter; if it is important to use them in the 
context of larger systems, it could be crucial for debuggability.  

The transparency issue, as yet unsolved, is a potential liability when using deep learning 
for problem domains like financial trades or medical diagnosis, in which human users 
might like to understand how a given system made a given decision. As Catherine 
O’Neill (2016) has pointed out, such opacity can also lead to serious issues of bias. 
  

3.6.Deep learning thus far has not been well integrated with prior 
knowledge 

The dominant approach in deep learning is hermeneutic, in the sense of being self-
contained and isolated from other, potentially usefully knowledge. Work in deep learning 
typically consists of finding a training database, sets of inputs associated with respective 
outputs, and learn all that is required for the problem by learning the relations between 
those inputs and outputs, using whatever clever architectural variants one might devise, 
along with techniques for cleaning and augmenting the data set.  With just a handful of 
exceptions, such as LeCun’s convolutional constraint on how neural networks are 
wired(LeCun, 1989), prior knowledge is often deliberately minimized.  

Thus, for example, in a system like Lerer et al’s (2016) efforts to learn about the physics 
of falling towers, there is no prior knowledge of physics (beyond what is implied in 
convolution). Newton’s laws, for example, are not explicitly encoded; the system instead 
(to some limited degree) approximates them by learning contingencies from raw, pixel 
level data. As I note in a forthcoming paper in innate (Marcus, in prep) researchers in 
deep learning appear to have a very strong bias against including prior knowledge even 
when (as in the case of physics) that prior knowledge is well known.  

It also not straightforward in general how to integrate prior knowledge into a deep 
learning system:, in part because the knowledge represented in deep learning systems 
pertains mainly to (largely opaque) correlations between features, rather than to 
abstractions like quantified statements (e.g. all men are mortal), see discussion of 
universally-quantified one-to-one-mappings in Marcus (2001), or generics (violable 

  Page !  of !11 27



statements like dogs have four legs or mosquitos carry West Nile virus (Gelman, Leslie, 
Was, & Koch, 2015)). 

A related problem stems from a culture in machine learning that emphasizes competition 
on problems that are inherently self-contained, without little need for broad general 
knowledge. This tendency is well exemplified by the machine learning contest platform 
known as Kaggle, in which contestants vie for the best results on a given data set. 
Everything they need for a given problem is neatly packaged, with all the relevant input 
and outputs files. Great progress has been made in this way; speech recognition and some 
aspects of image recognition can be largely solved in the Kaggle paradigm.  

The trouble, however, is that life is not a Kaggle competition; children don’t get all the 
data they need neatly packaged in a single directory. Real-world learning offers data 
much more sporadically, and problems aren’t so neatly encapsulated. Deep learning 
works great on problems like speech recognition in which there are lots of labeled 
examples, but scarcely any even knows how to apply it to more open-ended problems. 
What’s the best way to fix a bicycle that has a rope caught in its spokes? Should I major 
in math or neuroscience? No training set will tell us that.  

Problems that have less to do with categorization and more to do with commonsense 
reasoning essentially lie outside the scope of what deep learning is appropriate for, and so 
far as I can tell, deep learning has little to offer such problems. In a recent review of 
commonsense reasoning, Ernie Davis and I (2015) began with a set of easily-drawn 
inferences that people can readily answer without anything like direct training, such as 
Who is taller, Prince William or his baby son Prince George? Can you make a salad out 
of a polyester shirt? If you stick a pin into a carrot, does it make a hole in the carrot or in the 
pin?  

As far as I know, nobody has even tried to tackle this sort of thing with deep learning. 
  
Such apparently simple problems require humans to integrate knowledge across vastly disparate 
sources, and as such are a long way from the sweet spot of deep learning-style perceptual 
classification. Instead, they are perhaps best thought of as a sign that entirely different 
sorts of tools are needed, along with deep learning, if we are to reach human-level 
cognitive flexibility.  

3.7.Deep learning thus far cannot inherently distinguish causation 
from correlation 

If it is a truism that causation does not equal correlation, the distinction between the two 
is also a serious concern for deep learning. Roughly speaking, deep learning learns 
complex correlations between input and output features, but with no inherent 

  Page !  of !12 27



representation of causality. A deep learning system can easily learn that height and 
vocabulary are, across the population as a whole, correlated, but less easily represent the 
way in which that correlation derives from growth and development (kids get bigger as 
they learn more words, but that doesn’t mean that growing tall causes them to learn more 
words, nor that learning new words causes them to grow). Causality has been central 
strand in some other approaches to AI (Pearl, 2000) but, perhaps because deep learning is 
not geared towards such challenges, relatively little work within the deep learning 
tradition has tried to address it.  9

3.8.Deep learning presumes a largely stable world, in ways that may 
be problematic 

The logic of deep learning is such that it is likely to work best in highly stable worlds, 
like the board game Go, which has unvarying rules, and less well in systems such as 
politics and economics that are constantly changing. To the extent that deep learning is 
applied in tasks such as stock prediction, there is a good chance that it will eventually 
face the fate of Google Flu Trends, which initially did a great job of predicting 
epidemological data on search trends, only to complete miss things like the peak of the 
2013 flu season  (Lazer, Kennedy, King, & Vespignani, 2014). 

3.9. Deep learning thus far works well as an approximation, but its 
answers often cannot be fully trusted 

In part as a consequence of the other issues raised in this section, deep learning systems 
are quite good at some large fraction of a given domain, yet easily fooled. 

An ever-growing array of papers has shown this vulnerability, from the linguistic 
examples of Jia and Liang mentioned above to a wide range of demonstrations in the 
domain of vision, where deep learning systems have mistaken yellow-and-black patterns 
of stripes for school buses (Nguyen, Yosinski, & Clune, 2014) and sticker-clad parking 
signs for well-stocked refrigerators (Vinyals, Toshev, Bengio, & Erhan, 2014) in the 
context of a captioning system that otherwise seems impressive. 

More recently, there have been real-world stop signs, lightly defaced, that have been 
mistaken for speed limit signs (Evtimov et al., 2017) and 3d-printed turtles that have been 
mistake for rifles  (Athalye, Engstrom, Ilyas, & Kwok, 2017). A recent news story 

 One example of interesting recent work is (Lopez-Paz, Nishihara, Chintala, Schölkopf, & Bottou, 2017), albeit 9
focused specifically on an rather unusual sense of the term causation as it relates to the presence or absence of 
objects (e.g., “the presence of cars cause the presence of wheel[s]). This strikes me as quite different from the sort of 
causation one finds in the relation between a disease and the symptoms it causes.

  Page !  of !13 27



recounts the trouble a British police system has had in distinguishing nudes from sand 
dunes.  10

The “spoofability” of deep learning systems was perhaps first noted by Szegedy et 
al(2013). Four years later, despite much active research, no robust solution has been 
found.   11

3.10. Deep learning thus far is difficult to engineer with 
Another fact that follows from all the issues raised above is that is simply hard to do 
robust engineering with deep learning. As a team of authors at Google put it in 2014, in 
the title of an important, and as yet unanswered essay (Sculley, Phillips, Ebner, 
Chaudhary, & Young, 2014), machine learning is “the high-interest credit card of 
technical debt”, meaning that is comparatively easy to make systems that work in some 
limited set of circumstances (short term gain), but quite difficult to guarantee that they 
will work in alternative circumstances with novel data that may not resemble previous 
training data (long term debt, particularly if one system is used as an element in another 
larger system).  

In an important talk at ICML, Leon Bottou (2015) compared machine learning to the 
development of an airplane engine, and noted that while the airplane design relies on 
building complex systems out of simpler systems for which it was possible to create 
sound guarantees about performance, machine learning lacks the capacity to produce 
comparable guarantees. As Google’s Peter Norvig (2016) has noted, machine learning as 
yet lacks the incrementality, transparency and debuggability of classical programming, 
trading off a kind of simplicity for deep challenges in achieving robustness.  

Henderson and colleagues have recently extended these points, with a focus on deep 
reinforcement learning, noting some serious issues in the field related to robustness and 
replicability (Henderson et al., 2017). 

Although there has been some progress in automating the process of developing machine 
learning systems (Zoph, Vasudevan, Shlens, & Le, 2017), there is a long way to go. 

 https://gizmodo.com/british-cops-want-to-use-ai-to-spot-porn-but-it-keeps-m-1821384511/amp10

 Deep learning’s predecessors were vulnerable to similar problems, as Pinker and Prince (1988)pointed out, in a 11
discussion of neural networks that produced bizarre past tense forms for a subset of its inputs. The verb to mail, for 
example, was inflected in the past tense as membled, the verb tour as toureder. Children rarely if ever make mistakes 
like these.

  Page !  of !14 27



3.11. Discussion 
  
Of course, deep learning, is by itself, just mathematics; none of the problems identified 
above are because the underlying mathematics of deep learning are somehow flawed. In 
general, deep learning is a perfectly fine way of optimizing a complex system for 
representing a mapping between inputs and outputs, given a sufficiently large data set. 

The real problem lies in misunderstanding what deep learning is, and is not, good for. The 
technique excels at solving closed-end classification problems, in which a wide range of 
potential signals must be mapped onto a limited number of categories, given that there is 
enough data available and the test set closely resembles the training set.  

But deviations from these assumptions can cause problems; deep learning is just a 
statistical technique, and all statistical techniques suffer from deviation from their 
assumptions.  

Deep learning systems work less well when there are limited amounts of training data 
available, or when the test set differs importantly from the training set, or when the space 
of examples is broad and filled with novelty. And some problems cannot, given real-
world limitations, be thought of as classification problems at all. Open-ended natural 
language understanding, for example, should not be thought of as a classifier mapping 
between a large finite set of sentences and large, finite set of sentences, but rather a 
mapping between a potentially infinite range of input sentences and an equally vast array 
of meanings, many never previously encountered. In a problem like that, deep learning 
becomes a square peg slammed into a round hole, a crude approximation when there 
must be a solution elsewhere. 

One clear way to get an intuitive sense of why something is amiss to consider a set of 
experiments I did long ago, in 1997, when I tested some simplified aspects of language 
development on a class of neural networks that were then popular in cognitive science. 
The 1997-vintage networks were, to be sure, simpler than current models — they used no 
more than three layers (inputs nodes connected to hidden nodes connected to outputs 
node), and lacked Lecun’s powerful convolution technique. But they were driven by 
backpropagation just as today’s systems are, and just as beholden to their training data.  

In language, the name of the game is generalization — once I hear a sentence like John 
pilked a football to Mary, I can infer that is also grammatical to say John pilked Mary the 
football, and Eliza pilked the ball to Alec; equally if I can infer what the word pilk means, 
I can infer what the latter sentences would mean, even if I had not hear them before. 

  Page !  of !15 27



Distilling the broad-ranging problems of language down to a simple example that I 
believe still has resonance now, I ran a series of experiments in which I trained three-
layer perceptrons (fully connected in today’s technical parlance, with no convolution) on 
the identity function, f(x) = x, e.g, f(12)=12.  

Training examples were represented by a set of input nodes (and corresponding output 
nodes) that represented numbers in terms of binary digits. The number 7 for example, 
would be represented by turning on the input (and output) nodes representing 4, 2, and 1.  
As a test of generalization, I trained the network on various sets of even numbers, and 
tested it all possible inputs, both odd and even. 

Every time I ran the experiment, using a wide variety of parameters, the results were the 
same: the network would (unless it got stuck in local minimum) correctly apply the 
identity function to the even numbers that it had seen before (say 2, 4, 8 and 12), and to 
some other even numbers (say 6 and 14) but fail on all the odds numbers, yielding, for 
example f(15) = 14.  

In general, the neural nets I tested could learn their training examples, and interpolate to a 
set of test examples that were in a cloud of points around those examples in n-
dimensional space (which I dubbed the training space), but they could not extrapolate 
beyond that training space. 

Odd numbers were outside the training space, and the networks could not generalize 
identity outside that space.  Adding more hidden units didn’t help, and nor did adding 12
more hidden layers. Simple multilayer perceptrons simply couldn’t generalize outside 
their training space (Marcus, 1998a; Marcus, 1998b; Marcus, 2001). (Chollet makes quite 
similar points in the closing chapters of his his (Chollet, 2017) text.) 

What we have seen in this paper is that challenges in generalizing beyond a space of 
training examples persist in current deep learning networks, nearly two decades later. 
Many of the problems reviewed in this paper — the data hungriness, the vulnerability to 
fooling, the problems in dealing with open-ended inference and transfer —   can be seen 
as extension of this fundamental problem. Contemporary neural networks do well on 
challenges that remain close to their core training data, but start to break down on cases 
further out in the periphery.  

 Of course, the network had never seen an odd number before, but pretraining the network on odd numbers in a 12
different context didn’t help. And of course people, in contrast, readily generalize to novel words immediately upon 
hearing them. Likewise, the experiments I did with seven-month-olds consisted entirely of novel words.

  Page !  of !16 27



The widely-adopted addition of convolution guarantees that one particular class of 
problems that are akin to my identity problem can be solved: so-called translational 
invariances, in which an object retains its identity when it is shifted to a location.  But the 
solution is not general, as for example Lake’s recent demonstrations show. (Data 
augmentation offers another way of dealing with deep learning’s challenges in 
extrapolation, by trying to broaden the space of training examples itself, but such 
techniques are more useful in 2d vision than in language).  

As yet there is no general solution within deep learning to the problem of generalizing 
outside the training space. And it is for that reason, more than any other, that we need to 
look to different kinds of solutions if we want to reach artificial general intelligence. 

4. Potential risks of excessive hype 

One of the biggest risks in the current overhyping of AI is another AI winter, such as the 
one that devastated the field in the 1970’s, after the Lighthill report (Lighthill, 1973), 
suggested that AI was too brittle, too narrow and too superficial to be used in practice. 
Although there are vastly more practical applications of AI now than there were in the 
1970s, hype is still a major concern. When a high-profile figure like Andrew Ng writes in 
the Harvard Business Review promising a degree of imminent automation that is out of 
step with reality, there is fresh risk for seriously dashed expectations. Machines cannot in 
fact do many things that ordinary humans can do in a second, ranging from reliably 
comprehending the world to understanding sentences. No healthy human being would 
ever mistake a turtle for a rifle or parking sign for a refrigerator. 

Executives investing massively in AI may turn out to be disappointed, especially given 
the poor state of the art in natural language understanding. Already, some major projects 
have been largely abandoned, like Facebook’s M project, which was launched in August 
2015 with much publicity  as a general purpose personal assistant, and then later 13
downgraded to a significantly smaller role, helping users with a vastly small range of 
well-defined tasks such as calendar entry. 

It is probably fair to say that chatbots in general have not lived up to the hype they 
received a couple years ago. If, for example, driverless car should also, disappoint, 
relative to their early hype, by proving unsafe when rolled out at scale, or simply not 
achieving full autonomy after many promises, the whole field of AI could be in for a 
sharp downturn, both in popularity and funding. We already may be seeing hints of this, 

 https://www.wired.com/2015/08/how-facebook-m-works/13

  Page !  of !17 27



as in a just published Wired article  that was entitled “After peak hype, self-driving cars 14
enter the trough of disillusionment.”  

There are other serious fears, too, and not just of the apocalyptic variety (which for now 
to still seem to be stuff of science fiction).  My own largest fear is that the field of AI 
could get trapped in a local minimum, dwelling too heavily in the wrong part of 
intellectual space, focusing too much on the detailed exploration of a particular class of 
accessible but limited models that are geared around capturing low-hanging fruit — 
potentially neglecting riskier excursions that might ultimately lead to a more robust path.  

I am reminded of Peter Thiel’s famous (if now slightly outdated) damning of an often 
too-narrowly focused tech industry: “We wanted flying cars, instead we got 140 
characters”. I still dream of Rosie the Robost, a full-service domestic robot that take of 
my home; but for now, six decades into the history of AI, our bots do little more than play 
music, sweep floors, and bid on advertisements. 

If didn’t make more progress, it would be a shame. AI comes with risk, but also great 
potential rewards. AI’s greatest contributions to society, I believe, could and should 
ultimately come in domains like automated scientific discovery, leading among other 
things towards vastly more sophisticated versions of medicine than are currently possible. 
But to get there we need to make sure that the field as whole doesn’t first get stuck in a 
local minimum.  

5. What would be better?  

Despite all of the problems I have sketched,  I don’t think that we need to abandon deep 
learning.  

Rather, we need to reconceptualize it: not as a universal solvent, but simply as one tool 
among many,  a power screwdriver in a world in which we also need hammers, wrenches, 
and pliers, not to mentions chisels and drills, voltmeters, logic probes, and oscilloscopes.  

In perceptual classification, where vast amounts of data are available, deep learning is a 
valuable tool; in other, richer cognitive domains, it is often far less satisfactory. 

The question is, where else should we look? Here are four possibilities.  

 https://www.wired.com/story/self-driving-cars-challenges/14

  Page !  of !18 27

https://www.wired.com/story/self-driving-cars-challenges/


5.1.Unsupervised learning 

In interviews, deep learning pioneers Geoff Hinton and Yann LeCun have both recently 
pointed to unsupervised learning as one key way in which to go beyond supervised, data-
hungry versions of deep learning. 

To be clear, deep learning and unsupervised learning are not in logical opposition. Deep 
learning has mostly been used in a supervised context with labeled data, but there are 
ways of using deep learning in an unsupervised fashion. But there is certainly reasons in 
many domains to move away from the massive demands on data that supervised deep 
learning typically requires. 

Unsupervised learning, as the term is commonly used, tends to refer to several kinds of 
systems. One common type of system “clusters” together inputs that share properties, 
even without having them explicitly labeled. Google’s cat detector model (Le et al., 2012) 
is perhaps the most publicly prominent example of this sort of approach. 

Another approach, advocated researchers such as Yann LeCun (Luc, Neverova, Couprie, 
Verbeek, & LeCun, 2017), and not mutually exclusive with the first, is to replace labeled 
data sets with things like movies that change over time. The intuition is that systems 
trained on videos can use each pair of successive frames as a kind of ersatz teaching 
signal, in which the goal is to predict the next frame; frame t becomes a predictor for 
frame t1, without the need for any human labeling.  

My view is that both of these approaches are useful (and so are some others not discussed 
here), but that neither inherently solve the sorts of problems outlined in section 3. One is 
still left with data hungry systems that lack explicit variables, and I see no advance there 
towards open-ended inference, interpretability or debuggability. 

That said, there is a different notion of unsupervised learning, less discussed, which I find 
deeply interesting: the kind of unsupervised learning that human children do. Children 
often y set themselves a novel task, like creating a tower of Lego bricks or climbing 
through a small aperture, as my daughter recently did in climbing through a chair, in the 
space between the seat and the chair back . Often, this sort of exploratory problem 
solving involves (or at least appears to involve) a good deal of autonomous goal setting  
(what should I do?) and high level problem solving (how do I get my arm through the 
chair, now that the rest of my body has passed through?), as well the integration of 
abstract knowledge (how bodies work, what sorts of apertures and affordances various 
objects have, and so forth).  If we could build systems that could set their own goals and 
do reasoning and problem-solving at this more abstract level, major progress might 
quickly follow. 

  Page !  of !19 27



5.2.Symbol-manipulation, and the need for hybrid models 

Another place that we should look is towards classic, “symbolic” AI, sometimes referred 
to as GOFAI (Good Old-Fashioned AI). Symbolic AI takes its name from the idea, central 
to mathematics, logic, and computer science, that abstractions can be represented by 
symbols. Equations like f = ma allow us to calculate outputs for a wide range of inputs, 
irrespective of whether we have seen any particular values before; lines in computer 
programs do the same thing (if the value of variable x is greater than the value of variable 
y, perform action a).  

By themselves, symbolic systems have often proven to be brittle, but they were largely 
developed in era with vastly less data and computational power than we have now. The 
right move today may be to integrate deep learning, which excels at perceptual 
classification, with symbolic systems, which excel at inference and abstraction. One 
might think such a potential merger on analogy to the brain; perceptual input systems, 
like primary sensory cortex, seem to do something like what deep learning does, but there 
are other areas, like Broca’s area and prefrontal cortex, that seem to operate at much 
higher level of abstraction. The power and flexibility of the brain comes in part from its 
capacity  to dynamically integrate many different computations in real-time. The process 
of scene perception, for instance, seamlessly integrates direct sensory information with 
complex abstractions about objects and their properties, lighting sources, and so forth.  

Some tentative steps towards integration already exist, including neurosymbolic 
modeling (Besold et al., 2017) and recent trend towards systems such as differentiable 
neural computers (Graves et al., 2016), programming with differentiable interpreters 
(Bošnjak, Rocktäschel, Naradowsky, & Riedel, 2016), and neural programming with 
discrete operations (Neelakantan, Le, Abadi, McCallum, & Amodei, 2016). While none 
of this work has yet fully scaled towards anything like full-service artificial general 
intelligence, I have long argued (Marcus, 2001) that more on integrating microprocessor-
like operations into neural networks could be extremely valuable.  

To the extent that the brain might be seen as consisting of “a broad  array of reusable 
computational primitives—elementary units of  processing akin to sets of basic  
instructions in a microprocessor—perhaps wired together in parallel, as in the 
reconfigurable integrated circuit type known as the field-programmable gate array”, as I 
have argued elsewhere(Marcus, Marblestone, & Dean, 2014), steps towards enriching the 
instruction set out of which our computational systems are built can only be a good thing. 

  Page !  of !20 27



5.3.More insight from cognitive and developmental psychology 

Another potential valuable place to look is human cognition (Davis & Marcus, 2015; 
Lake et al., 2016; Marcus, 2001; Pinker & Prince, 1988). There is no need for machines 
to literally replicate the human mind, which is, after all, deeply error prone, and far from 
perfect. But there remain many areas, from natural language understanding to 
commonsense reasoning, in which humans still retain a clear advantage; learning the 
mechanisms underlying those human strengths could lead to advances in AI, even the 
goal is not, and should not be, an exact replica of human brain. 

For many people, learning from humans means neuroscience; in my view, that may be 
premature. We don’t yet know enough about neuroscience to literally reverse engineer the 
brain, per se, and may not for several decades, possibly until AI itself gets better. AI can 
help us to decipher the brain, rather than the other way around. 

Either way, in the meantime, it should certainly be possible to use techniques and insights 
drawn from cognitive and developmental and psychology, now, in order to build more 
robust and comprehensive artificial intelligence, building models that are motivated not 
just by mathematics but also by clues from the strengths of  human psychology.  

A good starting point might be to first to try understand the innate machinery in humans 
minds, as a source of hypotheses into mechanisms that might be valuable in developing 
artificial intelligences; in companion article to this one (Marcus, in prep) I summarize a 
number of possibilities, some drawn from my own earlier work (Marcus, 2001) and 
others from Elizabeth Spelke’s (Spelke & Kinzler, 2007).  Those drawn from my own 
work focus on how information might be represented and manipulated, such as by 
symbolic  mechanisms for representing variables and distinctions between kinds and 
individuals from a class; those drawn from Spelke focus on how infants might represent 
notions such as space, time, and object. 

A second focal point might be on common sense knowledge, both in how it develops 
(some might be part of our innate endowment, much of it is learned), how it is 
represented, and how it is integrated on line in the process of our interactions with the 
real world (Davis & Marcus, 2015). Recent work by Lerer et al (2016), Watters and 
colleagues (2017),  Tenenbaum  and colleagues(Wu, Lu, Kohli, Freeman, & Tenenbaum, 
2017) and Davis and myself (Davis, Marcus, & Frazier-Logue, 2017) suggest some 
competing approaches to how to think about this, within the domain of everyday physical 
reasoning.  

  Page !  of !21 27



A third focus might be on human understanding of narrative, a notion long ago suggested 
by Roger Schank and Abelson (1977) and due for a refresh (Marcus, 2014; Kočiský et al., 
2017). 

5.4.Bolder challenges 
Whether deep learning persists in current form, morphs into something new, or gets 
replaced altogether, one might consider a variety of challenge problems that push systems 
to move beyond what can be learned in supervised learning paradigms with large 
datasets. Drawing in part of from a recent special issue of AI Magazine  devoted to 
moving beyond the Turing Test that I edited with Francesca Rossi, Manuelo Veloso 
(Marcus, Rossi, Veloso - AI Magazine, & 2016, 2016), here are a few suggestions: 

• A comprehension challenge (Paritosh & Marcus, 2016; Kočiský et al., 2017)] which 
would require a system to watch an arbitrary video (or read a text, or listen to a 
podcast) and answer open-ended questions about what is contained therein. (Who is the 
protagonist? What is their motivation? What will happen if the antagonist succeeds in 
her mission?) No specific supervised training set can cover all the possible 
contingencies; infererence and real-world knowledge integration are necessities. 

• Scientific reasoning and understanding, as in the Allen AI institute’s 8th grade science 
challenge (Schoenick, Clark, Tafjord, P, & Etzioni, 2017; Davis, 2016). While the 
answers to many basic science questions can simply be retrieved from web searches, 
others require inference beyond what is explicitly stated, and the integration of general 
knowledge. 

• General game playing (Genesereth, Love, & Pell, 2005), with transfer between games 
(Kansky et al., 2017), such that, for example, learning about one first-person shooter 
enhances performance on another with entirely different images, equipment and so 
forth. (A system that can learn many games, separately, without transfer between them, 
such as DeepMind’s Atari game system, would not qualify; the point is to acquire 
cumulative, transferrable knowledge). 

• A physically embodied test an AI-driven robot that could build things (Ortiz Jr, 2016), 
ranging from tents to IKEA shelves, based on instructions and real-world physical 
interactions with the objects parts, rather than vast amounts trial-and-error. 

No one challenge is likely to be sufficient. Natural intelligence is multi-dimensional 
(Gardner, 2011), and given the complexity of the world, generalized artificial intelligence 
will necessarily be multi-dimensional as well.  

By pushing beyond perceptual classification and into a broader integration of inference 
and knowledge, artificial intelligence will advance, greatly. 

  Page !  of !22 27



6.  Conclusions 

As a measure of progress, it is worth considering a somewhat pessimistic piece I wrote 
for The New Yorker five years ago , conjecturing that “deep learning is only part of the 15
larger challenge of building intelligent machines” because “such techniques lack ways of 
representing causal relationships (such as between diseases and their symptoms), and are 
likely to face challenges in acquiring abstract ideas like “sibling” or “identical to.” They 
have no obvious ways of performing logical inferences, and they are also still a long way 
from integrating abstract knowledge, such as information about what objects are, what 
they are for, and how they are typically used.” 

As we have seen, many of these concerns remain valid, despite major advances in 
specific domains like speech recognition, machine translation, and board games, and 
despite equally impressive advances in infrastructure and the amount of data and compute 
available. 

Intriguingly, in the last year, a growing array of other scholars, coming from an 
impressive range of perspectives, have begun to emphasize similar limits. A partial list 
includes Brenden Lake and Marco Baroni (2017), François Chollet (2017), Robin Jia and 
Percy Liang (2017), Dileep George and others at Vicarious (Kansky et al., 2017) and 
Pieter Abbeel and colleagues at Berkeley (Stoica et al., 2017).  

Perhaps most notably of all, Geoff Hinton has been courageous enough to reconsider has 
own beliefs, revealing in an August interview with the news site Axios  that he is 16
“deeply suspicious” of back-propagation, a key enabler of deep learning that he helped 
pioneer, because of his concern about its dependence on labeled data sets.  

Instead, he suggested (in Axios’ paraphrase) that “entirely new methods will probably 
have to be invented.”  

I share Hinton’s excitement in seeing what comes next. 

 https://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/is-deep-learning-a-revolution-in-artificial-intelligence15

 https://www.axios.com/ai-pioneer-advocates-starting-over-2485537027.html16

  Page !  of !23 27

https://www.axios.com/ai-pioneer-advocates-starting-over-2485537027.html


References 
Athalye, A., Engstrom, L., Ilyas, A., & Kwok, K. (2017). Synthesizing Robust Adversarial 

Examples. arXiv, cs.CV. 
Besold, T. R., Garcez, A. D., Bader, S., Bowman, H., Domingos, P., Hitzler, P. et al. (2017). 

Neural-Symbolic Learning and Reasoning: A Survey and Interpretation. arXiv, cs.AI. 
Bošnjak, M., Rocktäschel, T., Naradowsky, J., & Riedel, S. (2016). Programming with a 

Differentiable Forth Interpreter. arXiv. 
Bottou, L. (2015). Two big challenges in machine learning. Proceedings from 32nd International 

Conference on Machine Learning. 
Bowman, S. R., Angeli, G., Potts, C., & Manning, C. D. (2015). A large annotated corpus for 

learning natural language inference. arXiv, cs.CL. 
Chollet, F. (2017). Deep Learning with Python. Manning Publications. 
Cireşan, D., Meier, U., Masci, J., & Schmidhuber, J. (2012). Multi-column deep neural network 

for traffic sign classification. Neural networks. 
Davis, E., & Marcus, G. (2015). Commonsense reasoning and commonsense knowledge in 

artificial intelligence. Communications of the ACM, 58(9)(9), 92-103. 
Davis, E. (2016). How to Write Science Questions that Are Easy for People and Hard for 

Computers. AI magazine, 37(1)(1), 13-22. 
Davis, E., Marcus, G., & Frazier-Logue, N. (2017). Commonsense reasoning about containers 

using radically incomplete information. Artificial Intelligence, 248, 46-84. 
Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L. J., Li - Computer Vision and, K., & 2009 Imagenet: A 

large-scale hierarchical image database. Proceedings from Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition, 2009. CVPR 2009. IEEE Conference on. 

Elman, J. L. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive science, 14(2)(2), 179-211. 
Evtimov, I., Eykholt, K., Fernandes, E., Kohno, T., Li, B., Prakash, A. et al. (2017). Robust 

Physical-World Attacks on Deep Learning Models. arXiv, cs.CR. 
Fodor, J. A., & Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1988). Connectionism and cognitive architecture: a critical 

analysis. Cognition, 28(1-2)(1-2), 3-71. 
Gardner, H. (2011). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple intelligences. Basic books. 
Gelman, S. A., Leslie, S. J., Was, A. M., & Koch, C. M. (2015). Children’s interpretations of 

general quantifiers, specific quantifiers, and generics. Lang Cogn Neurosci, 30(4)(4), 
448-461. 

Genesereth, M., Love, N., & Pell, B. (2005). General game playing: Overview of the AAAI 
competition. AI magazine, 26(2)(2), 62. 

George, D., Lehrach, W., Kansky, K., Lázaro-Gredilla, M., Laan, C., Marthi, B. et al. (2017). A 
generative vision model that trains with high data efficiency and breaks text-based 
CAPTCHAs. Science, 358(6368)(6368). 

Gervain, J., Berent, I., & Werker, J. F. (2012). Binding at birth: the newborn brain detects identity 
relations and sequential position in speech. J Cogn Neurosci, 24(3)(3), 564-574. 

Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., & Courville, A. (2016). Deep learning. MIT press. 

  Page !  of !24 27



Graves, A., Wayne, G., Reynolds, M., Harley, T., Danihelka, I., Grabska-Barwińska, A. et al. 
(2016). Hybrid computing using a neural network with dynamic external memory. Nature, 
538(7626)(7626), 471-476. 

Henderson, P., Islam, R., Bachman, P., Pineau, J., Precup, D., & Meger, D. (2017). Deep 
Reinforcement Learning that Matters. arXiv, cs.LG. 

Huang, S., Papernot, N., Goodfellow, I., Duan, Y., & Abbeel, P. (2017). Adversarial Attacks on 
Neural Network Policies. arXiv, cs.LG. 

Jia, R., & Liang, P. (2017). Adversarial Examples for Evaluating Reading Comprehension 
Systems. arXiv. 

Kahneman, D. (2013). Thinking, fast and slow (1st pbk. ed. ed.). New York: Farrar, Straus and 
Giroux. 

Kansky, K., Silver, T., Mély, D. A., Eldawy, M., Lázaro-Gredilla, M., Lou, X. et al. (2017). 
Schema Networks: Zero-shot Transfer with a Generative Causal Model of Intuitive 
Physics. arXIv, cs.AI. 

Kočiský, T., Schwarz, J., Blunsom, P., Dyer, C., Hermann, K. M., Melis, G. et al. (2017). The 
NarrativeQA Reading Comprehension Challenge. arXiv, cs.CL. 

Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., & Hinton, G. E. (2012). Imagenet classification with deep 
convolutional neural networks. In (pp. 1097-1105). 

Lake, B. M., Salakhutdinov, R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2015). Human-level concept learning 
through probabilistic program induction. Science, 350(6266)(6266), 1332-1338. 

Lake, B. M., Ullman, T. D., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Gershman, S. J. (2016). Building Machines 
That Learn and Think Like People. Behav Brain Sci, 1-101. 

Lake, B. M., & Baroni, M. (2017). Still not systematic after all these years: On the compositional 
skills of sequence-to-sequence recurrent networks. arXiv. 

Lazer, D., Kennedy, R., King, G., & Vespignani, A. (2014). Big data. The parable of Google Flu: 
traps in big data analysis. Science, 343(6176)(6176), 1203-1205. 

Le, Q. V., Ranzato, M.-A., Monga, R., Devin, M., Chen, K., Corrado, G. et al. (2012). Building 
high-level features using large scale unsupervised learning. Proceedings from International 
Conference on Machine Learning. 

LeCun, Y. (1989). Generalization and network design strategies. Technical Report CRG-TR-89-4. 
Lerer, A., Gross, S., & Fergus, R. (2016). Learning Physical Intuition of Block Towers by 

Example. arXiv, cs.AI. 
Lighthill, J. (1973). Artificial Intelligence: A General Survey. Artificial Intelligence: a paper 

symposium. 
Lipton, Z. C. (2016). The Mythos of Model Interpretability. arXiv, cs.LG. 
Lopez-Paz, D., Nishihara, R., Chintala, S., Schölkopf, B., & Bottou, L. (2017). Discovering 

causal signals in images. Proceedings from Proceedings of Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition (CVPR). 

Luc, P., Neverova, N., Couprie, C., Verbeek, J., & LeCun, Y. (2017). Predicting Deeper into the 
Future of Semantic Segmentation. International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV 
2017). 

  Page !  of !25 27



Marcus, G., Rossi, F., Veloso - AI Magazine, M., & 2016. (2016). Beyond the Turing Test. AI 
Magazine, Whole issue. 

Marcus, G., Marblestone, A., & Dean, T. (2014). The atoms of neural computation. Science, 
346(6209)(6209), 551-552. 

Marcus, G. (in prep). Innateness, AlphaZero, and Artificial Intelligence. 
Marcus, G. (2014). What Comes After the Turing Test? The New Yorker.  
Marcus, G. (2012). Is “Deep Learning” a Revolution in Artificial Intelligence? The New Yorker.  
Marcus, G. F. (2008). Kluge : the haphazard construction of the human mind. Boston: Houghton 

Mifflin. 
Marcus, G. F. G. F. (2001). The Algebraic Mind: Integrating Connectionism and cognitive 

science. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
Marcus, G. F. (1998a). Rethinking eliminative connectionism. Cogn Psychol, 37(3)(3), 243-282. 
Marcus, G. F. (1998b). Can connectionism save constructivism? Cognition, 66(2)(2), 153-182. 
Marcus, G. F., Pinker, S., Ullman, M., Hollander, M., Rosen, T. J., & Xu, F. (1992). 

Overregularization in language acquisition. Monogr Soc Res Child Dev, 57(4)(4), 1-182. 
Marcus, G. F., Vijayan, S., Bandi Rao, S., & Vishton, P. M. (1999). Rule learning by seven-

month-old infants. Science, 283(5398)(5398), 77-80. 
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., & Dean, J. (2013). Efficient Estimation of Word 

Representations in Vector Space. arXiv. 
Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Veness, J., Bellemare, M. G. et al. (2015). 

Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540)(7540), 
529-533. 

Neelakantan, A., Le, Q. V., Abadi, M., McCallum, A., & Amodei, D. (2016). Learning a Natural 
Language Interface with Neural Programmer. arXiv. 

Ng, A. (2016). What Artificial Intelligence Can and Can’t Do Right Now. Harvard Business 
Review. 

Nguyen, A., Clune, J., Bengio, Y., Dosovitskiy, A., & Yosinski, J. (2016). Plug & Play 
Generative Networks: Conditional Iterative Generation of Images in Latent Space. arXiv, 
cs.CV. 

Nguyen, A., Yosinski, J., & Clune, J. (2014). Deep Neural Networks are Easily Fooled: High 
Confidence Predictions for Unrecognizable Images. arXiv, cs.CV. 

Norvig, P. (2016). State-of-the-Art AI: Building Tomorrow’s Intelligent Systems. Proceedings 
from EmTech Digital, San Francisco. 

O’Neil, C. (2016). Weapons of math destruction : how big data increases inequality and threatens 
democracy. 

Ortiz Jr, C. L. (2016). Why we need a physically embodied Turing test and what it might look 
like. AI magazine, 37(1)(1), 55-63. 

Paritosh, P., & Marcus, G. (2016). Toward a comprehension challenge, using crowdsourcing as a 
tool. AI Magazine, 37(1)(1), 23-31. 

Pearl, J. (2000). Causality : models, reasoning, and inference /. Cambridge, U.K.; New York : 
Cambridge University Press. 

  Page !  of !26 27



Pinker, S., & Prince, A. (1988). On language and connectionism: analysis of a parallel distributed 
processing model of language acquisition. Cognition, 28(1-2)(1-2), 73-193. 

Ribeiro, M. T., Singh, S., & Guestrin, C. (2016). “Why Should I Trust You?”: Explaining the 
Predictions of Any Classifier. arXiv, cs.LG. 

Sabour, S., Frosst, N., & Hinton, G. E. (2017). Dynamic Routing Between Capsules. arXiv, 
cs.CV. 

Samek, W., Wiegand, T., & Müller, K.-R. (2017). Explainable Artificial Intelligence: 
Understanding, Visualizing and Interpreting Deep Learning Models. arXiv, cs.AI. 

Schank, R. C., & Abelson, R. P. (1977). Scripts, Plans, Goals and Understanding: an Inquiry into 
Human Knowledge Structures. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum. 

Schmidhuber, J. (2015). Deep learning in neural networks: An overview. Neural networks. 
Schoenick, C., Clark, P., Tafjord, O., P, T., & Etzioni, O. (2017). Moving beyond the Turing Test 

with the Allen AI Science Challenge. Communications of the ACM, 60 (9)(9), 60-64. 
Sculley, D., Phillips, T., Ebner, D., Chaudhary, V., & Young, M. (2014). Machine learning: The 

high-interest credit card of technical debt. Proceedings from SE4ML: Software 
Engineering for Machine Learning (NIPS 2014 Workshop). 

Socher, R., Huval, B., Manning, C. D., & Ng, A. Y. (2012). Semantic compositionality through 
recursive matrix-vector spaces. Proceedings from Proceedings of the 2012 joint conference 
on empirical methods in natural language processing and computational natural language 
learning. 

Spelke, E. S., & Kinzler, K. D. (2007). Core knowledge. Dev Sci, 10(1)(1), 89-96. 
Stoica, I., Song, D., Popa, R. A., Patterson, D., Mahoney, M. W., Katz, R. et al. (2017). A 

Berkeley View of Systems Challenges for AI. arXiv, cs.AI. 
Szegedy, C., Zaremba, W., Sutskever, I., Bruna, J., Erhan, D., Goodfellow, I. et al. (2013). 

Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv, cs.CV. 
Vinyals, O., Toshev, A., Bengio, S., & Erhan, D. (2014). Show and Tell: A Neural Image Caption 

Generator. arXiv, cs.CV. 
Watters, N., Tacchetti, A., Weber, T., Pascanu, R., Battaglia, P., & Zoran, D. (2017). Visual 

Interaction Networks. arXiv. 
Williams, A., Nangia, N., & Bowman, S. R. (2017). A Broad-Coverage Challenge Corpus for 

Sentence Understanding through Inference. arXiv, cs.CL. 
Wu, J., Lu, E., Kohli, P., Freeman, B., & Tenenbaum, J. (2017). Learning to See Physics via 

Visual De-animation. Proceedings from Advances in Neural Information Processing 
Systems. 

Zoph, B., Vasudevan, V., Shlens, J., & Le, Q. V. (2017). Learning Transferable Architectures for 
Scalable Image Recognition. arXiv, cs.CV. 

  Page !  of !27 27


