







































We should use nukes to deflect asteroids, says astro algorithm


We should use nukes to deflect
asteroids, says astro algorithm

By Jacob Aron

asteroid

What could we do if an asteroid was on a collision course with Earth?

Detlev Van Ravenswaay/Science Photo Library

IF AN asteroid was set to hit Earth, humanity would have to scramble to

conduct the world’s riskiest experiment. We have never tried to shove a

space rock off its course, so any defence effort would be a shot in the

dark.

People have come up with ideas – like chucking nuclear weapons at an

incoming threat – but with limited asteroid defence budgets, which

should we pursue? An algorithm called the Deflector Selector says

nukes would do the job about half the time.

To be clear, Erika Nesvold, formerly at the Carnegie Institution for

Science in Washington DC, and her team don’t suggest we give a

computer free reign over nuclear missiles. “We are absolutely not

advocating putting the algorithm in charge of asteroid defence,” she

says.

Advertisement

Instead, their machine learning algorithm can study a population of

potentially hazardous objects, and determine which technology has the

best chance of deflecting them from Earth’s path.

To build the algorithm, Nesvold and her colleagues simulated six

million hypothetical objects with the potential to hit Earth. Next, they

looked at how early each could be detected before collision, and the

velocity change needed to knock it off course. Finally, they looked at

which of three technologies would be best at doing this: nuclear

weapons, kinetic impactors or gravity tractors.

Nuclear weapons release an explosive force, while a kinetic impactor is

We should use nukes to deflect asteroids, says astro algorithm https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg23731653-800-we-should-use-...

1 sur 2 12-03-18 à 19:04

lphilippe
Texte surligné 
In clear, ML is used here as a powerful interpolator!!!



essentially like trying to shoot one bullet out of the air with a much

smaller one. Gravity tractors are more subtle. The idea here is to put a

spacecraft near an asteroid, and let its gravitational pull slowly tug the

rock off course, but the concept hasn’t been tested.

All this number crunching required a cluster of 100 computer cores

running for around 40 hours. To bring the timing down, the researchers

turned to machine learning. Using the simulation as training data, they

taught an algorithm to study a given population of objects and decide

which tech had the best chance of deflection. Nesvold says after the

algorithm is trained, it can supply an answer in seconds instead of

hours.

The team tried their trained algorithm on three populations: hazardous

near-Earth asteroids, comets and rubble piles – loose collections of

material, rather than solid objects. In each case, nuclear weapons could

tackle about 50 per cent of the objects. Kinetic impactors and gravity

tractors had lower success rates (arxiv.org/abs/1802.00458).

That might suggest we should invest in nuclear weapons as our asteroid

defence of choice, but there are issues when it comes to mounting these

on rockets. “The risks created by pursuing a nuclear asteroid defence

programme would far outweigh the actual risks posed by asteroid

impacts,” says Eric Christensen at the Catalina Sky Survey.

The gravity tractor success rates improved when the asteroids were

spotted earlier. “That points to the need for better asteroid monitoring

and detection surveys,” says Nesvold. “Earlier detection of potential

impactors will provide more lead time to plan and execute a mission,”

agrees Christensen.

This article appeared in print under the headline “Deflector Selector

says nuke asteroids”

We should use nukes to deflect asteroids, says astro algorithm https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg23731653-800-we-should-use-...

2 sur 2 12-03-18 à 19:04


