









































Microsoft Word - Design for trust camera ready final.docx


Design for Trust: An Exploration of the Challenges and 
Opportunities of Bitcoin Users 

Corina Sas 
Lancaster University 

Lancaster, UK 
corina@comp.lancs.ac.uk 

Irni Eliana Khairuddin  
Universiti Teknologi MARA 

Selangor, Malaysia 
irnieliana@salam.uitm.edu.my  

 
ABSTRACT 
Bitcoin is a cryptocurrency which has received increasing 
interest over the last five years. Built upon a decentralized 
peer to peer system, it supports transparent, fast, cost 
effective, and irreversible transactions, without the need for 
trusting third party financial institutions. We know however 
little about people’s motivation and experience with bitcoin 
currency. This paper reports on interviews with 20 bitcoin 
users in Malaysia about their experience and trust 
challenges. Findings show that bitcoins are used more as 
store of value for speculative investment or savings’ 
protection. The paper advances the HCI theories on trust by 
identifying main bitcoin characteristics and their impact on 
trust, such as decentralization, unregulation, embedded 
expertise, and reputation, as well as transactions’ 
transparency, low cost, and easiness to complete. We 
discuss insecure transactions, the risk of dishonest traders 
and its mitigating strategies. The paper concludes with 
design implications including support for the transparency 
of two-way transactions, tools for materializing trust, and 
tools for supporting reversible transactions. 

Author Keywords 
Bitcoin users; blockchain; trust; dishonest traders; risks. 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 

INTRODUCTION 
Bitcoin is a special form of alternative currency: a digital 
cryptocurrency described as the first open and decentralized 
currency [23], whose transactions are recorded on an open 
source, and publicly distributed ledger. This blockchain 
technology allows for secure and transparent transactions, 
while protecting the identity of transaction’s parties [39]. 
On the one hand, such an innovative form of financial 
transaction appears particularly appealing to bitcoin users. 

 
Figure 1: Merchant’s sign for accepting bitcoin payment  

For example, in a preliminary study, Khairuddin and Sas 
[26] interviewed 9 users and identified three motivations for 
bitcoin use: the role of bitcoin technology in a monetary 
revolution, users’ increased empowerment due to the open, 
decentralized and unregulated technology, and their 
perception of the increasing value of bitcoins. On the other 
hand, blockchain’s characteristics as a decentralized and 
pseudo-anonymous platform can pose important trust 
challenges to bitcoin users such as illicit use and 
cyberattacks [15,53]. We argue that because of these 
characteristics, blockchain offers a unique case study for 
the exploration of trust. This contrasts with most HCI 
models of trust which have been informed by empirical 
work on e-commerce or e-payment systems which are 
traditionally centralized, regulated, and non-anonymous. 
Hence the feasibility of these models for theorizing about 
users’ trust in bitcoin requires exploration. 

Since its beginning in 2009, blockchain technology has 
steered increasing research interest predominantly in the 
areas of cryptography, security, and peer to peer computing. 
Relevant HCI work has just started to emerge [5,26,43]. We 
still know little about bitcoin users and their experience or 
how different blockchain’s characteristics impact on trust. 
This paper addresses this gap, by reporting on interviews 
with 20 bitcoin users about their motivations and 
experience of using bitcoins and their trust related issues. 
We addressed the following research questions: 
• Which are the motives for early adoption and use of 

bitcoins? How do people learn about bitcoin and how 
do they use bitcoins for?   

• How different blockchains’ characteristics impact on 
the various dimensions of trust? 

• Which are the main trust challenges and how do people 
attempt to mitigate them? 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CHI 2017, May 06-11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA 
© 2017 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4655-9/17/05…$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025886 

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA

6499



The main contributions of this work include advancing the 
theoretical discourse of trust in HCI, by extending it to 
unregulated, decentralized and pseudo-anonymous systems 
such as blockchain. We also identified three design 
implications for supporting users’ trust. 

RELATED WORK 
While the topic of trust has been well researched by various 
disciplines, for our work we selected theories developed in 
HCI, particularly for e-payment and e-commerce. 

Trust in HCI 
We agree with the definition of trust as the willingness to 
be vulnerable [13]. In HCI there are two main directions of 
conceptualizing trust: trust between people and technology, 
and trust between people interacting with technology. 
Specific HCI work exploring people’s trust in bitcoin 
technology is just starting to emerge. For example, in their 
framework for exploring the trust challenges of bitcoin 
technology, Sas and Khairuddin [43] identified three 
dimensions of trust: technological (users’ trust in bitcoin 
technology), social (trust between and among bitcoin’s 
stakeholders: users, miners, exchanges and merchants), and 
institutional trust (government trust in bitcoin technology).  

Two prevalent HCI models are the model of online trust 
[13], and the framework on mechanics of trust [41]. 
Corritore and colleagues [13] identified three trust factors 
including users’ perception of technology’s credibility, ease 
of use, and risk. Their four dimensions of credibility 
include honesty (well intention, truthful and unbiased 
actions), expertise (knowledge, experience and 
competence), predictability (expectation that technology 
will act consistently based on past experience), and 
reputation (recognized past performance). The model has 
been extensively applied to web design in e-government, e-
commerce, and e-banking, but its value for blockchain 
technology has received limited attention. The model also 
shares similarities with Davis’ [16] emphasis on usefulness 
and ease of use in his technology acceptance model.  

The framework on mechanics of trust [41] investigates 
technology-mediated trust between users and has been 
applied to e-commerce. This framework identifies two key 
properties warranting trust in transaction’s partner: 
contextual and intrinsic properties. Contextual properties 
are described as temporal, social and institutional 
embeddedness. Temporal embeddedness refers to parties’ 
potential for engaging in future transactions, and interest in 
their relationship’s longevity. This in turn prevents the risk 
of defection, as the present gains come at the cost of future 
lost ones. Temporal embeddedness requires traceability of 
action through “repeated interaction with stable identities” 
[p9, 41] so that the trustor can accumulate more knowledge 
and make better predictions about the trustee’s future 
behavior. Social embeddedness captures the exchange of 
information among trustors about trustees’ past 
performance. This motivates the trustee to fulfil the 
agreement in order to protect his reputation among the 

larger pool of trustors accessing information about his past 
performances. Institutional embeddedness captures the legal 
aspects underpinning transactions, able to enforce sanctions 
such as litigation or punishment for the parties who do not 
fulfil their agreement. Given this protection by the law 
institutions, the trustors are comfortable to engage in 
transactions with trustors of whom they know little. 

Intrinsic properties of the trustee include his ability or 
motivation to act in a trustworthy manner inferable on the 
basis of his credibility; internalized norms which capture 
trustee’s integrity or respect for moral principles which can 
be supported by the parties’ social identify and presence; 
and benevolence capturing trustee’s concern for the 
wellbeing of the other [41]. Benevolence resembles 
Hardin’s theory of trust [24] and the encapsulated interest: 
parties’ interest in relationship which tends to be rich and 
ongoing. He also discusses risk as the uncertainty of 
trustee’s choice to engage in betrayal or deflection; risk 
which is better mitigated in group or thick relationships 
where trustee’s reputation is socially embedded. 

To summarize, HCI models of trust identified key factors 
impacting on users’ trust in technology or in each other 
during technology-mediated transactions. There is however 
limited work on investigating the feasibility of these models 
for the exploration of trust in bitcoin technology.   

Alternative Crypto Currency  
Historically, people created objects as medium of exchange 
to replace the barter system [45]. Such objects include 
shells, stones or anything valuable to both buyer and seller. 
The argument of the medium of exchange was later 
extended in the 17th century through fiat money [17]: coins 
of precious metals issued and declared valuable by the king. 
Such coins were commonly deposited with goldsmiths for 
safekeeping, and in return, the owners were given receipts 
called goldsmith’s notes [51]. The goldsmith role was later 
taken on by the government institutions issuing fiat money 
through their treasuries or central banks, so that nowadays 
the national fiat currencies are the dominant medium of 
exchange for trading goods or services. They also serve the 
role of storing value for future purchase, and of units of 
account in which goods and services could be priced. Over 
the last five centuries however, alternative medium of 
exchange have also emerged as substitute to national fiat 
currencies [21], mostly for supporting local economies and 
their communities [20]. Developed privately, most of the 
alternative currencies have no legal tender and are not 
regulated by national governments [28]. Alternative 
currencies have also emerged as unregulated digital 
currencies issued and controlled by developers, and used by 
members of virtual communities [18].  

Bitcoin Technology 
A more recent development of alternative currencies is 
crypto currencies built through cryptographic algorithms. 
Among the over 500 cryptocurrencies available in the 
current market [12], bitcoin is one of the most popular ones. 

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA

6500



Designed by Nakamoto, an anonymous entity, bitcoin is 
underpinned by the blockchain technology [39] which has 
received increased interest from both the financial and 
industrial sectors [50]. The blockchain consists of a ledger 
distributed throughout a peer to peer network of nodes 
which record each transaction after it has been approved. 
Transactions in blockchain are represented as single data 
structures and from user’s perspective they involve three 
key components: the address where the bitcoins are stored; 
the private key owned by the user to send bitcoins; and the 
wallet software, which runs on user’s personal computer, 
used to receive, send or store bitcoins [47]. Each bitcoin 
transaction is created by the wallet software and 
broadcasted to the network where it is tested for validity 
and included in the blockchain.  

Unlike in the banking system, the blockchain ledger is not 
maintained by a central authority and the verification of 
transactions is not ensured by trusted third parties. Instead 
transactions are verified and authorized by miners using 
secure crypto algorithms [15] ensuring thus core security 
functions [4]. A negative consequence of this unregulation 
is the feud between governments and blockchain, with 
some central institutions having failed to recognize its 
legality [49]. Previous work has also identified some 
scamming cyber threats faced by the bitcoin users such as 
scams related to fake website, ponzi scheme, phishing, and 
application plugin [53]. As the ledger is public, blockchain 
is also known as a transparent system: each machine 
connected to the blockchain can download a full copy of the 
ledger, allowing for browsing or querying the global history 
of transactions as well as the remaining balance of the 
bitcoins left in each wallet address [47]. Since it no longer 
requires trust in third party entities to keep the ledger, 
blockchain technology has been called trustless. 

In Nakamoto’s view [39] the concepts of irreversible 
transactions and trust are strongly coupled. The blockchain 
aims to address the key weakness of the traditional trust 
based model where financial institutions act as trusted third 
parties to mediate e-payments. Bank transactions however 
are costly both in time and fees. They can also be reversed 
by the banks, in order to arbitrate disputes between the 
trading parties. The problem however is that the banks are 
not bound to enforce the contract between the trading 
parties, so that refunds may be approved even if the 
contract stipulates otherwise. In contrast, blockchain was 
intended to eliminate this middle link and its higher cost, as 
well as the option of reversing transactions.  

Another important aspect of the blockchain is protecting the 
privacy of the parties involved in bitcoin transactions [39]. 
A similar functionality is available in the banking system 
where the privacy is ensured by limiting access to 
transaction information to the involved parties and the 
bank. However, the protection of privacy in blockchain is 
even stronger, since it does not require any personally 
identifiable information in order to allow users to engage in 

bitcoin transactions. This makes the blockchain pseudo-
anonymous [4]: the wallet address is public while the 
identity of its owner is not [39]. It is however users’ 
responsibility to ensure that the two are never linked [15]. 
To support this, Nakamoto suggested the use of new wallet 
address for each transaction [39]. The pseudo-anonymous 
nature of blockchain technology lets it open to misuse on 
the online black market such as Silk Road, with negative 
consequences for blockchain’s reputation [15].  

To conclude, the technology underpinning bitcoin 
transactions has been purposefully designed as 
decentralized and secure, unregulated and transparent yet 
pseudo-anonymous. These unique strengths of the 
blockchain also relate to some trust challenges such as 
illicit use or damaged reputation. There are however limited 
empirical studies exploring the relationship between 
blockchain’s properties and users’ trust [30,33]. 

METHOD 
We recruited 20 bitcoin users, 18 male, 2 female, (mean age 
30, range 21-50). Six participants had less than 6 months 
experience of using bitcoins, 8 participants have between 6 
months and 2 years, while the remaining 6 have more than 
2 years. In terms of educational background, half of 
participants had Bachelor degrees, 7 were school leavers, 
and 3 had Master degrees. Participants had a broad range of 
occupations: 8 in administrative roles, 4 in financial and 
marketing sector, 3 school teachers, 2 unemployed, 1 in 
medical field, 1 in IT and 1 student. Each participant was 
rewarded RM50 (equivalent to £10 in Malaysian currency). 
Participants were recruited from five Facebook and 
Telegram groups of Malaysian bitcoin users, joined by the 
second author. Malaysia offers a specific opportunity for 
the exploration of bitcoin practices. On the one hand, 
despite five decades of economic growth, it is still a 
developing country with increasing inflation rate, 
underdeveloped democracy and a financial system which is 
now under the scrutiny of law enforcement. On the other 
hand, Malaysia experiences a massive growth of remittance 
and payment market, and interest in crypto currency, being 
in 2016 the first developing country considering 
Fintech regulation. Over the last year it also ranked fourth 
on bitcoin searches on Google Trends, and first among 
developing countries on the number of bitcoin nodes.  

The invitations for taking part in the study were both 
publicly posted and privately sent to the most active 
members in each of the online groups. We also applied 
snowball sampling so that six more participants were 
introduced by the interviewed ones. We conducted semi-
structured interviews between April and May 2016, to 
explore users’ motivation, understanding and use of bitcoin.  
We asked: “why are you interested in bitcoin”, “how did 
you learn about bitcoin” and “which are the benefits and 
challenges of using bitcoins”. We also asked about users’ 
challenges and trust-related issues: “what are the 
challenges that you face when using or engaging with 

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA

6501



bitcoin technology”, and “how much trust do you have in 
bitcoin technology”, and followed up with additional 
questions on perceived security and anonymity. Not at least, 
we explored participants’ perception of risk and their 
mitigation strategies: “did you experience any fraud”, and 
“will you take any actions to prevent that in the future”. 

The interviews took place via Skype or phone. They lasted 
at least an hour, were audio recorded and fully transcribed. 
The analysis involved a hybrid approach where existing 
concepts were used for the deductive coding while new 
concepts grounded on the empirical data, contributed to the 
inductive coding [19]. The deductive coding included 
concepts from the HCI literature on trust such as  
technological, social and institutional dimensions of trust 
[43], factors of user’s trust in technology such as 
credibility, ease of use, and risk [13], and properties 
warranting trust between technology users such as 
temporal, social and institutional embeddedness, as well as 
credibility, integrity and benevolence [41]. We have also 
used concepts related to blockchains’ characteristics such as 
decentralization, unregulation, pseudo-anonymity, as well 
as transparent and irreversible transactions. The coding list 
was iteratively refined in the light of the interview data, as 
new codes emerged under the theme of motivation, insecure 
transactions and risk mitigating strategies.  

RESULTS 
We start by outlining users’ motivation for engaging with 
bitcoin technology, followed by a description of its key 
characteristics and their impact on users’ trust. In particular, 
we highlight the issue of insecure transactions and the 
associated human and technology-related risks.  We further 
unpack the risks of dealing with dishonest traders, and the 
mitigating strategies for addressing them.  

Motivation for the Use of Bitcoin Currency 
This section highlights the motivation of end users, people 
with limited knowledge of bitcoin technology, who adopt 
and engage in the use of bitcoins. The motivation and 
perception of early adopters towards bitcoins can be 
grouped according to Davis’ technology acceptance model 
[16] in perceived usefulness, and ease of use.  We further 
describe the perceived usefulness of bitcoins as an external 
motivational factor and its key economic rationale. 

Economic Rationale 
The economic aspect captures people’s distrust in financial 
institutions and the governments legitimizing them. Several 
participants referred to the importance of protecting one’s 
savings in the face of an unstable economic climate, 
dominated not only by inflation but also by governments’ 
decisions to control personal bank account holders’ money 
and their movement [11]. For example, the following quote 
is illustrative for a quarter of our participants: “From what I 
learned from the Cyprus crisis, governments and banks 
have the authority to take your money from your account 
[…] the trust in financial institution is gone forever. So I 
looked for alternatives and found Bitcoin to keep the 

savings” [P16]. This outcome provides support for the 
security motive for acquiring money and bitcoins’ 
perceived value for providing safety when people distrust 
the world and the future [22], particularly in the context of 
inflation and economic downturn: “currently our currency 
is falling and I am worried. As a backup plan, I converted 
my money in gold or bitcoins, which are not influenced by 
any big parties or power” [P8]. This is interesting as 
reflects the assumption of gold as commodity, which 
wrongly conflates gold’s long-run price stability with the 
absence of power for regulating its price: while such power 
does not need to belong to centralized banks, it still requires 
government’s authority [6]. 

A third economic reason underpinning the adoption of 
bitcoins is speculation on their future value. Almost half of 
participants share this view: “I keep my saving in bitcoins 
[because] their future value will increase over time” [P11]. 
In such cases, participants purposely explored alternative 
means of exchange for replacing their volatile fiat currency 
in order to both protect savings and more importantly, to 
invest for future income. 

Social Learning 
Findings indicate that in order to learn about the bitcoin 
currency, participants leverage the emerging social network 
of bitcoin users. This social aspect underpinning the initial 
motivation of bitcoin’s early adopters include online 
communities where most of participants have heard for the 
first time what bitcoin currency is: “The first time I heard 
[about bitcoins] was from the Reddit forum”. After finding 
out about the bitcoin currency and its potential value, 
participants described their efforts to learn more through 
self-guided online research: “First I read about bitcoin 
online in 2009, [and] in 2013 I could see the price rising 
up, so I  started to learn more about” [P7]. An additional 
source of information about bitcoin is peers and friends: “I 
started to know about bitcoin a few years ago, when my 
friend told me about the wallet, the process and how 
bitcoins could eliminate banks’ transactions” [P3].This 
quote indicates how some early adopters champion the use 
of bitcoin currency by highlighting its advantages against 
the national fiat currencies. 

Uses of Bitcoins 
While most of the literature describes bitcoins as 
cryptocurrency [8,12], our findings indicate that they are 
used predominantly as store of value, i.e., predictably 
valuable for later use. Eight participants used bitcoins on a 
regular basis to generate income, 7 used them occasionally 
for investment, while 5 were full time investors. This is 
interesting, because, bitcoins experience high volatility 
which makes them on the long-term unreliable stores of 
value [52]. It appears that the complete control over one’s 
savings is preferred over the less volatile yet less 
controllable fiat currency. Such characteristics were shared 
by other cryptocurrencies such as litecoin and swisscoin 
also used by our participants. 

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA

6502



Another surprising finding is that we have seen only three 
isolated accounts of the use of bitcoin as currency for 
buying goods or services, despite the growing number of 
merchants who accept bitcoins (Figure 1). Most of the 
payments were for online utility or phone bills, food, or 
mining equipment. For example one participant noted the 
payment of his mobile phone’s prepaid credit with bitcoins 
[P10], while another referred to the payment of food 
supplement from a friend: “he just sent me his QR code and 
I scanned the code and transferred the amount of bitcoins ” 
[P19]. In addition one participant mentioned both online 
and offline uses of bitcoin currency: “I pay my utility bills 
in bitcoins from the cryptomarket.my. I even buy my 
cigarette from expedia.com, and use cheapair.com to buy 
my flight tickets and hotel bookings too. Then there is a 
restaurant in Johor where I pay in bitcoins” [P12]. This 
diverse way of spending bitcoins as currency is an 
exception rather than the norm, as we failed to find any 
additional participants reporting similarly rich use of 
bitcoin currency. Interestingly, we only found one account 
of illegal purchase: “I bought an unlimited Spotify account 
from the dark web using bitcoin” [P1]. 

Blockchain’s Characteristics and their Impact on Trust 
We now describe the main characteristics of bitcoin 
technology, and how they contribute to trust in bitcoin. 
These include blockchain’s decentralization, unregulation, 
embedded expertise and reputation, as well as transparent, 
low cost, easy, and insecure transactions. 

Decentralized Blockchain 
One of the main identified characteristics relates to the 
decentralized nature of bitcoin technology [47]. Findings 
indicate that most participants appreciate that bitcoin 
transactions do not involve any third party involvement 
from financial institutions: “A decentralized currency is a 
bit more secure in terms of handling it is same like an asset. 
So if nobody else [third party] handles the asset, it is more 
secure for me to handle it by myself” [P20]. The 
decentralization of blockchain also fosters confidence in its 
clear intention to circumvent, arguably dishonest central 
financial institutions. This in turn provides support for 
honesty as a dimension of credibility in Corritore and 
colleagues’ [13] model of online trust. 

People also understand the reduced need for the 
complicated authorization process for sending and receiving 
money: “if you look at the current banking system, it takes 
three working days to do the settlement, but with blockchain 
you can settle it instantly” [P3]. This quote illustrates the 
appreciation for quicker transfer of money between 
accounts, and therefore the ease of use. 

Unregulated Blockchain 
Participants also expressed appreciation for the unregulated 
aspect of blockchain technology. As a result, more than half 
of participants perceive this as an opportunity to become 
more empowered and privileged to regain control over their 
own money: “All governments love to control people [but] 

they cannot control bitcoin, and that’s why they cannot 
accept it. Bitcoin is people’s money giving them financial 
freedom” [P14]. This is a militant statement, which links 
back to the initial motivation for engaging with blockchain 
technology: the erosion of trust in financial and government 
institutions coupled with the economic crisis [43].  

Unregulation sets no limits for sending and receiving 
money, which can take place either locally or worldwide: “I 
see no boundaries for people to do trading globally or 
nationwide; a freedom to do the trading without any 
restriction from the authority” [P2].  As a decentralized and 
unregulated system, the risk of abuse of power over 
individuals’ personal assets is highly restricted. This 
confirms a limitation of the perceived risk as the third 
dimension of the model of online trust [13]. Several 
participants referred to the benefits of blockchain’s pseudo-
anonymity, and its value in supporting unregulation as 
illustrated by this quote: “we can keep our money as much 
as we want and the government will not able to freeze our 
wallet because of the pseudo-anonymity” [P11]. 

Blockchain’s Embedded Expertise 
Another characteristic of bitcoin technology is people’s 
appreciation for the expertise required for mining bitcoins 
and verifying transactions. This is interesting giving that for 
example, mining a rig needs limited technical knowledge. 
Findings however indicate that the cost required by the 
mining process provides a guarantee for the invested 
expertise and ultimately for the credibility of the blockchain 
technology: “producing bitcoins is not something easy. 
There are specific ways to mine and expensive equipment 
needed” [P8]. As the competition and difficulty for mining 
bitcoins increases over time, more computationally intense 
mining equipment is needed which in turn lead to higher 
costs for producing bitcoins. Almost a quarter of 
participants mentioned this complexity and the cost of the 
mining procedure. Their appreciation for miners’ expertise 
fosters credibility in bitcoin currency and transactions. This 
further confirms the credibility dimension of the online 
model of trust and its application to bitcoin technology [13].  

Blockchain’s Reputation 
The reputation of the blockchain technology has been 
notoriously damaged due to illicit activities on Silk Road, 
an anonymous online marketplace predominantly for 
narcotics, which uses bitcoins as its exchange currency 
[10]. Four participants mentioned such reputation issue due 
also to current cybercrimes, since Silk Road was closed 
down in 2013: “there are lot of crimes due to bitcoin’s 
anonymity: money laundering, terrorist financing and tax 
evasion” [P15] but surprisingly, with limited reference to its 
negative impact on participants’ credibility in bitcoin 
technology. Interestingly, we also found instances where 
participants in fact valued the growing reputation of bitcoin 
technology: “In the long term, this technology has a very 
bright future. There are lots of big companies which start 
doing research on blockchain” [P17]. This quote suggests 

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA

6503



that the large companies’ interest in blockchain offers 
alternative routes for legitimizing its authenticity and 
ultimately credibility. Apart from trust in blockchain, 
participants also referred to trust in bitcoin transactions. We 
now discuss the main characteristics of bitcoin transactions 
and how they support or hinder trust.  

Transparent Transactions 
Our findings indicate an important and valued characteristic 
of bitcoin transactions: their transparency [47]. The public 
ledger allows public access to the movement of bitcoins 
from one wallet to another. Users are able to track any 
bitcoin transactions from the very first one, until the present 
day: “because bitcoin uses blockchain, we can see the 
movement of the bitcoins in a public ledger. It is very 
transparent” [P11]. Transparency echoes technology’s 
credibility dimension in Corritore and colleagues’ [13] 
model of online trust, and its honesty dimension. 

Easy and Quick Transactions 
Another valued characteristic of bitcoin transactions is their 
ease and speed of completion:  “With bitcoin you can move 
your money globally in just a second; very easy” [P11].  A 
similar quote emphasizing the ease of completing 
worldwide transactions by comparing them with the ease of 
texting: “It is easy to move money from one country to 
another. It is just like you send a text message and the 
transaction is done” [P13]. The above outcomes suggest 
that through transparent, easy, and quick transactions, 
people experience ease of use. According to Corritore and 
colleagues’ [13] model of online trust, ease of use is one of 
the three factors of trust.  

Low Cost Transactions 
A third valued characteristic of bitcoin transactions is their 
low cost. A few participants provided quotes to support 
this: “it only costs me 10 cent for each transaction” [P6]; or 
“the main benefit of transactions is that they are easy, fast 
and cheap” [P14]. These outcomes indicate that 
transactions’ low cost could further contribute to reducing 
transactions’ perceived risk, as participants do not have to 
fear hidden or higher costs. In their model of online trust, 
Corritore and colleagues’ [13] referred to risk as the third 
factor of trust, and explained the direct relationship between 
users’ perception of control and their trust. If the above 
characteristics support users’ trust in their bitcoin 
transactions, findings also indicate one characteristic which 
hinders trust which is further detailed. 

Insecure Transactions 
An important finding is that despite the above 
characteristics supporting trust in blockchain technology 
and bitcoin transactions, participants also reported their 
concerns about the risk associated with insecure 
transactions. It is worth mentioning that insecure 
transactions do not concern miners’ cryptographic protocol 
for authorizing transactions. Indeed, none of participants 
reported concerns about the security of this protocol, but 
strong trust in miners’ expertise and in the predictability of 

the protocol. Instead, insecure transactions relate to human 
error or malice and technology’s limitation to address them. 
More specifically, we identified four types of insecure 
transactions, three related to human factors: those due to 
users themselves, to the other person or entity engaged in 
transaction, or to the third human parties not engaged in 
transactions; and one related to technology’s limitation to 
address them.  We now discuss the associated risks for each 
of these types of transactions.  

Risks Due to Users’ Challenges of Handling Passwords 
Six participants mentioned the risk of losing the password 
for their wallets, or the risk of insufficiently protecting it. 
For example, the quote below illustrates this type of risk 
and its serious consequence of no longer being able to 
access one’s bitcoins from that wallet: “Make sure you 
don’t forget your password because blockchain does not 
keep your password […] it cannot be recovered and you 
will lose all your bitcoins from that wallet” [P16]. 

The second risk of insufficiently protecting the password 
can have equally serious consequence of having the bitcoins 
stolen: “I lost 30 bitcoins in the last months because of my 
own security mistake. I set up my wallet password the same 
as my email password. One day, my wife clicked on a 
phishing email and the hackers were able to get my email 
password and use it to log in to my bitcoin wallet” [P12]. 

In order to address these risks, some users mentioned the 
importance of taking responsibility for securely storing and 
protecting their passwords: “As users we must know how to 
make sure that our bitcoins are secured. It is the same as 
protecting our own cash or any personal valuable thing 
that can be stolen by others” [P15]. Some participants even 
installed additional security applications in their bitcoin 
wallet such as double authentication [P12], since although 
“the system is secured, the security responsibility is with the 
user. If anyone lost their bitcoins, the first person to be 
blame is themselves, not the system” [P14]. 

Risks Due to Hackers’ Malicious Attacks 
Three participants mentioned that insecure transactions are 
also due to malicious hacker attacks. We have seen above 
that some of these involve phishing emails to target wallet 
passwords. Such attacks can penetrate even through double 
authentication: “you must make sure that your password is 
difficult to guess. A friend lost 14 bitcoins even though he 
applied double authentication on multiple devices” [P11]. 

Risks Due to Failure to Recover from Human Error or Malice 
Although a third of participants considered themselves 
responsible to secure their bitcoins, a few also indicated that 
the recovery from users’ failure to protect their passwords 
or from hackers’ attacks is limitedly supported by the 
bitcoin technology. The main imitation here is that 
transactions are irreversible: “let’s say the hacker has 
diverted the money to another bitcoin wallet address; you 
will never know where your money has been transferred to 
and you cannot reverse the transaction either” [P1]. This is 

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA

6504



an interesting finding, indicating a drawback of the 
blockchain technology. The rationale for irreversible 
transactions addresses the limitation of the centralized 
financial system which allows reversible transactions 
without being bound to enforce the parties’ contract stating 
that the sale is final [39]. However, as suggested in the 
above quote, this design feature fails to account for 
malicious transactions due to hacking, or to the dishonesty 
of the trading parties, as further detailed.  

It is important to make the distinction between how 
transactions are represented in blockchain, i.e., data 
structure allowing the transfer of bitcoins from one 
electronic wallet to another; and how our participants 
perceive transactions: a two-way transfer of bitcoins and 
money/goods. Unlike the one-way remittance transactions 
well supported by the bitcoin technology [27], all 
transactions reported by participants are two-way, with both 
parties sending and receiving assets. Although most 
transactions involve buying or selling bitcoins against fiat 
currency, participants were only able to track one side of 
the transaction, namely the movement of bitcoins captured 
within the blockchain. This raises major risks and trust 
issues particularly in relation to potentially dishonest 
trading partners, as the untracked part of transaction does 
not allow for scrutiny. This issue is further emphasized 
when dealing with traders who are not authorized entities. 

Risks Related to Dishonest Partner of Transaction 
Findings indicate that a considerable risk factor is dishonest 
partners with whom one engages in bitcoin transactions. A 
quarter of participants reported incidents where either them, 
or their close friends have been cheated and their trust 
betrayed: “I transferred some bitcoins but the buyer didn’t 
pay me” [P6]. This quote illustrates the importance of 
knowing about the transaction partner. This point has been 
mentioned by other participants who expressed concerns 
about strangers’ unknown reputation: “you don’t know 
whether the seller is scam or not” [P1].  

Strategies for Mitigating the Risks of Dishonest Traders 
We identified five strategies for dealing with dishonest 
transaction partners, and for mitigating their risks. These 
strategies involve two forms of trading: directly with 
another person, or through online exchanges, i.e. services 
for matching price and offer between bitcoin sellers and 
buyers. These strategies are further described starting with 
the most frequent one, and we shall see that the running 
themes across these strategies are the traders’ pseudo-
anonymity and the unregulation of blockchain technology.  

Trade with Authorized Exchanges 
The online exchange is by far the first and most preferred 
form of transaction, mostly because its regulation supports 
users’ trust. Indeed, although bitcoin technology and its 
cryptographic protocol are unregulated, exchanges require 
authorization from the financial services such as Financial 
Conduct Authority [54]. For example, five participants 
mentioned their check of exchangers’ credentials: “I do 

look at their background, and legal term conditions and 
from there I put trust on the exchange” [P2]. The 
exchanges’ websites are crucial for fostering trust: “a 
proper website, [indicating the amount of] trading, and 
testimonials [supports] trust on the exchange” [P3].  

This extends previous HCI findings on the value of website 
for trust [3,38], to the context of cryptocurrency 
transactions. An additional source of trust is the option to 
contact directly the exchange’s agents: “I prefer this 
exchange because they have their representative to contact 
if there is any problem or question to ask” [P12]. In turn, 
this makes users’ relationship with the exchanges, a more 
personal one. Apart from being authorized by financial 
services, and having credible websites, exchanges also 
foster trust in transaction partners, as they require sellers 
and buyers to register and have their identity verified. This 
is an important finding, indicating ways to address the 
extensive concerns around traders’ pseudo-anonymity. 
Surprisingly, only one participant reported the use of the 
escrow service (third party holding the assets to be released 
once both parties are satisfied with the transaction). 
Findings indicate that ease of use is negatively impacted by 
the use of the escrow, because of its additional registration 
requirements: “it is easier and faster to do the transaction 
[directly] with other traders” [P10]. 

These findings provide support for the contextual properties 
described in the framework on mechanics of trust [41], 
warranting users’ trust in exchanges because of their 
successful performance and the expectation that they will 
perform consistently well in the future (temporal 
embeddedness), exchanges’ reputation (social 
embeddedness), and their legally authorized services 
(institutional embeddedness). We also found evidence for 
the intrinsic properties warranting trust in exchanges, for 
example through social presence of professional websites 
and contactable local representatives (integrity), as well as 
reputation through testimonials (credibility).  

Trade with Socially Authorized Traders 
In comparison with exchanges, dealing with individual 
traders offers weaker risk mitigating strategies. The 
strongest strategy is dealing with socially authorized 
traders. These are well-known, de-anonymized members of 
online groups who regularly join discussions and trade 
bitcoins. Thus they become trusted and their names are 
added by the group administrator to an online list of 
verified traders: “I only buy from authorized traders as lots 
of friends experienced scam and huge losses” [P18].  The 
label of authorized trader is usually provided within an 
online group of bitcoin users on the basis of a series of 
successful de-anonymized transactions. This outcome 
indicates the crucial value of de-anonymity for credibility 
and trust. These findings also provide evidence for the 
framework on mechanics of trust [41] warranting users’ 
trust in authorized traders (temporal and social 
embeddedness), but limited institutional embeddedness.  

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA

6505



Trade with Reputable Individual Traders 
If an authorized trader cannot be found, participants engage 
in a weaker risk mitigating strategy: dealing with reputable 
traders. Unlike traders authorized by an online user group, 
reputable ones benefit only by credibility by proxy, from a 
few group members who have engaged in successful 
transactions with these traders. For example, participants 
indicated the use of peers’ or friends’ recommendations: “I 
knew the trader from the telegram group, and a few 
recommendations from friends who can be trusted” [P8]. 
Almost half of participants noted that their first point of 
contact for background check on an unknown trader is their 
online groups “If I am dealing with stranger, I will ask in 
my online group to verify that particular person. If they 
don’t know him I will not proceed with the transaction” 
[P10]. In addition, more than half of participants mentioned 
their preference for known traders whom they have had 
successfully trusted in the past:  “Most of them are my close 
friends, so I have no problem trusting them” [P20]. This 
shows the value of reputation and benevolence in 
supporting traders’ credibility [13]. These findings confirm 
the framework on mechanics of trust [41] warranting users’ 
trust in traders because of their reputation (social 
embeddedness and credibility), and when dealing with 
friends, because of perceived integrity and benevolence. 

Trade with De-anonymized Individual Traders 
Although less common and mostly due to lack of 
experience, sometimes bitcoin users engage in transactions 
with unknown traders. In such cases, findings indicate that 
seldom the traders remain unknown, as we identified two 
mechanisms for ensuring traders’ de-anonymization: face to 
face meeting, or online sharing of their IDs. For example, 
several participants expressed the view that they only 
proceed with the transaction if the trader is willing to de-
anonymize. One way of achieving this is through face to 
face meeting, where both sides of the transaction take place 
simultaneously, i.e., the exchange of bitcoins and fiat 
currency or goods: “We cannot trust them online. We need 
to see that person and to do cash on delivery” [P4].  Other 
participants require traders to de-anonymize by emailing 
their  copy of personal ID: “I need to know their identity” 
[P5]. This strategy does not provide any contextual factors 
to allow users’ trust in unknown traders for whom they 
have no reputation-related information (neither social nor 
institutional embeddedness) [41]. Hence, users attempt to 
develop institutional embeddedness by de-anonymizing the 
traders, or by reducing the risk of asynchronous transaction 
altogether through face to face meetings to perform 
synchronous two-way exchanges.  

Regulating Bitcoin  
In order to address the challenge of dishonest traders, many 
participants expressed the wish that bitcoin becomes 
regulated: “I think we must demand to our politicians to 
regulate bitcoin” [P1]. This is an important finding 
indicating a higher level strategy which does not address 
the trading itself but the unregulated nature of blockchain.  

THEORETICAL IMPLICATIONS 
We now reflect on the value of these findings for advancing 
the HCI discourse on trust. We also discuss the specific 
tensions that unregulation and pseudo-anonymity bring to 
trust. Our implications are mostly relevant for bitcoin users 
in developing contexts. They may also hold value for 
understanding and supporting trust in cryptocurrencies in 
general in both developing and developed contexts, but 
future work is required to explore this.  

Towards a Model of Trust among Bitcoin Users  
Our findings advance the understanding of users’ trust in 
blockchain technology and in transaction partners. We 
argue for the feasibility of the considered HCI theories 
[13,41,43] for identifying key blockchain’s characteristics 
supporting users’ trust: decentralization, unregulation, 
miners’ expertise, as well as transparent, easy, and low cost 
transactions. The main trust challenge experienced by 
bitcoin users is the risk of insecure transactions, and in 
particular that of dealing with dishonest traders.  

We start by discussing the findings in the light of Sas and 
Khairuddin’s [43] bitcoin trust framework. Our findings 
suggest that technological trust of bitcoin users in 
blockchain technology is strong, as participants value its 
secure cryptographic protocol. This extends prior findings 
on users’ challenges to secure their bitcoins [29] with their 
willingness to take responsibility for their weak, easy to 
break wallet passwords. 

Findings also indicate novel insights into the social 
dimension of trust among bitcoin users. The main challenge 
here relates to dishonest bitcoin traders. With respect to 
different stakeholders, it is worth mentioned that our 
findings capture the blurring of the boundaries between 
merchants and users when the object of transaction is 
bitcoins. In fact, we found little evidence that bitcoin users 
engage with merchants to buy goods, indicating 
participants’ preferential use of bitcoin as a store of value 
rather than currency. Our outcomes also suggest extending 
this framework’s definition of institutional trust to include 
not only government trust in blockchain technology but also 
the trust of bitcoin users in government and financial 
institution. We have also seen evidence for how the erosion 
of such institutional trust is crucial in users’ adoption of 
bitcoin and acceptance of its algorithmic authority [33]. 

Probing further into the exploration of technological trust, 
we applied the model of online trust [13] to identify specific 
blockchain’s characteristic impacting on trust. Our findings 
provide support for extending the applicability of this 
model to bitcoin technology. Blockchain’s characteristic 
supporting users’ credibility include: honesty ensured by 
decentralization and public ledger’s transparency; expertise 
supported by miners’ competence and hard labor; 
predictability supported by the cryptographic protocol; and 
reputation supported by large companies’ interest in bitcoin. 
Findings also identified blockchain’s characteristics 
supporting the other dimensions of trust: ease of use 

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA

6506



grounded in ease and quick transactions; and limited risk 
due to transactions’ low cost and the decentralized, 
unregulated nature of blockchain which limits the risk of 
institutional power abuse. Outcomes also suggest a specific 
technological characteristic perceived as a risk factor: the 
blockchain’s purposeful design feature for irreversible 
transactions. We found the challenge of two-way 
transactions and in particular the offline one which is not 
captured by the blockchain. The challenge of irreversible 
transactions is not grounded in people’s distrust on 
transaction, but in potentially the dishonest part of 
transaction, i.e., the payment of fiat currency for acquiring 
the bitcoins. If this side of agreement is not fulfilled, users 
would prefer to reverse the bitcoin transaction, an operation 
which is not possible. An interesting design opportunity 
here would be exploring new ways of tracking this 
movement of fiat currency (currently not captured) in the 
blockchain. 

As a means of exploring users’ support for trusting their 
transactions partners, we applied the framework on 
mechanics of trust [41]. This framework allowed the 
identification of different sources of trust for each of the 
risk mitigating strategies. Among these strategies for 
dealing with dishonest traders, bitcoin users engage in 
decreasing order of preference with exchanges, authorized 
or reputable traders, and ultimately with unknown traders 
which they attempt to de-anonymize. Only the exchangers 
provide legally authorized services [37,52], while trust in 
the other types of traders is supported mostly by the 
information about their credibility and reputation within the 
thick relationships [24] of online user groups. The less 
reputation-related information users can gather about the 
traders, the stronger the need to de-anonymize them. Most 
participants went even further suggesting the value of 
regulating the blockchain (institutional embeddedness for 
all types of traders). 

The Paradox of Unregulation 
We argue that the exploration of bitcoin use offers an 
unprecedented opportunity for questioning common 
assumptions that people hold about fiat money and in 
particular around the value of money, their control and 
legitimacy. Blockchain’s unregulation and the pseudo-
anonymity of people behind transactions are crucial 
characteristics of this technology [18,28,46,49]. Together, 
these characteristics ensure the privacy of the owners of 
bitcoin addresses, which is central to Nakamoto’s vision 
[39]. Our findings however highlight an interesting tension: 
bitcoin users desire regulation, mostly because of the 
challenge of dealing with dishonest traders, which they 
believe may be addressed by de-anonymizing transaction’s 
parties. This is an important finding as the efforts to 
regulate bitcoin have been driven mostly by government 
and financial institutions rather than users [21]. Users’ 
desire for regulation may be also related to the new forms 
of thinking that a disruptive technology like bitcoin 
demands. Bitcoin provides freedom over one’s assets which 

many participants enjoy, but at the same time, it no longer 
provides the security that regulated financial institutions 
provide, and which users are accustomed with. We argue 
that at present, bitcoin users continue to operate under the 
old mind-set of fiat money in traditional centralized and 
regulated financial systems, and may need support for 
developing new mental models underpinning the 
unregulated bitcoin technology. This calls for new ways of 
supporting users to further develop their digital literacy. It 
also calls for the exploration of innovative technological 
and social mechanisms for limiting the impact of dishonest 
traders, while still preserving anonymity. 

The Challenge of Pseudo-anonymous Transactions 
Our findings indicate that blockchain’s deliberate pseudo-
anonymity of users engaged in bitcoin transactions becomes 
a challenge for the contextual properties for warranting trust 
as described in the framework on mechanics of trust [41]. 
This is because all three forms of temporal, social and 
institutional embeddedness would become effective only 
through the known and stable identities of bitcoin users 
across transactions. This would ensure that the transaction 
partners build together a history of transactions (temporal), 
and a reputation among other potential transaction partners 
(social), while becoming vulnerable to legal sanctions when 
they dishonestly fail to meet their transaction agreement 
(institutional embeddedness).  However, neither of these is 
possible, as the blockchain protects the privacy of the 
transaction parties, both by preventing the link between the 
wallet address and the owner’s identify, and by enabling the 
loss of the link between user’s transactions over time, i.e., 
through the option of creating new wallet addresses for 
each transaction [39]. This is problematic, as blockchain’s 
failure to support for contextual properties motivating users 
to fulfil their agreements [41], means that such fulfilment 
relies entirely on the trustees’ intrinsic properties such as 
credibility, integrity, and benevolence or encapsulated 
interest [24]. We found however significant evidence that 
people do not trust the intrinsic properties of the trustee, 
and aim to protect themselves by challenging the trustees’ 
pseudo-anonymity as one of blockchain’s key designed 
feature [39]. This confirms findings on people’s readiness 
to take very small risks regarding unknown trustees [24]. 

DESIGN IMPLICATIONS 
Now we turn our attention to the design implications [44] 
that our findings suggest. We discuss the need to support 
the transparency of two-way transactions, tools for 
materializing trust, and tools for supporting reversible 
transactions. These design implications have been 
developed to address the identified trust challenges of 
dishonest traders, while respecting blockchain’s main 
characteristics such as decentralization, unregulation and 
pseudo-anonymity. 

Supporting Transparency of Two-way Transactions 
All transactions reported in the study are two-way, most of 
them sequential and asynchronous, i.e., typically one party 
sends the fiat currency and after receiving it, the other party 

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA

6507



sends the bitcoins. However, people can only track on the 
blockchain the movement of bitcoins. Sending fiat currency 
can be faked through fraudulent statements of transfer.  
This coupled with the lack of legally authorized partners 
warranting one’s trust in them, i.e., institutional 
embeddedness, leads to increased risk of defraud from 
dishonest traders. Such traders are not known and cannot be 
made accountable for failing to complete their part of 
transaction, neither responsible for the retribution it entails. 

One can imagine creative design methods [42] and new 
tools for digitally capturing the contents of transactions 
which is not bitcoins, to ensure that their transfer is also 
verified, authorized and stored on the public ledger.  Our 
findings indicate that such content of transaction is often 
fiat currency. Blockchain already provides mechanisms for 
creating digital tokens backed by fiat currency, i.e., Colored 
Coin, Omni Layer [48]. Such mechanisms can also be 
harnessed for creating digital tokens (metadata embedded in 
the blockchain) backed by physical goods, such as the ones 
explored in the provenance context where tokens represent 
documents accompanying the transaction of goods or 
finances as means of tracking their ownership. Such 
mechanisms need to remain decentralized and to become 
integrated into the blockchain interface so that end users 
with limited technical expertise can access and use them. 

Tools for Materializing Trust in Blockchain 
Findings indicate that in the absence of known and stable 
identities, bitcoin users who engage in transactions with 
each other rely mostly on social embeddedness. As one of 
the properties warranting trust in another party [41], social 
embeddedness is reflected in users’ active effort to gather 
reputation-related information about unknown traders, 
either from people they already trust such as close friends, 
or from members of the online group where most of their 
social learning about bitcoin technology takes place. One 
way to better support this data gathering is through 
designing mechanisms for capturing and visualizing 
reputation as meta-data linked to a wallet address. 
Blockchain protocol already supports the creation of 
metadata within a transaction, by allowing the generation of 
a new secure address referencing the metadata. A reputation 
management system built on top of the blockchain will 
strongly contribute to the social embeddedness for 
warranting trust among traders. This in turn, motivates 
traders to keep the same wallet address in order to grow 
their reputation, hence providing more stable, albeit still 
private, identities. For example, Carboni [7] proposed 
vouchers attached to transaction for the transfer of payment 
for a service. If the buyer is satisfied with the service, he 
can accept and co-sign the voucher which contains an 
incentive fee paid by the service provider to the buyer for 
leaving a positive feedback. The reputation score of a 
service provider could be computed by adding the voting 
fees for that service across blockchain’s relevant 
transactions. Alternative mechanisms for supporting also 
the caption of negative feedback are much needed. 

Tools to Support Reversible Transactions 
Findings indicate that in the case of dishonest traders, the 
irreversible bitcoin transactions are problematic. This stems 
from the lack of transparency of the two-way transactions: 
while the transfer of bitcoins is captured by the blockchain, 
the counterpart asynchronous transfer of money (or goods) 
for which people receive (or pay bitcoins) is not. One way 
of addressing this is by exploring novel mechanisms for 
reversing individual two-way transactions on top of the 
irreversible blockchain protocol [2]. This is not a trivial 
issue, as in its current form, the blockchain protocol does 
not allow reversing transactions which have been already 
confirmed and added to the ledger. One solution would be 
new tools for enabling the de-anonymization of the owner 
of disposable wallet addresses (discarded after one use). 
Besides hindering dishonesty, such tools would allow users’ 
to protection their privacy on the blockchain, while 
enabling them to contact the other party, and request 
reversing the bitcoin transfer. This would also support 
social embeddedness, as the reputation of a given trader 
operating in a local online group can well extend beyond 
the lifetime of a disposable wallet. Other tools could 
leverage the support of multisignature transactions enabled 
by the bitcoin protocol [2]. A common example is 2-of-3 
transaction model where money is placed in a joint address 
owned by the both parties and a third arbitrator, to be 
signed off once each party is satisfied. If there is a problem, 
the arbitrator will investigate and decide to transfer the 
payment back to the buyer or to the seller. Once the 
transaction receives 2 out of 3 signatures, it is completed. 
The multisignature tools differ from the escrow services as 
the arbitrator receives a fee agreed by all three parties, but 
cannot defraud as he will need two signatures for this. 
Surprisingly, no participant mentioned the use of 
multisignature tools, probably because of the same reason 
they do not engage with the escrow services: perceived 
difficulty of use, or limited awareness of such tools. Future 
work could further explore this. 

CONCLUSIONS 
This empirical study investigated blockchain’s 
characteristics which support and challenge users’ trust, 
alongside their motivation for bitcoin use, and strategies for 
mitigating identified risks. We advance the theory towards 
a model of trust among users of Bitcoin’s decentralized, 
unregulated and pseudo-anonymous technology in 
developing context, and provide insights into the specific 
tensions around these characteristics. Study findings led to 
a number of design implications that would support bitcoin 
users develop increased trust in each other, including 
support for the transparency of two-way transactions, tools 
for materializing trust, and tools for supporting reversible 
transactions. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work was supported by the UK Research Council 
through the Digital Threads project, (AHRC Grant 
AH/P014186/1). 

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA

6508



REFERENCES 
1. Michael Bacharach and Diego Gambetta. 2003. Trust in 

Signs. In Trust in Society, Karen S. Cook (ed.),. Russell 
Sage, New York.  

2. Rachid El Bansarkhaniand Jan Sturm. 2016. An 
Efficient Lattice-Based Multisignature Scheme with 
Applications to Bitcoins. In International Conference on 
Cryptology and Network Security, 140-155. 

3. Ardion Beldad, Menno de Jong  and Michaël 
Steehouder. 2010. How shall I trust the faceless and the 
intangible? A literature review on the antecedents of 
online trust. Computers in human behavior 26, 5: 857-
869. 

4. Bitcoin Wiki. Anonymity. Retrieved September 14, 
2016 from https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Anonymity 

5. Mads Bodker. 2004. Trust and the digital environment. 
Retrieved June 10, 2016 from 
http://www.itu.dk/people/boedker/trustpaper.pdf 

6. Michael Bordo. 1981. The classical gold standard: some 
lessons for today. Review, 2-17. 

7. Davide Carboni. 2015. Feedback based Reputation on 
top of the Bitcoin Blockchain. Retrieved September 19, 
2016 from arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.01504 

8. Raul Carillo. 2015. Alternative currencies are bigger 
than bitcoin: how they’re building prosperity from 
London to Kenya. Retrieved June 22, 2016 from 
http://www.yesmagazine.org/commonomics/alternative-
currencies-bigger-than-bitcoin-bangla-pesa-brixton 

9. John M. Carroll and Victoria Bellotti. 2015. Creating 
Value Together: The Emerging Design Space of Peer-
to-Peer Currency and Exchange. In Proceedings of the 
18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work & Social Computing, 1500-1510.  

10. Nicolas Christin. 2013. Traveling the Silk road: A 
measurement analysis of a large anonymous online 
marketplace. In Proceedings of the 22nd international 
conference on World Wide Web. ACM, 213-224. 

11. CNN Money. 2015. Greece shuts banks in bid to 
prevent collapse. Retrieved June 10, 2016 from 
http://money.cnn.com/2015/06/28/news/economy/greec
e-banks-ecb/ 

12. Coin Market Cap. 2016. Crypto-currency market 
capitalizations. Retrieved  June 10, 2016 from 
https://coinmarketcap.com/ 

13. Cynthia L. Corritore, Beverly Kracher and Susan 
Wiedenbeck. 2003. International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies 58, 6: 738-758. 

14. Robert Costanza,  et. al. 2003. Complementary 
currencies as a method to improve local sustainable 
economic welfare. Retrieved June 10, 2016 from 
http://78.46.126.155/Record/632 

15. Michael Crosby, Nachiappan , Pradhan Pattanayak, 
Sanjeev Verma and Vignesh Kalyanaraman. 2015. 
Retrieved June 10, 2016 from  
http://scet.berkeley.edu/wp-
content/uploads/BlockchainPaper.pdf 

16. Fred D. Davis. 1989. Perceived usefulness, perceived 
ease of use, and user acceptance of information 
technology. MIS Quarterly 13, 3: 319-340. 

17. Encyclopedia.com. 2002. Coins and currency. Retrieved 
September 19,  2016 from 
http://www.encyclopedia.com/topic/coin.aspx 

18. European Central Bank. 2012. Virtual currency 
schemes. Retrieved June 10,  2016 from 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/virtualcurrenc
yschemes201210en.pdf 

19. Jennifer Fereday and Eimear Muir-Cochrane. 2006. 
Demonstrating rigor using thematic analysis: A hybrid 
approach of inductive and deductive coding and theme 
development. International journal of qualitative 
methods, 5, 1: 80-92. 

20. Amy Fontinelle. 2011. An introduction to 
complementary currencies. Retrieved June 10, 2016 
from 
http://www.investopedia.com/articles/economics/11/intr
oduction-complementary-currencies.asp 

21. David Gilbert. 2016. Bitcoin’s big problem: transaction 
delays renew blockchain debate. Retrieved  June 10, 
2016 from http://www.ibtimes.com/bitcoins-big-
problem-transaction-delays-renew-blockchain-debate-
2330143 

22. Herb Goldberg and Lewis Robert. 2000. Money 
madness: The psychology of saving, spending, loving, 
and hating money. Wellness Institute, Inc, Gretna LA, 

23. Andres Guadamuz, Chris Marsden Guadamuz. 2015. 
Blockchains and Bitcoin: Regulatory responses to 
cryptocurrencies. First Monday, 20: 12-7. 

24. Russell Hardin. 2002. Trust and trustworthiness. Sage 
Foundation, New York. 

25. Garrick Hileman. 2014. From bitcoin to the brixton 
pound: history and prospects for alternative currencies. 
In International Conference on Financial Cryptography 
and Data Security ,163-165.  

26. Jofish Kaye, Janet Vertesi, Jennifer Ferreira, Barry 
Brown, and Mark Perry. 2014. #CHImoney: financial 
interactions, digital cash, capital exchange and mobile 
money. In CHI '14 Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '14). 111-114. 

27. Erol Kazan, Chee-Wee Tan, and Eric TK Lim. 2015. 
Value Creation in Cryptocurrency Networks: Towards 
A Taxonomy of Digital Business Models for Bitcoin 
Companies. The 19th Pacific Asia Conference on 
Information Systems (PACIS 2015).  

28. Irni Eliana Khairuddin, Corina Sas, Sarah Clinch, and 
Nigel Davies. 2016. Exploring Motivations for Bitcoin 
Technology Usage. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI 
Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems. ACM, 2872-2878. 

29. Brad Klontz, Sonya L. Britt, Jennifer Mentzer, and Ted 
Klontz. 2011. Money beliefs and financial behaviors: 
Development of the Klontz Money Script Inventory. 
Journal of Financial Therapy 2,1.  

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA

6509



30. Katharina Krombholz, Aljosha Judmayer, Matthias 
Gusenbauer and Edgar   Weippl. 2016. The Other Side 
of the Coin: User Experiences with Bitcoin   Security 
and Privacy. Financial Cryptography and Data 
Security. 

31. Sara Lipkis and Amanda Roth. 2016. Anatomy: what is 
alternative currency? Retrieved  June 10 2016 from 
http://www.worldpolicy.org/anatomy-what-alternative-
currency 

32. Niklas Luhman. 1979. Trust: a mechanism for reduction 
of social complexity. In Trust and Power, Niklas 
Luhmann (ed). Wiley, New York,  

33. Caitlin Lustig and Bonnie Nardi. 2015. Algorithmic 
authority: The case of Bitcoin. In System Sciences 
(HICSS), 2015 48th Hawaii International Conference 
IEEE. 743-752.  

34. Roger C. Mayer, James H. Davis and F. David 
Schoorman. 1995. An integrative model of 
organizational trust. The Academy of Management 
Review 20, 3: 709  

35. Barbara A. Misztal. 1996. Trust in Modern Societies. 
The Search for Basis of Social Order. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, 42-87. 

36. Guido Mollering. 2006. Trust: Reason, Routine, 
Reflectivity. Elseiver, Netherlands. 

37. Malte Moser. 2013. Anonymity of bitcoin transactions: 
an analysis if mixing service. RetrievedJune 10,  2016 
from 
https://www.wi.unimuenster.de/sites/wi/files/public/dep
artment/itsecurity/mbc13/mbc13-moeser-paper.pdf 

38. Fiona F. Nah and Sid Davis. 2002. HCI research issues 
in e-commerce. Journal of Electronic Commerce 
Research 3.3: 98-113. 

39. Satoshi Nakamoto. 2008. Bitcoin: peer to peer 
electronic cash system. Retrieved  September 14, 2016 
from https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf 

40. P2P Foundations. 2015. Definition of Bitcoin. Retrieved 
June 10,  2016 from http://p2pfoundation.net/bitcoin 

41. Jens Riegelsberger, M. Angela Sasse and John D. 
McCarthy. 2005.  The mechanics of trust: a framework 
for research and design. International of Human-
Computer Studies. 62, 3: 381-422. 

42. Antti Salovaara, Kristina Höök, Keith Cheverst, 
Michael Twidale, Matthew Chalmers, and Corina Sas. 
2011. Appropriation and creative use: linking user 
studies and design. In CHI '11 Extended Abstracts on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '11). 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 37-40. 

43. Corina Sas and Irni Eliana Khairuddin. 2015. Exploring 
Trust in Bitcoin Technology: A Framework for HCI 
Research. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the 
Australian Special Interest Group for Computer Human 
Interaction (OzCHI '15), 338- 342. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2838739.2838821 

44. Corina Sas, Steve Whittaker, Steven Dow, Jodi Forlizzi, 
and John Zimmerman. 2014. Generating implications 
for design through design research. In Proceedings of 
the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in 
computing systems (CHI '14). ACM, New York, NY, 
USA, 1971-1980. 

45. Larry Schweikart. 1991. U.S. commercial banking: a 
historiographical survey. Business History Review.  65 
(Autumn): 606. 

46. Evander Smart. 2015. Top 10 Countries in which 
bitcoin is banned. Retrieved  June 10,  2016 from 
https://www.cryptocoinsnews.com/top-10-countries-
bitcoin-banned/ 

47. Melanie Swan. 2015. Blockchain blueprint for a new 
economy. O.Reilly, California.  

48. Tether. White paper. Retrieved September 19, 2016 
from 
https://www.weusecoins.com/assets/pdf/library/Tether%
20Whitepaper.pdf 

49. The Law Library of Congress. 2014. Regulation of 
bitcoin in selected jurisdiction. Retrieved  June 10,  
2016 from https://www.loc.gov/law/help/bitcoin-
survey/regulation-of-bitcoin.pdf  

50. UK Government. 2016. Distributed ledger technology 
beyond block chain. Retrieved June 10, 2016 from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/upload
s/attachment_data/file/492972/gs-16-1-distributed-
ledger-technology.pdf 

51. Randall L. Wray. 2012. Introduction to an alternative 
history of money. Levy Economics Institute Working 
Paper, 717. 

52. David Yermack. 2013. Is bitcoin a real currency? an 
economic appraisal. NBER Working Paper19747.  

53. Suraya Zainuddin. 2016. The complete guide to bitcoin 
scams. Retrieved  June 10, 2016 from 
https://www.coingecko.com/buzz/complete-guide-to-
bitcoin-scams?locale=en 

54. Adam Vaziri Zanjani. 2014. Bitcoin Exchanges as 
Payment Institution. Retrieved  September 16, 2016 
from http://neopay.co.uk/site/wp-
content/uploads/Diacle-Bitcoin-Regulation.pdf

 

 

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA

6510




