


























































































Deterministic control of magnetic vortex wall chirality by electric field


1Scientific REPORtS | 7: 7613  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9

www.nature.com/scientificreports

Deterministic control of magnetic 
vortex wall chirality by electric field
R. P. Beardsley1, S. Bowe1,2, D. E. Parkes1, C. Reardon  3, K. W. Edmonds1, B. L. Gallagher1,  
S. A. Cavill2,3 & A. W. Rushforth1

Concepts for information storage and logical processing based on magnetic domain walls have great 
potential for implementation in future information and communications technologies. To date, the 
need to apply power hungry magnetic fields or heat dissipating spin polarized currents to manipulate 
magnetic domain walls has limited the development of such technologies. The possibility of controlling 
magnetic domain walls using voltages offers an energy efficient route to overcome these limitations. 
Here we show that a voltage-induced uniaxial strain induces reversible deterministic switching of the 
chirality of a magnetic vortex wall. We discuss how this functionality will be applicable to schemes 
for information storage and logical processing, making a significant step towards the practical 
implementation of magnetic domain walls in energy efficient computing.

Magnetic domain walls separate regions of a ferromagnetic material in which the magnetisation points in differ-
ent directions. If the magnetic material is patterned into a quasi 1D object, such as a nanowire, the domain walls 
separate regions in which the magnetisation points in opposite directions and can be propagated along the length 
of the nanowire by the application of magnetic fields or electrical currents. This is highly attractive for imple-
mentation in magnetic data storage1, 2 and concepts for performing logical operations3 in which information is 
encoded as the presence or position of a domain wall. It has also been proposed to use the internal structure of the 
domain wall to encode information. For example, depending on the wire geometry and magnetic parameters, the 
domain wall structure can be that of a vortex consisting of a circulating pattern of magnetic moments in the plane 
of the wire, which point out of the plane at the centre of the wall (Fig. 1(a)). The sense of circulation of the mag-
netisation, i.e. the chirality of the wall, can be used to encode information as binary “1” or “0”4, and nanowire net-
works designed to use vortex domain walls to perform the key logical processing operations have been proposed5. 
In such schemes it is proposed to switch the chirality by driving the domain wall through a nanowire network 
containing notches via the application of an external magnetic field or electrical current. Experimentally, chirality 
rectification has been achieved by propagating vortex domain walls along wires with asymmetric notches6, rec-
tangular end geometries7 and around curved sections of wires8 or rings9 using external magnetic fields. Similarly, 
the magnetic vortex states in nanodisks have been reversed by tailored magnetic field pulses10, 11. The use of 
externally applied magnetic fields creates limitations in terms of scalability and the ability to address individual 
domain walls, while the use of electrical currents causes Joule heating and produces stray magnetic (Oersted) 
fields which limit packing density due to interactions between neighbouring elements. In order to utilise vortex 
domain walls in any commercially viable technology it will be necessary to develop electrical methods to control 
the chirality of individually addressable domain walls reversibly and with low power.

Electric fields can provide a practical and energy efficient means to control magnetisation because their 
application does not require large current densities and does not generate Oersted magnetic fields. One route to 
achieve coupling of the electric field to the magnetisation is via mechanical strain in a hybrid piezoelectric/fer-
romagnet structure. A voltage applied to the piezoelectric component induces a mechanical deformation which 
transfers to the ferromagnetic layer and alters the magnetic anisotropy via inverse magnetostriction. The method 
has been used to modify magnetic anisotropy and to demonstrate rotation of the magnetic easy axis direction12, 13.  
Detailed modelling predicts that the implementation of these methods in devices consisting of single domain 
magnetic elements could lead to information storage devices with orders of magnitude better energy efficiency 
than present technologies relying on electrical currents14. To date, the use of inverse magnetostriction to control 

1School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, United Kingdom. 2Diamond 
Light Source Chilton, Didcot, Oxfordshire, OX11 0DE, UK. 3Department of Physics, University of York, Heslington, 
York, YO10 5DD, United Kingdom. R. P. Beardsley and S. Bowe contributed equally to this work. Correspondence 
and requests for materials should be addressed to S.A.C. (email: stuart.cavill@york.ac.uk) or A.W.R. (email: andrew.
rushforth@nottingham.ac.uk)

Received: 15 May 2017

Accepted: 5 July 2017

Published: xx xx xxxx

OPEN

http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7550-6415
mailto:stuart.cavill@york.ac.uk
mailto:andrew.rushforth@nottingham.ac.uk
mailto:andrew.rushforth@nottingham.ac.uk


www.nature.com/scientificreports/

2Scientific REPORtS | 7: 7613  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9

domain walls has resulted in movement between random pinning sites15, 16 or between positions along the cir-
cumference of a ring structure17, 18, local pinning of a domain wall at a position in a nanowire19, pinning at mobile 
ferroelectric domain walls20 and tuning of the domain wall velocity21 or width22. The possibility of switching the 
domain wall configuration by electric fields has not been considered before now.

In this article we demonstrate that the chirality of a vortex domain wall can be controlled reversibly by creating 
a strain-induced inhomogeneous uniaxial magnetic anisotropy energy profile in the vicinity of the domain wall. 
Using micromagnetic calculations we simulate the magnetisation dynamics in response to a strain pulse and 
show that the chirality switching can arise from the nucleation of a second vortex core followed by the damped 
precessional motion of the cores. We discuss how the method might be implemented in device concepts for low 

Figure 1. Device geometry and characteristics. (a) A representation of a vortex domain wall situated in 
a magnetic nanowire. Arrows represent the direction of the magnetisation. (b) A schematic of the device 
consisting of a nickel ring situated on top of a PMN-PT chip. A voltage applied across the thickness of the chip 
generates a uniaxial strain in the plane. (c) Schematic representation of the uniaxial strain as a function of the 
electric field applied to the PMN-PT, based on ref. 23. EC is the ferroelectric coercive field. Roman numerals 
correspond to the electric field values labelled in Fig. 2.

Figure 2. XMCD-PEEM images of strain-induced chirality switching in vortex domain walls. Red shading 
represents magnetisation pointing from right to left. Blue represents magnetisation pointing from left to 
right. Panel sequences (a) to (e) and (f) to (j) show the evolution of a tail to tail and head to head vortex 
wall respectively as a function of the electric field applied to the PMN-PT. The axis of the induced uniaxial 
anisotropy is represented by the arrow. Roman numerals correspond to the electric fields labelled in Fig. 1(c).



www.nature.com/scientificreports/

3Scientific REPORtS | 7: 7613  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9

energy electric field operated non-volatile information storage and logical processing. The use of electric fields to 
manipulate the configuration of magnetic domain walls will reduce the energy required to switch the magnetic 
state in non-volatile information storage and processing technologies by orders of magnitude.

The experimental demonstration was achieved by positioning a vortex domain wall along the circumference 
of a ring structure, close to the axis of the uniaxial anisotropy. The device (Fig. 1(b)) consists of a piezoelectric 
[Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3]0.68 -[PbTiO3]0.32 (PMN-PT) (011) substrate with top and bottom electrodes, onto which is 
fabricated a 20 nm thick Ni ring of outer(inner) diameter 7.7μm (5.7 μm). Application of an electric field between 
the top and bottom electrodes results in mechanical deformation of the PMN-PT substrate and induces a uniaxial 
strain of order 10−3 in the plane of the Ni ring. Images of the magnetic contrast were obtained using the x-ray 
photoemission electron microscope (X-PEEM) on beamline I06 at the Diamond Light Source synchrotron.

The application of an electric field across the thickness direction of a PMN-PT (011) substrate is known 
to result in a two stage reversal of the ferroelectric polarisation vector at the ferroelectric coercive field EC23. 
Switching of the polarisation vector between the <111> directions with components pointing out of the plane 
is mediated by a range of electric field for which the polarisation points in the plane. This is accompanied by a 
large uniaxial strain of order 10−3 in the plane in a narrow range of electric field around EC, which is approxi-
mately 0.18–0.19MV/m for our device (Fig. 1(c)). This results in a uniaxial anisotropy energy of order 10 kJm−3 12. 
Further increase of the electric field results in the strain returning to a value close to that at zero field as the 
ferroelectric vector rotates out of the plane towards the < 111 > directions. The sequence of magnetic contrast 
images in Fig. 2 reveals that this transition is accompanied by a reversal of the vortex wall chirality. Figure 2(a) 
and (b) show the transition from a clockwise tail to tail wall to an anti-clockwise tail to tail wall at electric fields 
illustrated by points (i) and (ii) in Fig. 1(c). The same transition occurs between Fig. 2(d) and (e) for the opposite 
sign of applied electric field ((iv) and (v) in Fig. 1(c)), but an identical uniaxial strain transition. The intermediate 
magnetic state was not captured for these transitions because of the sharpness of the transition at EC resulting in 
the uniaxial strain state being induced and removed between successive images. An intermediate magnetic state 
can be observed in Fig. 2(c) when the electric field had been increased further beyond the ferroelectric coercive 
field to point (iii) in Fig. 1(c). Here a reversible uniaxial strain is also present, albeit smaller than that generated at 
the ferroelectric coercive field. Removal of this uniaxial strain results in the switching of the vortex wall chirality, 
from anti-clockwise to clockwise in the sequence from Fig. 2(b) to (d). To summarise, Fig. 2(a) to (e) show that 
three successive applications of a uniaxial strain induce three successive reversals of the vortex wall chirality. 
The chirality switching is also observed for a head to head vortex wall shown in Fig. 2(f) to (j), but the sequence 
is interrupted by the movement of the domain wall along the circumference of the ring in Fig. 2(h) to (j). The 
importance of pinning of the domain wall position will be discussed in the next section.

A full understanding of the mechanism by which the vortex domain wall chirality switches would require 
knowledge of how the strain profile varies, both spatially and temporally. The structure of ferroelectric domains 
in PMN-PT and the processes involved in switching of the ferroelectric polarisation vector are areas of intense 
research at present. It is known that domains can range in size from tens24 or hundreds12 of nm up to several 
tens of µm24 and that different domain regions can represent different polarisation vectors as well as different 
structural phases25 because the [Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3]0.68 -[PbTiO3]0.32 composition sits close to a morphotropic 
phase boundary. The application of an electric field can induce reorientation of nanoscale domains and move-
ment of the boundaries of micron scale domains within the same sample24. For our sample we cannot image 
the ferroelectric domain structure because the presence of the top electrode prevents escape of photoelectrons 
from the PMN-PT. We can, however consider the extreme cases: (i) the strain in the region of the vortex domain 
wall switches homogeneously (e.g. via the reorientation of nanoscale ferroelectric domains of size much smaller 
than the vortex domain wall) and (ii) the change in strain sweeps across the device (e.g. due to a ferroelectric 
domain wall moving across the region beneath the vortex domain wall). We find that both mechanisms can 
induce switching of the vortex wall chirality. We describe the first mechanism in detail here because the results of 
micromagnetic simulations most closely match the experimental results obtained, and the results of our investi-
gations of the second mechanism are described in the Supplementary Note.

We performed micromagnetic simulations using the OOMMF simulation package26 using realistic parameters 
for nickel (see Methods). Results from the simulations, presented in Fig. 3(a) to (e), show successive switching of 
vortex wall chirality from anticlockwise to clockwise and back to anticlockwise. The switching events are induced 
by the application of a uniaxial magnetic anisotropy favouring an easy axis perpendicular to the circumference of 
the ring in the vicinity of the domain wall, i.e. along the y-axis. The anisotropy causes a flux closure domain pat-
tern to form, characterised by red and blue triangular regions in Fig. 3(b) and (d), in order to minimise the mag-
netic free energy. There are similarities between these patterns and the experimental image in Fig. 2(c). Crucially, 
the final position of the flux closure pattern in Fig. 3(b) and (d) is offset slightly to the right or left of the axis of 
the anisotropy depending upon the initial chirality of the domain wall. When the anisotropy is changed to an 
easy axis tangential to the ring in the region of the domain wall (i.e. parallel to the x-axis), the flux closure pattern 
evolves back to a vortex domain wall, with the opposite chirality to the original state.

We now examine in detail the important transitions involved in this process. In Fig. 3(a) the initial vortex 
domain wall state is made to resemble that in the experimental images, in particular the “s-shape” of the central 
white region, by applying a uniaxial anisotropy of KU = −3 kJm−3 parallel to the x-axis. Here the minus sign 
denotes the axis of the anisotropy such that a positive or negative value for KU represents an easy axis parallel 
to the y or x axis respectively. A small uniaxial anisotropy could arise during fabrication of the rings due to dif-
ferent thermal contraction of the Ni and PMN-PT, or due to the ferroelectric domain state prior to electric field 
poling12. Upon the application of a uniaxial anisotropy of KU = +10 kJm−3 (easy axis along the y-axis, also repre-
sented by the dashed line in Fig. 3), the flux closure pattern forms by reversing the direction of magnetisation in 
a region on the inner circumference of the ring, indicated by the dashed circles in Fig. 3(b) and (d). The position 
of the reversed region depends upon the initial chirality of the domain wall, such that the flux closure pattern is 



www.nature.com/scientificreports/

4Scientific REPORtS | 7: 7613  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9

made up of two vortex cores of opposite chirality – one from the original domain wall and one formed when the 
magnetisation in the region indicated by the dashed circle reverses. In our simulation, the reversal occurs by the 
precessional dynamics of the magnetisation, which is triggered by abruptly changing the anisotropy, and allowed 
to proceed using a realistic damping coefficient of α = 0.02. In the laboratory experiment, we do not know the 
timescale over which the anisotropy changes. This will likely be governed by the reorientation of ferroelectric 
domains or the movement of ferroelectric domain walls between pinning sites triggered by thermal activation. 
If the anisotropy changes on a timescale that is long compared to the damping of the magnetisation (a few ns), 
then the reversal of the magnetisation can still occur through thermal activation of the magnetisation precession. 
We have not investigated such processes. Once the region indicated has reversed, then the flux closure pattern 
oscillates along the circumference of the ring and settles to the final position on a timescale of several nano-
seconds. The sequences in Supplementary Videos 1 and 2 show this oscillatory behaviour for the transitions in 
Fig. 3(a) to (b) and (c) to (d) respectively. The formation of the reversed region causes an initial rapid movement 
of the pattern to the left or right as the vortex cores gyrate. The direction of this initial motion is determined by 
the chirality of the original domain wall. The final offset of the flux closure pattern along the ring is determined 
by this initial motion of the vortices, after which damping of the magnetisation reduces subsequent oscillations. 
Upon setting the anisotropy back to KU = −3 kJm−3 the formation of the vortex wall proceeds by domain wall 
motion resulting in the annihilation of the inner triangular region adjacent to the region marked by the dashed 
rings in Fig. 3(b) and (d). This sequence is shown in Supplementary Videos 3 and 4 for the transitions in Fig. 3(b) 
to (c) and (d) to (e) respectively. For these transitions to the single domain wall states the damping parameter was 
set to a large value (α = 0.5) to suppress motion of the domain wall around the ring. If a more realistic value for 
the damping parameter is used (α = 0.02) then the domain wall moves around the ring by 90°. Experimentally, 
we do not observe such motion due to pinning of the domain wall, likely by material defects or edge roughness. 
The exception to this is the sequence in Fig. 2(h) and (i). Previous studies17, 18 of vortex domain walls in Ni-ring/
PMN-PT devices observed rotation of the domain wall position around the ring, but did not report switching of 
the chirality.

The sequences in the simulations are deterministic. The initial wall chirality determines the offset of the flux 
closure pattern which in turn determines the chirality of the newly formed domain wall. In real devices the final 
position of the flux closure pattern will depend on several factors including the ring dimensions, defects, edge 
roughness, the size of the induced strain, thermal fluctuations and material parameters such as the magnetisa-
tion and damping. Such factors may introduce some stochasticity into the magnetisation dynamics which could 
prevent repeatable switching of the chirality. A detailed investigation of the influence of such factors is beyond 
the scope of the present work. It should be possible however, to set the chirality of the domain wall by setting the 
offset of the flux closure pattern using an external impetus, such as a weak magnetic field pulse, or an electrical 
current pulse.

The functionality described here has potential for application in devices for information storage and logical 
processing. The inhomogeneous magnetic anisotropy profile required to switch the chirality of a vortex domain 
wall could also be induced in a straight nanowire with voltage gate electrodes positioned to produce a strain in a 
local region along the wire. The geometry is shown in Fig. 4 and simulations of the chirality reversal in response 
to a voltage pulse are presented in Supplementary Video 5. The wire could form part of a larger nanowire circuit 
used for logical processing based on domain walls. A gate design that produces an anisotropy gradient may also 

Figure 3. Micromagnetic simulations of a head to head vortex domain wall under the action of a uniaxial 
magnetic anisotropy energy. (a) to (e) show successive switching of the chirality of the vortex wall. The 
transitions from panels (a) and (c) to panels (c) and (e) respectively involve the reversal of the x-component of 
the magnetisation in the regions marked by dashed circles in (b) and (d).

http://1
http://2
http://3
http://4
http://5


www.nature.com/scientificreports/

5Scientific REPORtS | 7: 7613  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9

be used to move the domain wall along the wire. Although the investigation of domain wall motion in magnetic 
anisotropy gradients is beyond the scope of the present work, we suggest that a device design in which a succes-
sion of gates are implemented to move and switch the chirality of vortex domain walls would avoid the need to use 
magnetic fields or electrical currents in information processing schemes using domain walls, thereby removing 
some of the major practical limitations to the development of such technologies.

Methods
10 mm × 10 mm × 0.5 mm PMN-PT(110) substrates were purchased from Atom Optics Co., Ltd. Atomic Force 
Microscopy measurements revealed a surface roughness of order 1 nm. Ti(5 nm)/Au(35 nm) electrodes were 
deposited onto the top and bottom sides of the PMN-PT by thermal evaporation. The ring pattern was defined 
using electron beam lithography before deposition of Ni(20 nm)/Al(2 nm) by magnetron sputtering followed by 
lift-off.

Magnetic contrast images were obtained using the x-ray photoemission electron microscope (PEEM) on 
beamline I06 at the Diamond Light Source synchrotron. Illuminating the sample at oblique (16°) incidence 
and making use of XMCD at the Ni L3 edge (853 eV) as the contrast mechanism allowed sensitivity to in-plane 
moments with a spatial resolution of approximately 50 nm. Azimuthal rotation of the sample with respect to the 
incident polarization vector allowed unambiguous assignment of the magnetization direction in each domain. 
Additional electrical feedthroughs allowed the in-situ application of voltage to the PMN-PT whilst imaging.

Micromagnetic simulations were carried out using the Object Oriented Micromagnetic Framework 
(OOMMF) package26 installed on the University of Nottingham High Performance Computing cluster. 
Simulations were performed for a half ring geometry with inner diameter = 5.7 µm, outer diameter = 7.7 µm and 
thickness = 20 nm. A zoomed-section is shown in Fig. 3. The mesh size was 5 nm × 5 nm × 20 nm. Magnetisation 
M = 490 kAm−1. The damping constant is stated in the main text. The ends of the half ring section were set to 
critical damping to suppress the reflection of spin waves. Simulations were carried out using uniaxial anisotropy 
energy values of KU = −3 kJm−3 and +10 kJm−3.

References
 1. Parkin, S. S. P., Hayashi, M. & Thomas, L. Magnetic domain-wall racetrack memory. Science 320, 190 (2008).
 2. Lavrijsen, R. et al. Magnetic ratchet for three-dimensional spintronic memory and logic. Nature 493, 647 (2014).
 3. Allwood, D. A. et al. Magnetic domain-wall logic. Science 309, 1688 (2005).
 4. Pushp, A. et al. Domain wall trajectory determined by its fractional topological edge defects. Nature Phys. 9, 505 (2013).
 5. Omari, K. A. & Hayward, T. J. Chirality-based vortex domain-wall logic gates. Phys. Rev. Applied 2, 044001 (2014).
 6. Brandão, J. et al. Control of the magnetic vortex chirality in Permalloy nanowires with asymmetric notches. J. Appl. Phys. 116, 

193902 (2014).
 7. Wilhelm, E.-S., McGrouther, D., Heyne, L., Bisig, A. & Kläui, M. Vortex domain wall chirality rectification due to the interaction 

with end domain spin structures in permalloy nanowires. Appl. Phys. Lett. 95, 252501 (2009).
 8. Omari, K. et al. Ballistic rectification of vortex domain wall chirality at nanowire corners. Appl. Phys. Lett. 107, 222403 (2015).

Figure 4. A method to switch the chirality of a vortex domain wall by applying strain locally. A schematic 
representation of a device element for reversing the chirality of a vortex domain wall in a nanowire fabricated 
on a piezoelectric substrate. A voltage applied to the electrodes induces a mechanical strain and a uniaxial 
anisotropy favouring an easy axis transverse to the wire. (a), A vortex domain wall positioned at the edge of 
the electrode region is transformed to a flux closure domain pattern near the electrodes (b). (c), Relaxation of 
the induced anisotropy leads to the formation of a vortex domain wall with the opposite chirality to the initial 
domain wall.



www.nature.com/scientificreports/

6Scientific REPORtS | 7: 7613  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9

 9. Bisig, A. et al. Dynamic domain wall chirality rectification by rotating magnetic fields. Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, 122401 (2015).
 10. Uhlir, V. et al. Dynamic switching of the spin circulation in tapered magnetic nanodisks. Nature Nanotech. 8, 341 (2013).
 11. Antos, R. & Otani, Y. Simulations of the dynamic switching of vortex chirality in magnetic nanodisks by a uniform field pulse. Phys 

Rev. B 80(R), 140404 (2009).
 12. Buzzi, M. et al. Single Domain Spin Manipulation by Electric Fields in Strain Coupled Artificial Multiferroic Nanostructures. Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 111, 027204 (2013).
 13. Rushforth, A. W. et al. Voltage control of magnetocrystalline anisotropy in ferromagnetic-semiconductor/piezoelectric hybrid 

structures. Phys. Rev. B 78, 085314 (2008).
 14. Hu, J.-M., Li, Z., Chen, L.-Q. & Nan, C.-W. High-density magnetoresistive random access memory operating at ultralow voltage at 

room temperature. Nature Commun. 2, 553 (2011).
 15. Parkes, D. E. et al. Non-volatile voltage control of magnetization and magnetic domain walls in magnetostrictive epitaxial thin films. 

Appl. Phys. Lett. 101, 072402 (2012).
 16. Brintlinger, T. et al. In Situ Observation of Reversible Nanomagnetic Switching Induced by Electric Fields. Nano. Lett. 10, 1219 

(2010).
 17. Hockel, J. L., Bur, A., Wu, T., Wetzlar, K. P. & Carman, G. P. Electric field induced magnetization rotation in patterned Ni ring/

Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3](1-0.32)-[PbTiO3]0.32 heterostructures. Appl. Phys. Lett. 100, 022401 (2012).
 18. Sohn, H. et al. Electrically driven magnetic domain wall rotation in multiferroic heterostructures to manipulate suspended on-chip 

magnetic particles. ACS Nano 9, 4814 (2015).
 19. Lei, N. et al. Strain-controlled magnetic domain wall propagation in hybrid piezoelectric/ferromagnetic structures. Nature Commun. 

4, 1378 (2013).
 20. Franke, K. J. A. et al. Reversible Electric-Field-Driven Magnetic Domain-Wall Motion. Phys. Rev. X 5, 011010 (2015).
 21. De Ranieri, E. et al. Piezoelectric control of the mobility of a domain wall driven by adiabatic and non-adiabatic torques. Nature 

Mater. 12, 808 (2013).
 22. Bryan, M. T., Bance, S., Dean, J., Schre, T. & Allwood, D. A. Transverse and vortex domain wall structure in magnetic nanowires with 

uniaxial in-plane anisotropy. J. Phys. Cond. Matt. 24, 024205 (2012).
 23. Wu, T. et al. Domain engineered switchable strain states in ferroelectric (011)[Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3](1-x)-[PbTiO3]x (PMN-PT, 

x = 0.32) single crystals. J. Appl. Phys. 109, 124101 (2011).
 24. Sato, Y., Hirayama, T. & Ikuhara, Y. Real-time direct observations of polarisation reversal in a piezoelectric crystal: Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)

O3-PbTiO3 studied via in situ electrical biasing transmission electron microscopy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 187601 (2011).
 25. Rafalovskyi, I., Guennou, M., Gregora, I. & Hlinka, J. Macroscopic lamellar heterophase pattern in Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3-PbTiO3 single 

crystals. Phys. Rev. B 93, 064110 (2016).
 26. Donahue, M. and Porter, D. G. Interagency report NISTIR 6376, OOMMF User’s Guide, Version 1.0 (National Institute of Standards 

and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, 1999).

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council [grant numbers EP/
H003487/1 and EP/K503800/1]. The authors would like to acknowledge Diamond Light Source for the provision 
of beamtime under SI-9521 and 11327. We are grateful for access to the University of Nottingham High 
Performance Computing Facility.

Author Contributions
R.B., S.B., D.E.P., K.W.E., S.A.C. and A.W.R. conducted the PEEM measurements. C.R. performed electron beam 
lithography and S.B. carried out the sputter deposition. A.W.R. and S.A.C. designed the experiments. A.W.R. 
carried out the micromagnetic simulations. All authors contributed to the manuscript.

Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at doi:10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9
Competing Interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 

format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 
© The Author(s) 2017

http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

	Deterministic control of magnetic vortex wall chirality by electric field
	Methods
	Acknowledgements
	Figure 1 Device geometry and characteristics.
	Figure 2 XMCD-PEEM images of strain-induced chirality switching in vortex domain walls.
	Figure 3 Micromagnetic simulations of a head to head vortex domain wall under the action of a uniaxial magnetic anisotropy energy.
	Figure 4 A method to switch the chirality of a vortex domain wall by applying strain locally.




