











































Composite Graphics

page 2

EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES’ IMPACT 
ON SOCIETY & WORK IN 2030

The next era of

human|machine
PARTNERSHIPS



INSTITUTE FOR THE FUTURE 
Institute for the Future (IFTF) is an independent, nonprofit 501(c)(3) 
strategic research and educational organization celebrating nearly  
50 years of forecasting experience. The core of our work is 
identifying emerging trends and discontinuities that will transform 
global society and the global marketplace. Our research generates 
the foresight needed to create insights that lead to action and spans 
a broad territory of deeply transformative futures, from health and 
health care to technology, the workplace, learning, and human 
identity. As an educational organization, IFTF strives to comply with 
fair-use standards and publish only materials in the public domain 
under the Creative Commons 4.0 International License  
(CC BY-NC-ND 4.0). The Institute for the Future is based in  
Palo Alto, California. (www.iftf.org)

This report was researched, written, designed, and produced by IFTF 
in English. With IFTF permission, the Dell Technologies Globalization 
Team has translated the work with approved Language Service 
Providers (LSPs) around the world to obtain quality translation of the 
work, however content may differ from the original source material. 
All translations shall remain under the original copyright.  

DELL TECHNOLOGIES 
Dell Technologies is a unique family of businesses that provides the 
essential infrastructure for organizations to build their digital future, 
transform IT, and protect their most important asset, information. 
The company services customers of all sizes—ranging from 98% 
of the Fortune 500 to individual consumers—with the industry’s 
broadest and most innovative portfolio from edge to core to cloud. 
Dell Technologies family consists of the following brands: Dell, Dell 
EMC, Pivotal, RSA, SecureWorks, Virtustream, and VMware.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This report would not have been possible without the  
substantial contributions of many collaborators, a partial list 
of whom includes:

Julie Magee
Christopher Bishop
Srinivasan Sankarambadi
Sudhir Swamy
Ed Kennedy
Jarl Taggueg
Katherine Miller
Dianne E. Durham
Anastasia Nylund

Cristian Malineanu
Eunice Romero
Hester Bruikman
Ghanima Abdullah
Amanda Maher
Rachel Michaud
Greg Vanderhorst
Ashley Drake
Amardeep Sodhi

© 2017 Institute for the Future for Dell Technologies. All rights reserved. All trademarks are the property of their respective owners. SR-1940



Contents

Introduction 1

Emerging Technologies Impacting Our Lives  3

Human-Machine Partnerships by 2030  7

Impact on Individuals and Organizations by 2030  9

Digital Conductors 

Work Chasing People 

In-the-Moment Learning

Preparing for the Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships 17

Skills & Traits for Individuals

Skills & Responses for Organizations 

Conclusion: Human-Machine Partnerships in 2030 21

Endnotes  23



ABOUT THIS RESEARCH
In 2017, Dell Technologies partnered with the independent 
futures research group, Institute for the Future (IFTF), to explore 
the emerging technologies shaping the future of the human 
experience over the next decade, and the specific impacts and 
implications they will have on society and work. To execute 
this, IFTF relied on its decades-long study on the future of work 
and technology, in-depth interviews with key stakeholders, and 
the opinions and ideas generated during an all-day facilitated 
workshop with a diverse set of experts from across the globe. 
Experts informing the report include: 

Ian Bork, CEO, Luminate Health
Ming-Li Chai, Principal, Design Research & Strategy 
Office Envisioning, Microsoft
Devin Fidler, Research Director, Institute for the Future 
Eri Gentry, Research Manager, Institute for the Future 
Deborah Johnson, Anne Shirley Carter Olsson  
Professor Emeritus of Applied Ethics:  
Science, Technology, and Society, University of Virginia
Jordan Howard, Social Good Strategist, GenYNot
Toshi Hoo, Director of Emerging Media Lab, 
Institute for the Future
Jeremy Kirshbaum, Research Manager, 
Institute for the Future 
Rachel Maguire, Research Director, Institute for the Future
Lauren McCarthy, Programmer, Media Artist, 
Assistant Professor of Design Media Arts  
University of California Los Angeles 
Adam Miner, PsyD, post-doctoral fellow 
Stanford Clinical Excellence Research 
Stanford University School of Medicine 
Liam Quinn, Chief Technology Officer,  
Sr. Vice President, Sr. Fellow, Dell Technologies
Zulfikar Ramzan, Chief Technology Officer, RSA Security 
Tasneen Salim, Founder/Managing Director, 
GCON, Saudi Arabia 
William Senyo, Co-founder & Chief Executive Officer, 
Impact Hub Accra, Ghana
John Suh, Vice President, Hyundai Ventures
Mark Thiele, Chief Strategy Officer, Apcera
Thuc Vu, Co-founder & Chief Executive Officer, OhmniLabs 
Norman Wang, Executive Producer, Opaque Media, Australia 
David Yeo, Chief Learning Architect, Kydon Group, Singapore



    The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships   1

Introduction

At its inception, very few people anticipated the pace at which the internet would spread across the 
world, or the impact it would have in remaking business and culture. And yet, as journalist Oliver 
Burkeman wrote in 2009, “Without most of us quite noticing when it happened, the web went from 
being a strange new curiosity to a background condition of everyday life.”1 

Today’s emerging technologies also feel like strange, new 
curiosities. Artificial Intelligence (AI), augmented and virtual 
reality, home robots, and cloud computing, to name only a 
few of the sophisticated technologies in development today, 
are capturing the imaginations of many. The advanced 
capabilities of today’s emerging technologies are driving 
many academics, entrepreneurs, and enterprises to envision 
futures in which their impacts on society will be nothing 
short of transformative. At a recent expert workshop hosted 
by Dell Technologies and the Institute for the Future (IFTF), 
participants suggested that the technologies in play over 
the next decade have the potential to “solve some of the 
intractable problems that humanity has faced for so long,” 
offer the opportunity to “increase productivity [such that] 
all our basics needs [are taken care of],” and fundamentally 
reframe “notions of what it means to be a person.”2 

Whether or not these emerging technologies will realize these 
ambitious possibilities is uncertain. What is certain is that they 
will intersect and interact with powerful demographic, eco-
nomic, and cultural forces to upend the conditions of everyday 
life and reshape how many live and work in 2030. As a result, 

many organizations and people will navigate unchartered 
waters over the next decade, unsure of what lies ahead.  
In Dell’s Digital Transformation Index study, with 4,000  
senior decision makers across the world, 45% say they are 
concerned about becoming obsolete in just 3-5 years, nearly 
half don’t know what their industry will look like in just three 
years’ time, and 73% believe they need to be more ‘digital’  
to succeed in the future. 

With this in mind, we set out with 20 experts to explore how 
various social and technological drivers will influence the 
next decade and, specifically, how emerging technologies 
will recast our society and the way we conduct business by 
the year 2030. As a result, this outlook report concludes that, 
over the next decade, emerging technologies will underpin 
the formation of new human-machine partnerships that make 
the most of their respective complementary strengths. These 
partnerships will enhance daily activities around the coordi-
nation of resources and in-the-moment learning, which will 
reset expectations for work and require corporate structures to 
adapt to the expanding capabilities of human-machine teams. 



    The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships   3

There is no universally agreed upon determination of which technologies are considered emerging. 
For the purpose of this study, IFTF explored the impact that Robotics, Artificial Intelligence (AI) and 
Machine Learning, Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR), and Cloud Computing, will have on 
society by 2030. These technologies, enabled by significant advances in software, will underpin the 
formation of new human-machine partnerships.

Robotics
For decades, robots have performed activities that humans 
should not or do not want to do. This includes dangerous 
situations, repetitive tasks, or tasks that do not require special 
cognitive or problem-solving skills. In the most advanced 
manufacturing sectors—among Japan’s carmakers, for 
example—robots are already able to work unsupervised,  
around the clock, for up to 30 days without interruption.

Rapid developments across science, technology, engineering, 
and communications have brought about what has been called 
the new Industrial Revolution, or “second machine age,” which 
will greatly expand robots’ competencies and functions. With 
these changes, a whole suite of jobs is being reimagined as 
automation displaces and disrupts human labor, the benefits of 
which have been well chronicled.

While offshoring manufacturing jobs to low-cost economies can 
save up to 65% on labor costs, replacing human workers with 
robots can save up to 90% of these costs.3 China is currently 
embarking upon an effort to fill its factories with advanced man-
ufacturing robots, as workers’ wages rise and technology allows 
the industry to become more efficient. The province of Guang-
dong, the heartland of Chinese manufacturing, has promised 
to invest $154 billion in installing robots. According to a report 
released by PwC, more than a third of U.K. jobs could be at 
“high risk” of automation by the early 2030s and robots could 
take over 38% of current U.S. jobs in the next 15 years.4 

Buoyed by their commercial success, the adoption of robots will 
extend beyond manufacturing plants and the workplace. Family 
robots, caregiving robots, and civic robots will all become 
commonplace as deep learning improves robots’ abilities to 
empathize and reason. Google recently won a patent to build 
worker robots with personalities. While there are certainly 
regulatory and legal hurdles, as well as cultural acceptance, to 
overcome, this introduction of robots into our personal lives will 
continue over the next 15 years. 

Emerging Technologies  
Impacting Our Lives 

OhmniLabs 
Ohmni is an affordable telepresence, self-charging and  
self-repairing home robot.

ohm
nilabs.com



4   INSTITUTE FOR THE FUTURE

Emerging Technologies Impacting Our Lives (cont.)

Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning 
Artificial Intelligence has come a long way from the days of 
Herbert Simon’s Logic Theory Machine program in 1956. Since 
1997, when a chess-playing computer, Deep Blue, beat Gary 
Kasparov, the reigning world chess champion, machines  
have became smarter, faster, and able to manage increasingly 
complex tasks.

Approximately 1,500 companies in North America alone are 
doing something related to AI today, which equates to less than 
1% of all medium-to-large companies. We’re seeing this in the 
financial services industry already, with data recognition, pattern 
recognition, and predictive analytics being applied to huge data 
sets on a broad scale. In a 2015 report, Bank of America Merrill 
Lynch estimated that the AI market will expand to $153 billion 
over the next five years—$83 billion for robots, and $70 billion 
for artificial intelligence-based systems.5

According to Michelle Zhou, an expert in AI, development 
can be thought of in three stages.6 The first is recognition 
intelligence—algorithms that recognize patterns; followed by 
cognitive intelligence—machines that make inferences from 
data; with the final stage being virtual human beings. It is plausi-
ble that, by 2030, we will enter the second stage in AI as this 
technology continues to progress. AI is being applied in both 
simple and complex applications—from autonomous vehicles 
to Apple’s Siri. Recently, an AI program called Libratus from 
Carnegie Mellon University beat the world’s best professional 
poker players in Pittsburgh after a 20-day event. Significantly, 
the machine was able to outsmart the humans by using “imper-
fect information.” This is because, in poker, there is a degree of 
missing information. Players will never reveal the cards in their 
hand until they must (unlike chess, where everyone can see the 
pieces and possible moves). 

In addition to their ability to make decisions with imperfect 
information, machines are now able to learn from their expe-
riences and share that learning with other AI programs and 
robots. But AI progress also brings new challenges. Discussions 
surrounding who or what has moral and ethical responsibility for 
decisions made by machines will only increase in importance 
over the next decade.

Libratus Supercomputer 
During the “Brains vs. Artificial Intelligence Re-Match” in 2017, the 
supercomputer, Libratus, developed at Carnegie Mellon University’s 
School of Computer Science, reigned supreme in Texas Hold’em 
against some of the world’s best professional poker players. 

cm
u.edu



    The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships   5

Oculus VR with Dell Precision Workstation 
Students use Virtual Reality for an immersive and educational  
experience. 

Dell.com

Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality 
Although both Virtual and Augmented Reality are changing 
the form factor of computing, there is a simple distinction 
between the two. VR blocks out the physical world and 
transports the user to a simulated world, whereas AR creates 
a digital layer over the physical world. Despite the difference, 
both technologies represent a fundamental shift in information 
presentation because they allow people to engage in what 
Toshi Hoo, Director of IFTF’s Emerging Media Lab, calls 
“experiential media” as opposed to representative media. No 
longer depending on one or two of our senses to process data, 
immersive technologies like AR and VR will enable people to 
apply multiple senses—sight, touch, hearing, and soon, taste 
and smell—to experience media through embodied cognition. 

Both VR and AR stand to transform not only media and 
entertainment but also drive development of innovative use 
cases in education, health care, travel and transportation, 
construction, and manufacturing. The information layer that 
both technologies create will accelerate the melding of digital 
and physical identities, with digital trails and traces forming 
a digital coating over individuals’ physical environments. 
On-demand access to AR learning resources will reset 
expectations and practices around workplace training and 
retraining, and real-time decision-making will be bolstered by 
easy access to information flows. VR-enabled simulation will 
immerse people in alternative scenarios, increasing empathy for 
others and preparation for future situations. It will empower the 
internet of experience by blending physical and virtual worlds.

Right now, analysts project revenues associated with AR 
technologies and services will grow to about $90 billion by 
2020, the majority of which will be generated through revenue 
spent on hardware. VR is forecasted to grow more modestly, 
increasing to $30 billion by 2020.7 Yet, as authoring tools get 
simplified, making it easier to create VR content, VR will  
catch up to AR. Over the next decade, Hoo forecasts  
that VR, combined with vast sensor networks and  
connected technologies, will be one of many tools that enable 
distributed presence and embodied cognition, allowing  
people to experience media with all their senses. 



6   INSTITUTE FOR THE FUTURE

Cloud Computing
It’s important to recognize that Cloud Computing isn’t a place, 
it’s a way of doing IT. Whether public, private, or hybrid (a 
combination of private and public), the technology is now used 
by 70% of U.S. organizations. This figure is expected to grow 
further, with 56% of businesses surveyed saying they are work-
ing on transferring more IT operations to the cloud, according to 
IDG Enterprise’s 2016 Cloud Computing Executive Summary.8 

Chitale Dairy exemplifies the power of cloud computing to 
improve the economic well-being of dairy farmers in India. 
Recently, Chitale Dairy launched a ‘cow to cloud’ initiative in 
which each cow is fitted with RFID tags to capture data that is 
held in the cloud. The relevant analysis of this data is then sent 
to the local farmers via SMS and the web, to alert farmers when 
they need to change the cows’ diet, arrange vaccinations, etc. 
The timely delivery of this information is increasing the cows’ 
yield, supporting local farmers, whose livelihoods depend on 
the dairy farms, and enabling Chitale to manage a part of the 
supply chain which is normally fraught with uncertainty.

While the cloud is not a recent technological advancement, 
cloud technology only really gathered momentum in recent 
years, as enterprise grade applications hit the market, virtualiza-
tion technologies matured, and businesses became increasingly 
aware of its benefits in terms of efficiency and profitability. 
Increasing innovation in cloud-native apps and their propen-
sity to be built and deployed in quick cadence to offer greater 
agility, resilience, and portability across clouds will drive further 
uptake. Start-ups are starting to use cloud-native approaches to 
disrupt traditional industries; and by 2030, cloud technologies 
will be so embedded, memories from the pre-cloud era will feel 
positively archaic by comparison.

Chitale Dairy
Chitale Dairy launched the ‘cow to cloud’ initiative to improve the health 
and well-being of cows on dairy farms in India.

chitaledairy.com

Emerging Technologies Impacting Our Lives (cont.)



    The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships   7

Recent conversations, reports, and articles about the 
intersection of emerging technologies and society have  
tended to promote one of two extreme perspectives about the 
future: the anxiety-driven issue of technological unemployment 
or the optimistic view of tech-enabled panaceas for all social 
and environmental ills. Perhaps a more useful conversation 
would focus on what the new relationship between technology 
and society could look like, and what needs to be considered 
to prepare accordingly. By framing the relationship between 
humans and machines as a partnership, we can begin to build 
capacity in machines to 
improve their understanding 
of humans, and in society and 
organizations, so that more 
of us are prepared to engage 
meaningfully with emerging 
technologies. 

Of course, people have 
lived and worked alongside 
machines for centuries. From 
the hand axe, possibly the first example of a human-made 
device designed to enhance human power, to time-saving  
home devices such as lawn mowers and vacuum cleaners,  
to calculators, personal computers, and the proliferation  
of mobile devices. However, society is about to enter a new  
phase, characterized by even greater efficiency and  
possibility than ever before. 

As processing power increases 10 times every five years 
(Source: Moore’s Law), humans will be eclipsed by computers 
in many areas. Machines will bring lightning speed and accu-
racy to all manner of tasks. However, it would be a fallacy to 
assume that technology is making human effort redundant. It’s 
doubtful that computers will have fully mastered the funda-
mental, instinctive skills of intuition, judgment, and emotional 
intelligence that humans value by 2030. Over the next decade, 
partnering with machines will help humans transcend their 
limitations.

Human-machine partnerships will enable people to find and 
act on information without interference of emotions or external 
bias, while also exercising human judgment where appropri-
ate. They’ll learn to team up with technologies integrated with 
machine learning tools to help activate and deactivate the 

resources they need to manage their daily lives. And they’ll  
partner with AR/VR technologies to develop necessary work 
skills, blending experiential media with human judgement to 
perform well at work. 

Meanwhile, organizations will increase value and customer 
satisfaction by growing their reliance on machine learned sys-
tems, making it possible for organizations to find and deploy 
resources rapidly to wherever they are needed, whenever they 
are needed, to create value and higher customer satisfaction. 

Their ability to evaluate talent 
will also be bolstered by VR/
AR technology, which will 
increase managers’ ability to 
evaluate a worker’s aptitude 
for gaining new knowledge or 
learning new skills and apply-
ing this knowledge to  
a new scenario.

Given the pace of industry 
disruption, now is the time to strengthen individual and 
organizational capacities to engage actively in human-machine 
partnerships. The next section describes the impact on 
individuals and organizations and how they’ll come together 
to produce mutually beneficial partnerships to enhance daily 
activities and reset expectations for learning and work. 

Human-Machine  
Partnerships by 2030

“This [human-machine partnerships] is 
a great opportunity for mankind. By 
offloading more, we’ll be able to focus  
on what humanity does best.”

— Norman Wang, Opaque Media



    The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships   9

The sophisticated capabilities of today’s 

emerging technologies are underpinning 

the formation of new human-machine 

partnerships, which will have significant 

impact on both individuals and 

organizations. Working in partnership 

with machines will enhance people’s 

ability to coordinate resources and learn 

in-the-moment, which, in turn, will reset 

expectations for work and require corporate 

structures to adapt to the expanding 

capabilities of human-machine teams. 

Impact on Individuals and  
Organizations by 2030 



10   INSTITUTE FOR THE FUTURE

Today, an increasing portion of human mobility needs are 
being met by an app. Soon it will be hard to justify keeping 
a car in a garage or maintaining a piece of equipment that’s 
rarely used, when technology is providing what people need, 
when they need it. And it’s not just mobility services that are 
being mediated through an app. Already, the number of digital 
platforms that are being used to orchestrate either physical 
or human resources has surpassed 1,800.9 They are not only 
connecting people in need of a ride with drivers, or vaca-
tioners with a place to stay, but job searchers with work, and 
vulnerable populations with critical services. The popularity of 
the services they offer is introducing society to the capabilities 
of coordinating technologies and resetting expectations about 
the ownership of fixed assets. 

By 2030, populations’ needs and resources will be 
orchestrated by self-learning, digital technologies, allowing 
humans to take the role of digital resource conductors. 
Technology will work as an extension of people, helping 
orchestrate, manage, and automate many day-to-day 
activities. And because the technology will be woven 
into everyone’s lives (some will even be implanted), and 
personalized to the individual, some needs will be met often 
before people even realize they have them. These digital 
technologies will be integrated with machine learning to create 
a population of digital orchestration systems, harnessing 
technology to arrange and direct resources to produce a 
desired result.

Digital natives will lead the charge. As they become parents, 
they’ll rely upon human-machine partnerships to manage work 
and family commitments. They’ll be joined by the millions of 
people involved in caring for a loved one. In regions of Asia 
and Europe where people aged 80 years or older comprise the 
fastest growing subsets of their populations, the  
retirement-age cohort will remain larger than the working- 
age population for decades to come. Many relatives of elderly 
people will use lightweight and affordable home robots to cul-
tivate co-presence, and depend on coordinating platforms to 
schedule and monitor caregiving services on-demand to find 
support for their loved ones. 

By 2030, many will be savvy digital orchestra conductors, 
relying on their suite of personal technologies, including voice-
enabled connected devices, wearables, and implantables; to 
infer intent from their patterns and relationships, and activate 
and deactivate resources accordingly. Yet, as is often the case 
with any shift in society, there is a risk that some segments 
of the population will get left behind. Individuals will need to 
strengthen their ability to team up with machines to arrange 
the elements of their daily lives to produce optimal outcomes. 
Without empowering more to hone their digital conducting 
skills, the benefits that will come from offloading ‘life admin’  
to machine partners will be limited to the digitally literate. 

Impact on Individuals and Organizations by 2030

Digital Conductors 

If you imagine this partnership [between humans and 
machines] transforming how we arrange and direct 
our lives to seamlessly provide what we need, before 
we need, with just the wave of a hand per se, it’s 
possible to imagine a future in which machines become 
extensions of ourselves. Today we have digital natives. 
In ten years, we’ll have digital conductors.” 

—Thuc Vu, Co-founder and CEO, OhmniLabs 

“



    The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships   11

Signals of ChangeA Day in the Life 2030 … 
Janine, a freelance designer, just 
received a notification from her AI 
assistant that her elderly aunt is 
unwell. Janine accesses her aunt’s 
home robot, which is constantly 
monitoring her aunt’s vital signs. 
She sees that the algorithmic health 
system has already diagnosed the 
issue and has ordered her medicine. 
Janine also added some flowers to 
the delivery to cheer up her aunt. The 
whole package is delivered within the 
hour via a drone. Janine coordinated 
all of that while commuting in a 
driverless, shared ride service 
programmed to pick her up and go 
directly to her daughter’s school. 
Janine’s AI assistant monitors the 
data flowing from her daughter’s 
implantable health tracker. Janine 
concludes that her daughter’s  
blood sugar levels must have been 
low because as her car pulls up,  
a delivery drone is dropping off a  
healthy snack. 

Original research conducted by Institute for the Future in 2016 identified more than 
1,800 digital work platforms (similar to Uber, Seamless, Upwork, etc.) in operation around 
the world. Notably, the vast majority of the platforms were founded in the last five years, 
suggesting that the tools and services that digital conductors will need to orchestrate their 
work and home lives are only beginning to form. 
IFTF

Honor is an app that matches patients with caregivers, and coordinates meals, 
transportation, housekeeping, and companionship, so older people can be cared for 
and carers can be present—without physically being in the same room. It uses one 
platform to manage all aspects of eldercare. Although it provides patient care, its founder, 
Seth Sternberg, says, “Honor is really about the technology”—connecting health care 
professionals (people) and those in need of care with one another.10 
joinhonor.com



12   INSTITUTE FOR THE FUTURE

Human-machine partnerships will not only help automate and 
coordinate lives, they will also transform how organizations 
find talent, manage teams, deliver products and services, 
and support professional development. Human-machine 
partnerships won’t spell the end of human jobs, but work  
will be vastly different.

By 2030, expectations of work will reset and the landscape 
for organizations will be redrawn, as the process of finding 
work gets flipped on its head. As an extension of what is often 
referred to as the ‘gig economy’ today, organizations will begin 
to automate how they source work and teams, breaking up 
work into tasks, and seeking out the best talent for a task. 
Instead of expecting workers to bear the brunt of finding work, 
work will compete for the best resource to complete the job. 
Reputation engines, data visualization, and smart analytics  
will make individuals’ skills and competencies searchable,  
and organizations will pursue the best talent for discrete  
work tasks. 

The ability to orchestrate both physical and human resources 
will make it possible for organizations to activate, deactivate, 
and deploy resources to wherever and whenever they are 
needed. Not only will this make the organization leaner 
and more competitive, it will also reduce fixed costs and 
overheads, and place them on the path to becoming more 
agile and profitable. However, none of this is assured. To 
prepare for 2030, organizations will need to build out their 
capacity to disaggregate the tasks and duties of jobs, as they 
are designed today. 

Businesses will need to manage this shift carefully. Upon first 
glance, any reduction in full-time employment could seem 
perilous for the economic stability of individuals and families. 
However, reframing talent from fixed to variable resources will 

unleash novel opportunities for a diverse pool of truly global 
talent. These skilled individuals will benefit from a suite of 
sophisticated communication and social collaboration tools 
that allow independent workers and teams to coordinate 
across institutions and time zones. By loosening the ties 
between work and geography, it will be possible to chip 
away at the misalignment of global talent that exists today. 
With regions of South-Central Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa 
projected to grow by almost one billion people by 2030, work, 
particularly digital work, will search for the top talent and 
innovative ideas housed in emerging regions. 

Work chasing people could also reduce personal biases 
and stereotypes in the job seeking process. Integrating VR 
technology into recruitment protocols, for example, enables 
the prospective worker to demonstrate competency by 
showcasing skills without revealing gender or ethnicity. Hiring 
through immersive technologies could improve the dismal 
representation of women in computing jobs (currently, in the 
United States, only 26% of them are held by women), and 
open more doors to people who, historically, have not had 
equal opportunity to demonstrate their abilities. 

For continuity, strategic advantage, and other critical reasons, 
there will still be many roles that will benefit from having full-
time employees with long tenures within a single organization. 
Yet, organizations will need to apply a more discerning lens 
to distinguish when full-time employment is necessary and 
when procuring the top talent for a specific set of tasks is 
more prudent. Similarly, organizations will need to rethink the 
recruitment process and determine when immersive and expe-
riential technologies serve as better hiring tools than human 
judgment. Without incorporating these expanded capabilities 
of machines, organizations will run the risk of missing out on 
new channels to identify optimal talent. 

Impact on Individuals and Organizations by 2030

Work Chasing People 

I lead a community of young, post-college, active technology 
users in Ghana and West Africa, and my work is to give 
them access to global opportunities” 

 —William Senyo, Co-founder & Chief Executive Officer, Impact Hub Accra, Ghana

“



    The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships   13

Signal of ChangeA Day in the Life 2030 … 
Eng is a natural when it comes 
to being entrepreneurial. He uses 
Working Local as a kind of “dating 
service” to find great opportunities. 
Today, Eng has been routed a project 
from a candy company in Sweden 
looking for help with market research 
as they consider opening exports to 
the Philippines. They are particularly 
interested in finding someone who 
can interview local shopkeepers 
in Manila and take photographs of 
their candy displays for analysis by 
computer vision systems. Eng has 
always liked the process of figuring 
out what people want. He is happy 
to see that the Working Local system 
is starting to recognize his talent for 
this and will probably offer similar 
opportunities in the future.

Alice, a technology powered by Circular Board, is the world’s first artificial intelligence 
platform for women entrepreneurs. Alice connects founders in real-time with carefully 
curated resources specific to their industry, stage of growth, and location. As Alice 
populates, machine learning will allow her to predict the needs of founders to guide  
them to referrals, events, mentors, and access to capital and ecosystems.
helloalice.com

Glowork is the first women’s employment organization in the Middle East and has launched 
a platform that links female jobseekers with employers. So far it has put over 3,000 women 
in the workplace, and found work-from-home jobs for 500 women. Leveraging big data, 
employers can search for candidates based on different search criteria as well as the right 
target market for them.11

glowork.net



14   INSTITUTE FOR THE FUTURE

The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics says that today’s learners 
will have 8 to 10 jobs by the time they are 38. Many of them 
will join the workforce of freelancers. Already 50 million  
strong, freelancers are projected to make up 50% of  
the workforce in the United States by 2020.12 Most freelancers 
will not be able to rely on traditional HR departments, 
onboarding processes, and many of the other affordances  
of institutional work. 

Not only will workers have many jobs, the tasks and duties of 
the jobs they’ll perform will be markedly different from what 
they studied. The experts that attended the IFTF workshop 
in March 2017 estimated that around 85% of the jobs that 
today’s learners will be doing in 2030 haven’t been invented 
yet. This makes the famous prediction that 65% of grade 
school kids from 1999 will end up in jobs that haven’t yet  
been created seem conservative in comparison.13

Whether either forecast comes to fruition, it’s clear that, by 
2030, workers will create new work infrastructures to acquire 
the skills and knowledge they will need to execute their 
work successfully. They will routinely improvise, learn from 
each other, and make their own way. Some will rely on past 
work experiences, frameworks, or mental models. Others 
will experiment across different platforms, discovering their 
own workarounds and pioneering their own innovations. 
These factors combined, will seriously challenge traditional 
establishments. Most will partner with machines to learn while 
on-the-gig. By 2030, in-the-moment learning will become the 
modus operandi, and the ability to gain new knowledge will  
be valued higher than the knowledge people already have.

To acquire the necessary knowledge, some will use AR  
technologies to perform unfamiliar and complex tasks on the 
job. Instead of depending on technical schools or training 
programs to learn new skills and retrain displaced workers, 
workers, wearing an AR headset, will be fed the information 
that they need in real-time and in their field-of-vision so they 
can do the work. As Amit Mahajan, Managing Partner at 
Presence Capital, forecasted, “A worker in the future may 
put on their AR headset and, just like a ride-sharing driver, 
start receiving requests to physically perform technical 
operations.”14 Others will depend on apps and services that 
are designed to engage users in learning during the idle 
moments of their lives. One early example of this is WaitSuite, 
developed by researchers at MIT’s Computer Science 
and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, to turn every waiting 
opportunity into a learning opportunity (a practice called  
‘wait-learning’).15 

As the transfer of knowledge will be increasingly offloaded to 
emerging technologies, individuals will shoulder the burden of 
using these new technologies to acquire necessary skills to 
demonstrate proficiency. As a result, people will need to know 
how to access information and learn through immersive and 
experimental media such as AR and VR. Whether it’s using 
VR/AR technology to prepare response teams for emergency 
events or teaching someone how to fix a leak, emerging 
technologies will reshape the methods and tools available to 
impart information. This will require both access to technology 
as well as increased confidence in their know-how to utilize 
emerging technologies. 

Impact on Individuals and Organizations by 2030

In-the-Moment Learning

Workers in the gig economy will self-direct their wage. 
They’ll increase their salary by taking on jobs in which 
they can learn. People are learning as they go and 
considering new avenues for their career in the process. 
This will have wide-ranging implications—on work and 
educational establishments.” –Eri Gentry, Institute for the Future

“



    The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships   15

Signals of ChangeA Day in the Life 2030 … 
When Lydia was in her early 20s, 
she spent over $5,000 to study 
automotive mechanics in New York 
City. Shortly after, she found steady 
work as an automotive technician 
at a large dealership. Throughout 
her tenure, she has routinely taken 
online courses to update her skillset 
and attended trainings related 
to specific car brands. Since her 
employer introduced AR technology 
into the repair shop, she doesn’t 
have to sacrifice family time and 
modest savings to acquire new 
skills. When she is charged with 
performing an unfamiliar or complex 
task, she slips on her safety glasses 
equipped with AR technology. 
As she begins the task, relevant 
information is served up, across her 
field of vision, guiding her process 
throughout the task. What’s more, 
Lydia uses a personalized system, 
so the information and guidance she 
receives is built on what she already 
knows, and delivered in the way she 
learns best. 

DAQRI, based in Los Angeles, California, is using state-of-the-art AR devices to display 
information and work instructions over a worker’s environment, enabling them to complete 
a task safely and efficiently. With DAQRI’s technology, workers are able to see their 
colleague’s field of view and provide assistance—meaning field workers will never have to 
work alone, without the aid of their team’s collective intelligence.
daqri.com 

WaitSuite was developed by researchers at MIT’s Computer Science and Artificial 
Intelligence Laboratory. WaitSuite is embedded directly into existing tasks so users can 
learn as they wait for a WhatsApp message to appear for instance, without having to leave 
the WhatsApp platform. Acquiring skills through apps like WaitSuite will only grow as more 
people strive to learn in the moment.
people.csail.mit.edu



    The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships   17

Preparing for the Next Era of  
Human-Machine Partnerships

The sophisticated capabilities of today’s 

emerging technologies will fuel a new 

level of human-machine collaboration and 

codependence. A future in which people 

partner with machines to build on their 

mutual strengths provides tremendous 

possibility to improve the conditions for 

everyday living. Classifying the skills that 

machines should bring to the table and what 

humans should contribute to the partnership 

is key. Forging strong working relationships 

depends upon each party bringing 

something unique to the collaboration.  

This section helps jump-start the new 

distribution of human and organizational 

skills and traits needed to thrive in the next 

era of human-machine partnerships.



18   INSTITUTE FOR THE FUTURE

Preparing for the Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships (cont.)

For individuals, domain expertise, the combination of  
experience, context, and knowledge on how “things get  
done,” will continue to be a decidedly human trait over the next 
decade. In addition to domain expertise, the set of attitudes 
often associated with entrepreneurs—vision, perseverance, 
creative problem-solving—will be a critical trait for all workers to 
employ. The ability to take a measured approach to balancing 
the big picture objectives of the organization with an entrepre-
neur’s drive to design workarounds and circumvent constraints 
will differentiate the humans from the machines. In other words, 
the skills traditionally employed by entrepreneurs will be funda-
mental for all workers.

While the creative skills of humans are often touted as superior 
to what machine intelligence might produce, human passion 
may be even more challenging to program. As highly valued as 
soft skills may be for humans to contribute to the new partner-
ships—such as creativity and empathy—the human drive that 
compels people to act is equally important. Brian Mullins, CEO 
and co-founder of DAQRI, believes passion is a clear advan-
tage that humans will have over machines. As Mullins argued, 
“If you pick up a device and learn how to do something that 
you couldn’t do before, you could fire up a passion in people 
and that is what’s going to make a change in our world. This is 
how the application of these technologies will solve even more 
interesting problems on a global scale.”16

As the rise of reputation engines, data visualization, and smart 
analytics make individuals’ skills and competencies increas-
ingly searchable, cultivating and preserving a strong personal 
brand will be considered basic professional hygiene over the 
next decade. In order for rewarding and challenging work to 
find them, people will need to maintain a favorable, professional 
reputation in one’s network. 

Many will depend on machines to run the daily activities 
associated with managing personal brands and professional 
reputations, exemplifying another critical skill for individuals to 
develop—the nimble ability to integrate lightweight automation 
tools into their own work and home lives. Instead of resisting 
the affordances of automation tools, being able to apply them to 
one’s own life will help individuals to easily offload automatable 
tasks, like personal brand audits, and hone the needed human 
skills in work and at home. 

Finally, as AI cloud services enable more applications and 
devices to incorporate AI capabilities without heavy investment 
in the technical infrastructure, access to information will be  
even more expansive than it is today. In 2030, skills in 
information qualification and judgment will remain critical,  
as will the new skill of interpreting an output produced by an  
algorithm. The ability to make sense of combined human- 
machine outputs will be key for success in the next era of 
human-machine partnerships. 

INDIVIDUAL SKILLS & TRAITS 

• Contextualized intelligence:  
nuanced understanding of culture, society,  
business, and people 

• Entrepreneurial mindset:  
applying creativity, learning agility, and an enterprising 
attitude to find workarounds and circumvent constraints 

• Personal brand cultivation:  
a searchable and favorable digital identity as  
basic work hygiene 

• Automation literacy:  
the nimble ability to integrate lightweight automation  
tools into one’s own work and home life

• Computational sensemaking:  
ability to derive meaning from blended machine  
and human-based outputs 

Individuals



    The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships   19

Preparing for the Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships (cont.)

For organizations, building out technological capabilities will 
be key. Central to this will be recognizing that the threat of 
falling victim to security breaches is no longer a technology 
problem, but a business problem. This will elevate the role of 
building and maintaining secure systems, as well as designing 
effective response strategies. Over the next decade, people 
will digitally transmit more and more traceable data, blending, 
in many cases, their physical and digital identities. As a result, 
maintaining consumer trust will be vital. Organizations will need 
to show that they’ve gone to the nth degree to protect their cus-
tomers’ data. As Zulfikar Ramzan, Chief Technology Officer at 
RSA Security, explained, “Any ambitious enterprise will be truly 
a joint venture between business and security.”17 Understanding 
the business implications of security breaches will drive 
organizations to develop risk-mitigating security strategies that 
work both to prevent attacks and respond and resolve incidents 
quickly when they occur.

Meeting the exacting expectations of consumers will be equally 
critical for organizations’ success in 2030. Whether it’s the 
delivery of a product, execution of a service, or even identifi-
cation of the next job, any delay in a digital transaction will be 
increasingly unacceptable to consumers. As AI is progressively 
applied, organizations will be able to fix problems and offer 
new services at speed, representing a continuous cycle of 
improvement. Eliminating latencies, responding in real-time, and 
activating this automatic cycle of improvement will be another 
key organizational competency to perfect. 

Organizations will need to quickly ramp-up their internal 
competency to ensure that the growing number of algorithms 
that are running more and more aspects of their business align 
with their brands and values. In addition to ensuring that the 
outputs from the machine-learned systems are accurate, for 
public relations and litigation purposes, organizations will need 
to be adept at reviewing the assumptions built into machine 
systems to prevent the systems from exhibiting implicit racial 
and gender bias.

Especially in a future of work chasing people, organizations 
will need to test and reset the assumptions employees have 
around the value of work. They’ll need to understand how the 
value of work in people’s lives is changing, and to assess what 
will be their anticipated return on time spent working. Digital 
natives will expect to apply their individual skills around digital 
conducting at work, and will view jobs as opportunities to learn 
and make a meaningful impact. Organizations that support 
those aspirations will attract the next decade’s top talent. 

Finally, as more automated machine-learned systems partner 
with workers, finding ways to create spontaneous and novel 
approaches to accomplishing tasks will help inspire creativity 
in the workplace. Implementing structures and processes 
that incent workers to deviate from algorithmic systems will 
reduce the likelihood that systems are running on historical or 
outdated assumptions, and impose attractive challenges for the 
workforce to outsmart the machines. 

ORGANIZATIONAL SKILLS & TRAITS

• Business-driven security:  
embed security as a business strategy

• Eliminate latencies:  
exceed consumer expectations for real-time delivery 

• Algorithmic branding:  
ensure algorithms align with organizational values

• Diversifying value of work:  
reset assumptions behind the value of work

• Inspire innovation:  
incent workers to deviate from machine-learned systems

Organizations



    The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships   21

Both individuals and organizations are grappling with the digital and workforce transformations 
underway today. As these transformations are informed and influenced by emerging technologies 
over the next decade, people will develop new and deeper relationships and new dependencies on 
machines, at home and in the workplace. If we start to approach the next decade as one in which 
partnerships between humans and machines transcend our limitations and build on our strengths,  
we can begin to create a more favorable future for everyone. 

Jordan Howard, Social Good Strategist and Executive  
Director of GenYNot, sees tremendous promise for the future 
of human-machine partnerships: “Many of the complex issues 
facing society today are rooted in waste, inefficiency, and 
simply not knowing stuff, like how to stop certain genes from 
mutating. What if we could solve these problems by pairing up 
more closely with machines and using the mass of data they 
provide to make breakthroughs at speed? As a team, we can 
aim higher, dream bigger, and accomplish more.”

Liam Quinn, Dell Chief Technology Officer, likens the emerging 
technologies of today to the roll-out of electricity 100 years ago. 
Quinn argues that we no longer fixate on the “mechanics” or 
the “wonders” of electricity, yet it underpins almost everything 

we do in our lives. Similarly, Quinn argues, in the 2030s, today’s 
emerging technologies will underpin our daily lives. As Quinn 
provokes, “Imagine the creativity and outlook that’s possible 
from the vantage point these tools will provide: In 2030, it will 
be less about the wonderment of the tool itself and more about 
what that tool can do.”18

By 2030, we will no longer revere the technologies that are 
emerging today. They will have long disappeared into the 
background conditions of everyday life. If we engage in the hard 
work of empowering human-machine partnerships to succeed, 
their impact on society will enrich us all. 

Conclusion: Human-Machine  
Partnerships in 2030



    The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships   23

1. Oliver Burkeman, “Forty Years of the Internet: How the World 
Changed Forever” in The Guardian (October 23, 2009)  
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2009/oct/23/inter-
net-40-history-arpanet 

2. Expert workshop held at Institute for the Future in Palo Alto,  
California on March 23, 2107. 

3. Heather Stewart, “Robot Revolution: Rise of ‘Thinking’ Machines 
Could Exacerbate Inequality,” The Guardian (November 4, 2015) 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/05/robot-revo-
lution-rise-machines-could-displace-third-of-uk-jobs

4. PricewaterhouseCoopers, “Will Robots Steal Our Jobs?: The 
Potential Impact of Automation on the UK and other Major 
Economies.” (March 2017) http://www.pwc.co.uk/economic-
services/ukeo/pwcukeo-section-4-automation-march-2017-v2.pdf

5. Bank of America Merrill Lynch, “Thematic Investing: Robot 
Revolution—Global Robot & AI Primer.” (December 16, 2015) 
https://www.bofaml.com/content/dam/boamlimages/documents/
PDFs/robotics_and_ai_condensed_primer.pdf

6. Om Malik, “The Hype-and Hope- of Artificial Intelligence” in The 
New Yorker (August 26, 2016) http://www.newyorker.com/business/
currency/the-hype-and-hope-of-artificial-intelligence 

7. Digi-Capital, “Augmented/Virtual Reality Revenue Forecast Revised 
to Hit $120B by 2020” (January 2016) http://www.digi-capital.com/
news/2016/01/augmentedvirtual-reality-revenue-forecast- 
revised-to-hit-120-billion-by-2020/#.WR3mDlPyub8 

8. IDG Enterprise, 2016 Cloud Computing Survey, (Nov 1, 2016) 
https://www.idgenterprise.com/resource/research/2016-idg- 
enterprise-cloud-computing-survey/

9. Original analysis conducted by IFTF Research Director Devin Fidler 
in March 2017. 

10.   Tomio Geron, “Elder Care Gets an Upgrade,” in Wall Street Journal 
(February 20, 2017) https://www.wsj.com/articles/elder-care-gets-
an-upgrade-1487646120

11.   Tamara Pupic, “Entrepreneur of the Week: Khalid Alkhudair, 
founder of Glowork” in arabianbusiness.com (February 28, 2016) 
http://www.arabianbusiness.com/entrepreneur-of-week-khalid-
alkhudair-founder-of-glowork-623010.html

12.   Brian Rashid, “The Rise of the Freelancer Economy,” Forbes, 
(January 26, 2016) www.forbes.com/sites/brianrashid/2016/01/26/
the-rise-of-the-freelancer-economy/#6033ad94379a. Rashid notes, 
“This does not mean they are all full-time freelancers, but one of 
every two workers will be freelancers in some capacity.”

13.   U.S. Department of Labor, Futurework: Trends and Challenges for 
Work in the 21st Century. (September 1999) https://www.dol.gov/
oasam/programs/history/herman/reports/futurework/report.htm

14.   Amitt Mahajan, “How Augmented Reality Will Put People Back to 
Work,” Medium (April 5, 2017), https://medium.com/@amitt/how-
augmented-reality-will-put-people-back-to-work-31f8bff10d53

15.   Carrie J. Cai, Philip J. Guo, James Glass, and Robert C. Miller. 
2014. Wait-learning: leveraging conversational dead time for 
second language education. In CHI ‘14 Extended Abstracts on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ‘14). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 2239-2244. http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/90407

16.   Brian Mullins, Panel, “Emerging Tech Trends’ Impact on Future 
Society” at Dell EMC World (May 9, 2017). 

17.  Ramzan, Zulfikar. Phone interview by IFTF. May 23, 2017.

18.  Quinn, Liam. Phone interview by IFTF. May 23, 2017.

Endnotes



201 Hamilton Avenue 
Palo Alto, CA 94301 
www.iftf.org

Composite Graphics

page 2




