






































Faster Big-data Analysis with World-class Pattern Mining Technologies


Faster Big-data Analysis with World-class Pattern Mining
Technologies

Faster Big-data Analysis with World-class Pattern Mining Technologies

- Expected to be utilized in various industries including the finance and IT sectors -

A research team led by Professor Min-Soo Kim from Department of Information and Communication
Engineering developed ‘GMiner’ technology that can analyze big data patterns at high speed. GMiner
technology exhibits performance up to 1,000 times faster than the world’s current best pattern mining
technology.

Fig 1. Multiple asynchronous GPU streams of GMiner

Pattern mining technology identifies all important patterns that appear repeatedly in the big data of various
fields such as buying goods at mega-marts, banking transactions, network packets, and social networks. This
technology is widely used in various industries for purposes such as determining the location of products on
mega-mart shelves or recommending credit cards that match the usage patterns of consumers of different
ages. 

The growing importance of pattern mining has led to the development of thousands of pattern mining
technologies over the past 20 years; however, due to the increasing length of big data patterns, which
increased the number of analytical patterns exponentially, existing mining technologies were hindered in
their analysis of data of more than ten gigabytes (GB) because they failed to complete their analysis due to
insufficient computer memory or took too much time.

Traditional pattern mining technologies first found medium-length patterns and stored them in memory.
When seeking a pattern that is longer than medium-length, they used a method of finding final patterns in
comparison to a medium-length pattern that had been previously saved.

Fig 2. Data flow of GMiner using multiple GPUs

However, GMiner technology developed by the research team has succeeded in fundamentally solving the
problem of existing technologies by proposing anti-intuitive techniques that combine the temporarily
calculated medium-length patterns using the thousands of cores on graphics processing units (GPU) to
calculate the ultimate length of patterns.

GMiner technology completely solved the chronic problem of insufficient memory suffered by conventional
technologies by not storing an exponential number of medium-length patterns in memory. In addition, it
solved the slow speed problem by streaming data from the main memory to the GPU while simultaneously
seeking patterns using the high computational performance of the GPU.

Faster Big-data Analysis with World-class Pattern Mining Technologies https://en.dgist.ac.kr/site/dgist_eng/menu/508.do?siteId=dgist_eng&sna...

1 sur 2 09-07-18 à 21:28



Fig 3. Speed-up ratios when using multiple GPUs for GPU-based methods

GMiner technology showed analysis performance that is a minimum of 10 times to a maximum of 1,000
times faster than conventional distributed and parallel technologies that analyzed data by using up to dozens
of general home computers that have a single GPU per computer; thus, it can analyze big data on a larger
scale than existing technologies. It also showed excellent expansion performance that improves performance
in proportion to the number of GPUs.

Professor Kim said, “We have secured fundamental technologies that can analyze big data patterns at high
speed without any problems in memory for big data accumulated in a variety of industries. By solving
problems where pattern mining technologies were not properly applied to big data due to lack of memory and
slow speed, this new technology can be utilized in helping companies to make efficient decisions by analyzing
big data patterns in various sectors including the finance, retail, IT, and bio-related sectors.” 

This research outcome was published in the May 9 issue of Information Sciences, the most authoritative
international journal in the field of information science.

For more information, please contact: 

Professor Min-Soo Kim

Department of Information and Communication Engineering

Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST)

E-mail: mskim@dgist.ac.kr

Associated Links

Research Paper on Journal of Advanced Health Care Materials

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2018.01.046

Journal Reference

Kang-wook Chon, Min-soo Kim, et al., “GMiner: A Fast GPU-based Frequent Itemset Mining Method for
Large-scale Data,” Information Sciences May 2018.

Faster Big-data Analysis with World-class Pattern Mining Technologies https://en.dgist.ac.kr/site/dgist_eng/menu/508.do?siteId=dgist_eng&sna...

2 sur 2 09-07-18 à 21:28


