






































Google Plans to Demonstrate the Supremacy of Quantum Computing - IEEE Spectrum


By the end of 2017, Google hopes to make a 49-qubit chip that will prove
quantum computers can beat classical machines

Quantum computers have long held the promise of

performing certain calculations that are

impossible—or at least, entirely impractical—for even

the most powerful conventional computers to

perform. Now, researchers at a Google laboratory in

Goleta, Calif., may finally be on the cusp of proving it,

using the same kinds of quantum bits, or qubits, that

one day could make up large-scale quantum

machines.

By the end of this year, the team aims to increase the

number of superconducting 

 it builds on

integrated circuits to create a 7-by-7 array. With this

quantum IC, the Google researchers aim to perform

operations at the edge of what’s possible with even the

best supercomputers, and so demonstrate “quantum

supremacy.”

qubits

(http://spectrum.ieee.org/tag/qubit)

“We’ve been talking about, for many years now, how a

quantum processor could be powerful because of the

way that quantum mechanics works, but we want to

specifically demonstrate it,” says team member John

Martinis (http://web.physics.ucsb.edu

Google Plans to Demonstrate the Supremacy of Quantum Computing - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/google-plans-to-demonstrate-the-supremacy-of-q...

1 sur 5 26/05/17 21:22



, a professor at the University of

California, Santa Barbara, who joined Google in 2014.

/~martinisgroup/)

A system size of 49 superconducting qubits is still far

away from what physicists think will be needed to

perform the sorts of computations that have long

motivated quantum computing research. One of those

is Shor’s algorithm, a computational scheme that

would enable a quantum computer to quickly factor

very large numbers and thus crack one of the

foundational components of modern cryptography. In

a recent commentary in , Martinis and

colleagues estimated that a 100-million-qubit system

would be needed to factor a 2,000-bit number—a

not-uncommon public key length—in one day. Most of

those qubits would be used to create the special

quantum states that would be needed to perform the

computation and to correct errors, creating a mere

thousand or so stable “logical qubits” from thousands

of less stable physical components, Martinis says.

Nature

There will be no such extra infrastructure in this

49-qubit system, which means a different

computation must be performed to establish

supremacy. To demonstrate the chip’s superiority

over conventional computers, the Google team will

execute operations on the array that will cause it to evolve chaotically and produce what looks like a

random output. Classical machines can simulate this output for smaller systems. In April, for example,

Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 

, Cori, had simulated the output of 45 qubits. But 49 qubits would push—if not

exceed—the limits of conventional supercomputers.

reported that its 29-petaflop supercomputer

(https://www.top500.org/news/berkeley-lab-supercomputer-breaks-new-ground-in-quantum-

computing-simulation/)

This computation does not as yet have a clear practical application. But Martinis says there are reasons

beyond demonstrating quantum supremacy to pursue this approach. The qubits used to make the

Google Plans to Demonstrate the Supremacy of Quantum Computing - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/google-plans-to-demonstrate-the-supremacy-of-q...

2 sur 5 26/05/17 21:22



Photo: Erik Lucero

Google will put its superconducting quantum

computer chip in this 10-millikelvin dilution refrigerator.

Put Chip Here: 

49-qubit array can also be used to make larger

“universal” quantum systems with error

correction, the sort that could do things like

decryption, so the chip should provide useful

validation data.

There may also be, the team suspects, untapped

computational potential in systems with little or

no error correction. “It would be wonderful if this

were true, because then we could have useful

products right away instead of waiting for a long

time,” says Martinis. One potential application, the

team suggests, could be in the simulation of

chemical reactions and materials.

Google recently performed a dry run of the

approach on a 9-by-1 array of qubits and tested out

some fabrication technology on a 2-by-3 array.

Scaling up the number of qubits will happen in

stages. “This is a challenging system engineering

problem,” Martinis says. “We have to scale it up,

but the qubits still have to work well. We can’t

have any loss in fidelity, any increase in error

rates, and I would say error rates and scaling tend

to kind of compete against each other.” Still, he

says, the team thinks there could be a way to scale

up systems well past 50 qubits even without error correction.

Google is not the only company working on building larger quantum systems without error correction. In

March, IBM 

 to create such a superconducting qubit system in the next few years,

also with roughly 50 qubits, and to make it accessible on the cloud. “Fifty is a magic number,” says Bob

Sutor, IBM’s vice president for this area, because that’s around the point where 

 will start to outstrip classical computers for certain

tasks.

unveiled a plan (http://spectrum.ieee.org/tech-talk/computing/hardware/ibm-expanding-

cloud-quantum-computer-10fold)

quantum computers

(http://spectrum.ieee.org/tag/quantum+computers)

Google Plans to Demonstrate the Supremacy of Quantum Computing - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/google-plans-to-demonstrate-the-supremacy-of-q...

3 sur 5 26/05/17 21:22



Photo: Erik Lucero

 Google’s quantum computing chip is a

2-by-3 array of qubits. The company hopes to make a 7-by-7

array later this year.

Steps to Supremacy:

The quality of superconducting qubits has

advanced a lot over the years since D-Wave

Systems began offering commercial quantum

computers, says 

, a professor of

computer science at the University of Texas at

Austin. D-Wave, based in Burnaby, B.C., Canada,

has claimed that its systems offer a speedup over

conventional machines, but Aaronson says there

has been no convincing demonstration of that.

Google, he says, is clearly aiming for a

demonstration of quantum supremacy that is “not

something you’ll have to squint and argue about.”

Scott Aaronson

(http://www.scottaaronson.com/)

It’s still unclear whether there are useful tasks a

50-or-so-qubit chip could perform, Aaronson says.

Nor is it certain whether systems can be made bigger without error correction. But he says quantum

supremacy will be an important milestone nonetheless, one that is a natural offshoot of the effort to make

large-scale, universal quantum machines: “I think that it is absolutely worth just establishing as clearly as

we can that the world does work this way. Certainly, if we can do it as a spin-off of technology that will be

useful eventually in its own right, then why the hell not?”

This article appears in the June 2017 print issue as “Google Aims for Quantum Computing Supremacy.”

Advertisement

Google Plans to Demonstrate the Supremacy of Quantum Computing - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/google-plans-to-demonstrate-the-supremacy-of-q...

4 sur 5 26/05/17 21:22



(/robotics/military-

robots/the-1961-

mobot-mark-ii-

had-all-the-moves)

(/semiconductors

/materials/the-most-

complex-

2d-microchipyet)

(/biomedical

/imaging/from-

macro-to-micro-

a-visual-guide-to-the-

brain)

(/computing

/hardware/can-we-

quantify-machine-

consciousness)

(/tech-

talk/semiconductors

/optoelectronics

/memristor-camera-

chip-uses-sparse-

coding-to-see)

(

on/the-iboardbot-

brings-xy-plotters-

into-the-cloud-age

Google Plans to Demonstrate the Supremacy of Quantum Computing - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/google-plans-to-demonstrate-the-supremacy-of-q...

5 sur 5 26/05/17 21:22


