






































Inequality and household debt: New evidence | VOX, CEPRâ•Žs Policy Portal


Columns Video Vox Vox Talks Publications People Debates Events About

VOX  CEPR's Policy Portal
Research-based policy analysis and commentary from leading economists

Create account  | Login  | Subscribe

7 A A

Related

Does inequality lead to a financial crisis?
Michael Bordo, Christopher Meissner

Inequality, leverage and crises
Romain Rancière, Michael Kumhof

Economic inequality during recessions
Jonathan Heathcote, Gianluca Violante, Fabrizio
Perri

Greater inequality and household borrowing? New
evidence from household data

Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Marianna Kudlyak, John Mondragon 29 January 2014

One popular explanation for the increase in US household debt in the years before the subprime mortgage

crisis is that households with stagnating incomes borrowed more to ‘keep up with the Joneses’. This column

presents recent research that questions this explanation. Low-income households in high-inequality regions in

fact borrowed relatively little compared to similar households in low-inequality regions. A theoretical model in

which greater local income inequality facilitates the screening of loan applicants makes predictions that are

consistent with the data.

The financial crisis of 2008–09 was preceded by an
exceptional rise in borrowing by US households,
accounted for primarily by a rise in mortgage debt.
There are two main views about the source of this
‘great leveraging’:

The rise in borrowing reflected ‘credit supply’
factors.

Olivier Coibion
Assistant Professor, UT Austin

Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Associate Professor in the

Department of Economics,

University of California – Berkeley

Marianna Kudlyak
Economist, Federal Reserve Bank

By Topic By Date By Reads By Tag

Inequality and household debt: New evidence | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evidence

1 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31



Proponents point to progress in information technology (Sanchez 2009) and rising financialisation of
debt (especially mortgages) as increasing the supply of credit, particularly to low-income and high-
risk households (Drozd and Serrano-Padial 2013).

The rise was driven by political motivations for expanding credit supply.

For example, Rajan (2010) argues that, in response to rising income inequality, credit was made
increasingly available to lower-income groups to support their consumption levels in the face of
stagnant incomes.

According to the second view (‘demand for credit’), there was a rise in the demand for borrowing on
the part of US households, especially low-income households. One possible motivation for rising
demand for borrowing again stems from rising income inequality. Specifically, higher consumption
on the part of wealthy households could have increased the demand for borrowing by lower-income
households in their attempts to ‘keep up’ with their wealthier neighbours. Indeed, there is a positive
correlation between income inequality in the US and household debt relative to GDP as illustrated in
Figure 1 below. The correlation is certainly consistent with the possibility of a causal relationship
running from inequality to household borrowing.

New evidence on inequality and debt

In a recent working paper (Coibion et al. 2014), we examine the link between inequality and
household borrowing. In particular, we investigate whether borrowing patterns on the part of low-,
middle- and high-income households differed depending on the level of local income inequality. To
measure both debt and inequality, we use unique data from the New York Federal Reserve Bank
Consumer Credit Panel/Equifax which provides comprehensive debt measures for millions of US
households since 1999, including detailed decompositions of debt by type. Because this dataset
does not include household income, we use the relationship between household debt and income,
conditional on observable household characteristics, in the Survey of Consumer Finances to predict
initial household income in 2001. From these imputed levels of income, we construct measures of
local inequality (which are highly correlated with alternative measures of local inequality constructed
from either Census or IRS income data) at the ZIP code, county, and state levels, as well as
measures of household debt-to-income ratios.

Figure 1. Inequality and debt in the US

Trilemma redux: Evidence
from emerging market
economies

Risk, return, and skill in the
portfolios of the wealthy

Transition to clean
technology

Economics of the populist
backlash

China’s WTO entry benefits
US consumers

Introducing VoxDev

Globalisation and executive

of Richmond

John Mondragon
PhD candidate in the Economics

department, UC Berkeley

Don't Miss

Obstfeld, Ostry, Qureshi

Bach, Calvet, Sodini

Acemoglu, Akcigit, Hanley, Kerr

Rodrik

Amiti, Dai, Feenstra, Romalis

Editors

Inequality and household debt: New evidence | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evidence

2 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31



Source: Coibion et al. (2014). The figure plots the income share of the top 5% of US households (source: IRS) and the

ratio of household (and non-profit) total liabilities to GDP (source: Federal Reserve).

Figure 2 below plots county-level inequality across the US from 2001. Inequality is on average
highest in the southern states, as well as California and the Pacific Northwest. Midwestern states, in
contrast, stand out for having some of the lowest levels of inequality on average. The map also
shows that inequality tends to be higher in large cities than in more rural areas. There is even
greater regional heterogeneity in inequality at the ZIP code level – the standard deviation of
inequality at the ZIP code level is twice as high as at the state or county level.

To assess how borrowing patterns differed with local inequality levels, we characterise the evolution
of household debt levels, relative to initial income levels, across income groups in areas with
different levels of income inequality. Our main finding is that low-income households in high-
inequality regions borrowed relatively less than similar households in low-inequality regions. We
illustrate this in Figure 3 below, which plots non-parametric estimates of the evolution of household
debt-to-income ratios across the 2000s for ‘low-income’ and ‘high-income’ households living in low-

compensation

Economics and policy in the
Age of Trump

Keller, Olney

Bown

Events

Shadow Banking: Financial
Intermediation beyond Banks
14 - 15 September 2017 /
Helsinki, Finland / SUERF -
The European Money and
Finance Forum and Bank of
Finland

Corporate Finance Theory
Symposium
15 September - 16 January
2017 / Cambridge / Cambridge
Judge Business School

IMF Eighteenth Jacques
Polak Annual Research
Conference: The Global
Financial Cycle
2 - 3 November 2017 /
Washington DC, USA /
International Monetary Fund

SNB Research Conference:
Monetary Policy Design,
Conduct and Effects
22 - 23 September 2017 /
Zurich, Switzerland / The Swiss
National Bank

Call for Papers: ADBI-World
Economy Workshop on
Globalization and the
Environment
26 - 27 September 2017 /
Tokyo, Japan / Asian
Development Bank Institute

Inequality and household debt: New evidence | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evidence

3 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31



inequality, medium-inequality, or high-inequality ZIP codes relative to those of ‘medium-income’
households. While the differences across inequality regions for high-ranked households are small,
low-ranked households display much larger differences in debt accumulation patterns across low-
and high-inequality regions, reaching around 15% of initial income levels by 2008. These
differences are precisely the opposite of what one would have expected if ‘keeping up with the
Joneses’ drove the rise in household debt during the 2000s. As we document in the text, these
results survive an extensive array of robustness checks.

Figure 2. Inequality across US counties

Source: Coibion et al. (2014). The figure plots inequality in 2001 at the county level. Darker counties are more unequal,

with each bin representing a quintile of the distribution across counties.

Figure 3. Debt accumulation across households and local inequality

@VoxEU

RSS Feeds

Weekly Digest

CEPR Policy Research

Discussion Papers Insights

Homeownership of
immigrants in France:
selection effects related to
international migration flows
Gobillon, Solignac

Climate Change and Long-
Run Discount Rates:
Evidence from Real Estate
Giglio, Maggiori, Stroebel,
Weber

The Permanent Effects of
Fiscal Consolidations
Summers, Fatás

Demographics and the
Secular Stagnation
Hypothesis in Europe
Favero, Galasso

QE and the Bank Lending
Channel in the United
Kingdom
Butt, Churm, McMahon,
Morotz, Schanz

Subscribe

Inequality and household debt: New evidence | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evidence

4 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31



Source: Coibion et al. (2014). The figure shows non-parametric estimates of the evolution of debt to initial income ratios for

households in different income groups living in regions with different levels of inequality. The dotted lines show the 95%-

confidence interval.

Because our data provides disaggregated information on household debt, we assess the link
between local inequality and different forms of debt: mortgage debt, auto debt, and credit-card debt.
We find strong evidence that low-income households in high-inequality regions borrowed less in
terms of both mortgage and auto debt than those in low-inequality regions. A unique feature of the
data is that we have information on both credit-card balances and credit-card limits. This is
particularly useful because the latter can be interpreted as largely representing credit supply,
whereas the former primarily reflects the demand for credit. We find that low-income households in

Inequality and household debt: New evidence | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evidence

5 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31



high-inequality regions saw their credit limits rise by less than those in lower-inequality regions – as
was the case with mortgage and auto debt. At the same time, no economically significant difference
is observed in terms of credit card balances. This contrast points to supply-side factors as being at
the root of the differential debt accumulation patterns in the data.

Income inequality and credit rationing

We present a model that provides one potential supply-side explanation for why differential
borrowing behaviours could be related to regional inequality. Each region is composed of two types
of households, such that ‘high-type’ households have higher income on average than ‘low-type’
households, and are also less likely to (exogenously) default on debt. Banks in each region lend to
these households, but do not observe households’ types – only their income and another signal
correlated with the underlying type. The key mechanism in the model is that as local income
inequality rises, banks treat an applicant’s income as an increasingly precise signal about their type,
and therefore target lending toward higher-income households on average. We show how the latter
can be accomplished via differential rejection rates (in monopoly banking settings) or differential
interest rates (in competitive banking settings). In both cases, banks will make credit more readily
accessible (or cheaper) to high-income households when local inequality is higher, because the
latter implies that income is a more precise signal of applicant types.

We test these additional theoretical predictions using detailed mortgage application information from
the publicly available Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data. These data track mortgage applications
as they go through the origination process, and contain information on applicants – including their
income, the amount of the loan requested, their locale, and whether the loan is denied or originated.
We document that high-income households in high-inequality regions were both less likely to be
denied and less likely to be charged higher interest rates than their counterparts in low-inequality
regions, precisely as suggested by the theory. Thus, both theoretical predictions from the model are
confirmed in the data.

Conclusions

In summary, we document a systematic relationship between local inequality and differential
borrowing patterns across richer and poorer households in the US that contradicts predictions
based on ‘keeping up with the Joneses’ motives. We argue that these results can instead be

Inequality and household debt: New evidence | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evidence

6 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31



explained through an information channel. Applicants’ incomes are a stronger signal of their
underlying quality when local inequality is high, so banks are likely to channel relatively more credit
to low-income applicants when the level of local inequality is low. The absence of ‘keeping up with
Joneses’ effects supports the notion that the growth in household borrowing during the mid-2000s
was driven in large part by credit supply expansions targeted at lower-income households.

However, to the extent that this expansion in the supply of credit to lower-income households is
unlikely to continue (for example if it reflected a one-time securitisation of household debt), our
results suggest that a continuation of recent trends toward rising inequality is likely to reduce access
to credit for lower-income households. Because limited access to credit restricts households’ ability
to smooth their consumption and engage in long-term investments (e.g. sending children to college,
retraining for different careers) that likely have positive societal externalities, such differential access
to credit could ultimately have negative long-term consequences and important policy implications.

Disclaimer: The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not reflect those of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond or the Federal Reserve System or any other institution with
which the authors are affiliated.

References

Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Marianna Kudlyak, and John Mondragon (2014), “Does
Greater Inequality Lead to More Household Borrowing? New Evidence from Household Data”,
NBER Working Paper 19850.

Drozd, Lukasz A and Ricardo Serrano-Padial (2013), “Modeling the Credit Card Revolution: The
Role of Debt Collection and Informal Bankruptcy”, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working
Paper 13-12.

Rajan, Raghuram G (2010), Fault Lines: How Hidden Fault Lines Still Threaten the World Economy,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Sanchez, Juan M (2009), “The IT Revolution and the Unsecured Credit Market”, Federal Reserve
Bank of Richmond Working Paper 09-4.

Inequality and household debt: New evidence | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evidence

7 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31



7 A A

Topics: Financial markets Poverty and income inequality

Tags: US, Inequality, debt, credit rationing, subprime mortgage crisis

Related

Does inequality lead to a financial crisis?
Michael Bordo, Christopher Meissner

Inequality, leverage and crises
Romain Rancière, Michael Kumhof

Economic inequality during recessions
Jonathan Heathcote, Gianluca Violante, Fabrizio Perri

23,304 reads
Printer-friendly version

Inequality and household debt: New evidence | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evidence

8 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31


