






































Lensless Camera Captures Highly Detailed 3D Images


An experimental camera can produce extremely detailed images

without even using a lens.

Scientists from the University of California, Berkeley has created

an easy-to-build lensless camera that produces 3D images from

a single 2D image.

 “The DiffuserCam can, in a single shot, capture 3D information

in a large volume with high resolution,” research team leader

Laura Waller, Ph.D., an associate professor from the University

of California, Berkeley, said in a statement. “We think the

camera could be useful for self-driving cars, where the 3D

information can offer a sense of scale, or it could be used with

machine learning algorithms to perform face detection, track

people or automatically classify objects.”

The compact and inexpensive camera—called the DiffuserCam

—consists of only a diffuser placed on top of an image sensor.

The researchers found that the prototype could be used to

reconstruct 100 million voxels or 3D pixels, from a 1.3-

Kenny

Walter

Lensless Camera Captures Highly Detailed 3D Images https://www.rdmag.com/article/2017/12/lensless-camera-captures-highly...

1 sur 3 31-12-17 à 13:11



megapixel image without any scanning.

“Our new camera is a great example of what can be

accomplished with computational imaging—an approach that

examines how hardware and software can be used together to

design imaging systems,” Waller said. “We made a concerted

effort to keep the hardware extremely simple and inexpensive.

“Although the software is very complicated, it can also be easily

replicated or distributed, allowing others to create this type of

camera at home,” she added.

A DiffuserCam can be created using any type of image sensor. It

can image objects that range from microscopic in scale to the

size of a human being. The camera offers a resolution in the

tens of microns range when imaging objects closer to the

sensor. While the resolution decreases when imaging a scene

farther away from the sensor, it is still high enough to

distinguish that one person is standing several feet closer to the

camera than another person.

The camera captures how much light is striking a pixel on the

image sensor, as well as the angle from which the light hits the

pixel.

Light field cameras have been limited in spatial resolution until

now because some spatial information is lost while the

directional information is collected. The microlens arrays used in

the cameras are also expensive and must be customized for a

particular camera or optical components used for imaging.

The researchers used various items including privacy glass

stickers, Scotch tape and plastic conference badge holders to

improve on traditional light field camera capabilities by using

compressed sensing to avoid the typical loss of resolution that

comes with microlens arrays.

“I wanted to see if we could achieve the same imaging

capabilities using simple and cheap hardware,” Waller said. “If

we have better algorithms, could the carefully designed,

expensive microlens arrays be replaced with a plastic surface

with a random pattern such as a bumpy piece of plastic?”

The researchers are now attempting to eliminate the need to

acquire a few images of a moving point of light to calibrate the

software prior to imaging by using the raw data for calibration.

They also want to improve the accuracy of the software and

make the 3D reconstruction faster.

The researchers plan to initially use the camera to watch

microscopic neuron activity in living mice without a microscope.

Eventually, the camera could be used in a number of

Lensless Camera Captures Highly Detailed 3D Images https://www.rdmag.com/article/2017/12/lensless-camera-captures-highly...

2 sur 3 31-12-17 à 13:11



applications involving 3D capture.

The study was published in Optica.

BMW Strikes Solid-State Battery
Development Deal for Electric Vehicles

•

Avatar — The critical parameters in

need of improvement for vehicle propulsion

batteries are cost per kWh and a recharge time

Artificial Intelligence Helps Reduce
Construction Injuries

•

Avatar — I have some experience in the

construction industry and I think the

researchers overlooked the fact that younger,

Key to Immune System's Memory Revealed
•

Avatar — why dont they have a

gene therapy now? What's holding them up?

They could've had ab AIDS cure already if they

R&D Market Pulse: Microsoft Foldable
Tablet Could Be on Horizon

•

Avatar — I have exactly no interest in "video

articles". Lose'em. If you can't read, go

elsewhere.

R&D MAGAZINE

0 Comments R&D Magazine Login1

Share Sort by Best

LOG IN WITH OR SIGN UP WITH DISQUS

Start the discussion…

?

Recommend

Lensless Camera Captures Highly Detailed 3D Images https://www.rdmag.com/article/2017/12/lensless-camera-captures-highly...

3 sur 3 31-12-17 à 13:11


