













































RESEARCH NEWS

Contact 
Janis Eitner | Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft, Munich | Communications | Phone +49 89 1205-1333 | presse@zv.fraunhofer.de  
Katharina Strohmeier | Fraunhofer Institute for Production Systems and Design Technology IPK | Phone +49 30 39006-331 | 
Pascalstrasse 8 - 9 | 10587 Berlin | www.ipk.fraunhofer.de | katharina.strohmeier@ipk.fraunhofer.de

February 2018 || Page 1 | 4

Automation in agriculture 
Lightweight robots harvest cucumbers
Automation-intensive sectors such as the automotive industry are not the only 
ones to rely on robots. In more and more agricultural settings, automation 
systems are superseding strenuous manual labor. As part of the EU’s CATCH 
project, the Fraunhofer Institute for Production Systems and Design Technolo-
gy IPK is developing and testing a dual-arm robot for the automated harves-
ting of cucumbers. This lightweight solution has the potential to keep crop 
cultivation commercially viable in Germany.

In Germany, cucumbers destined for pickle jars are harvested by hand with the aid of 
“cucumber flyers” – farm vehicles with wing-like attachments. Seasonal workers lie on 
their stomachs on the vehicle’s wings and pluck the ripe cucumbers. This labor-intensive 
and energy-sapping type of manual harvesting is increasingly becoming uneconomical. 
In addition, the per-unit costs of harvesting have risen since Germany introduced a 
minimum wage. Many of the country’s agricultural regions consequently face an 
uncertain future; cucumber farming has already begun relocating to Eastern Europe 
and India. There is thus an urgent need for improved harvesting technologies to 
maintain the economic viability of cucumber farming in Germany. Experts from 
Fraunhofer IPK in Berlin, along with other German and Spanish researchers, are study-
ing the potential for automating cucumber harvests in the scope of the EU project 
CATCH, which stands for “Cucumber Gathering – Green Field Experiments.” Project 
partners are the Leibniz Institute for Agricultural Engineering and Bioeconomy in 
Germany and the CSIC-UPM Centre for Automation and Robotics (CAR) in Spain.

CATCH researchers want to develop and test a dual-arm robot system consisting of 
inexpensive lightweight modules. The ultimate aim: this system could be used for 
automated cucumber farming and other agricultural applications. The robotic picker 
would have to be cost-effective, high-performance and dependable. Even in adverse 
weather, it would need to be capable of first identifying ripe cucumbers and then using 
its two gripper arms to gently pick and store them. To this end, cutting-edge control 
methods equip the robot with tactile perception and enable it to adapt to ambient 
conditions. These methods also make it possible for the dual-arm robot system to 
imitate human movements. Researchers namely want to make sure that the robot does 
not damage crops – or pull them and their roots out of the soil. But that is not all. The 
automated harvester must be at least as efficient as its experienced human counterpart, 
who can pick as many as 13 cucumbers per minute.



RESEARCH NEWS  

February 2018 || Page 2 | 4

High success rate

It is a considerable challenge to design autonomous systems capable of optical and 
tactile sensing, assessing and evaluating. The challenge is only compounded by cucum-
ber harvesting: a robot must identify green objects camouflaged by green surround-
ings. In addition, cucumbers are randomly distributed throughout a field, and some are 
concealed by vegetation. Varying light conditions make the mission all the more 
difficult. It should be possible to use multispectral cameras and intelligent image 
processing to help locate cucumbers and guide the robot’s gripper arms to pluck them. 
This part of the CATCH project is overseen by CSIC-UPM, the Spanish project partner. A 
special camera system helps ensure that the robot detects and locates approximately 95 
percent of cucumbers, an impressive success rate. The goal, of course, is to advance the 
technology so that the robot picks all the ripe cucumbers to foster growth of new ones. 
Fraunhofer IPK has developed robot arms with five degrees of freedom on the basis of 
hardware modules developed by igus GmbH in Cologne.

In search of human inspiration

The IPK project experts are tasked with developing three gripper prototypes: a gripper 
based on vacuum technology, a set of bionic gripper jaws (Fin Ray®) and a customized 
“cucumber hand” based on OpenBionics robot hands. They are relying on insights 
acquired during a previous European research project, in which they developed a 
dual-arm robot control system with efficient task-oriented programming for Workerbot 
I – a humanoid robot capable of industrial assembly. Project experts from IPK are 
enhancing this system so that it can plan, program and control the behavior of robots 
harvesting cucumbers. These preprogrammed behavioral patterns make bimanual 
searching possible, meaning the robot can look for cucumbers as a human would. Dr. 
Dragoljub Surdilovic, a scientist at Fraunhofer IPK, explains: “The robot can, for exam-
ple, push leaves to the side using symmetrical or asymmetrical movements, or congru-
ent and incongruent movements. As a result, it can automatically change directions on 
the fly to approach and then grasp a cucumber.” The researchers’ goal is to create an 
intelligent control system capable of making judgment calls: assigning a certain task to 
a certain gripper arm, monitoring cucumber picking and dealing with exceptions.

In July 2017, the Leibniz Institute for Agricultural Engineering and Bioeconomy used 
various types of cucumbers to conduct initial field testing of the robot system at its test 
site. The institute also tested harvesting new types of cucumbers with distinguishing 
features that make them easier to pick. In short, the first round of testing validated 
basic functionality. Since fall 2017, project partners have been conducting additional 
tests in a Leibniz Institute greenhouse. Researchers are especially eager to scrutinize the 
extent to which interference or malfunctions affect the efficiency and robustness of the 
system. Once testing of the lightweight robot has been completed, project partners will 
strive to make it commercially viable. Companies, cucumber farmers and agricultural 



RESEARCH NEWS 

February 2018 || Page 3 | 4

associations have expressed considerable interest in the dual-arm robot. In November 
2017, the CATCH project was unveiled to the general public at Agritechnica, the 
world’s leading trade fair for agricultural technology. The German Agricultural Society 
(DLG e.V.) exhibited the robot at its Agritechnica booth, eliciting enthusiastic feedback 
from agricultural specialists and numerous companies.

 
The project

CATCH – which stands for “Cucumber Gathering – Green Field Experiments” – is 
subsidized by the European Union’s robotics research project ECHORD++ Experiments 
(The European Coordination Hub for Open Robotics Development). ECHORD++ seeks 
to develop robotics technology for the manufacturing industry. In addition to 
Fraunhofer IPK, the CATCH project partners are:

• The Centre for Automation and Robotics (CAR) CSIC-UPM in Spain 
• The Leibniz Institute for Agricultural Engineering and Bioeconomy 

Agricultural vehicles known as “cucumber flyers” enable as many as 50 seasonal workers to 

harvest crops. © Fraunhofer IPK | Picture in color and printing quality: www.fraunhofer.de/en/press



RESEARCH NEWS  

February 2018 || Page 4 | 4

The Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft is the leading organization for applied research in Europe. Its research activities are conducted by 69 institutes 
and research units at locations throughout Germany. The Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft employs a staff of 24,500, who work with an annual research 
budget totaling 2.1 billion euros. Of this sum, 1.9 billion euros is generated through contract research. More than 70 percent of the Fraunhofer-
Gesellschaft’s contract research revenue is derived from contracts with industry and from publicly financed research projects.  International collabo-
rations with excellent research partners and innovative companies around the world ensure direct access to regions of the greatest importance to 
present and future scientific progress and economic development. 

A prototype of the dual-arm 

robot system during the first 

field tests. 

© Fraunhofer IPK | Picture in 

color and printing quality: 

www.fraunhofer.de/en/press


