






































Machine-learning earthquake prediction in lab shows promise


Contact  

Nancy
Ambrosiano
(505) 667-0471
Email

“At any given
instant, the
noise coming
from the lab
fault zone
provides
quantitative
information
on when the
fault will slip,”
said Paul
Johnson.

Listening to faultline’s grumbling gives
countdown to future quakes

LOS ALAMOS, N.M., Aug. 30, 2017—By listening to the acoustic
signal emitted by a laboratory-created earthquake, a computer
science approach using machine learning can predict the time
remaining before the fault fails.

“At any given instant, the noise coming from the lab fault zone
provides quantitative information on when the fault will slip,”
said Paul Johnson, a Los Alamos National Laboratory fellow and
lead investigator on the research, which was published today
in Geophysical Research Letters.

“The novelty of our work is the use of machine learning to
discover and understand new physics of failure, through
examination of the recorded auditory signal from the
experimental setup. I think the future of earthquake physics
will rely heavily on machine learning to process massive
amounts of raw seismic data. Our work represents an
important step in this direction,” he said.

Not only does the work have potential significance to
earthquake forecasting, Johnson said, but the approach is far-
reaching, applicable to potentially all failure scenarios
including nondestructive testing of industrial materials brittle
failure of all kinds, avalanches and other events.

Machine learning is an artificial intelligence approach to
allowing the computer to learn from new data, updating its
own results to reflect the implications of new information.

The machine learning technique used in this project also
identifies new signals, previously thought to be low-amplitude
noise, that provide forecasting information throughout the
earthquake cycle. “These signals resemble Earth tremor that

Machine-learning earthquake prediction in lab
shows promise
A computer science approach using machine learning can predict the
time remaining before the fault fails

August 30, 2017

Machine-learning earthquake prediction in lab shows promise http://www.lanl.gov/discover/news-release-archive/2017/August/0830-m...

1 sur 3 03/09/2017 23:35



occurs in association with slow earthquakes on tectonic faults
in the lower crust,” Johnson said. “There is reason to expect
such signals from Earth faults in the seismogenic zone for
slowly slipping faults.”

Machine learning algorithms can predict failure times of
laboratory quakes with remarkable accuracy. The acoustic
emission (AE) signal, which characterizes the instantaneous
physical state of the system, reliably predicts failure far into
the future. This is a surprise, Johnson pointed out, as all prior
work had assumed that only the catalog of large events is
relevant, and that small fluctuations in the AE signal could be
neglected.

To study the phenomena, the team analyzed data from a
laboratory fault system that contains fault gouge, the ground-
up material created by the stone blocks sliding past one
another. An accelerometer recorded the acoustic emission
emanating from the shearing layers.

Following a frictional failure in the labquake, the shearing
block moves or displaces, while the gouge material
simultaneously dilates and strengthens, as shown by
measurably increasing shear stress and friction. “As the
material approaches failure, it begins to show the
characteristics of a critical stress regime, including many small
shear failures that emit impulsive acoustic emissions,” Johnson
described.

“This unstable state concludes with an actual labquake, in
which the shearing block rapidly displaces, the friction and
shear stress decrease precipitously, and the gouge layers
simultaneously compact,” he said. Under a broad range of
conditions, the apparatus slide-slips fairly regularly for
hundreds of stress cycles during a single experiment. And
importantly, the signal (due to the gouge grinding and
creaking that ultimately leads to the impulsive precursors)
allows prediction in the laboratory, and we hope will lead to
advances in prediction in Earth, Johnson said.  

The paper: "Machine learning predicts laboratory earthquakes"
Geophysical Research Letters.

The funding: Los Alamos National Laboratory Directed
Research and Development (LDRD).

Machine-learning earthquake prediction in lab shows promise http://www.lanl.gov/discover/news-release-archive/2017/August/0830-m...

2 sur 3 03/09/2017 23:35



About Los Alamos National Laboratory

Los Alamos National Laboratory, a multidisciplinary
research institution engaged in strategic science on behalf
of national security, is operated by Los Alamos National
Security, LLC, a team composed of Bechtel National, the
University of California, BWXT Government Group, and URS,
an AECOM company, for the Department of Energy’s
National Nuclear Security Administration.

Los Alamos enhances national security by ensuring the
safety and reliability of the U.S. nuclear stockpile,
developing technologies to reduce threats from weapons of
mass destruction, and solving problems related to energy,
environment, infrastructure, health, and global security
concerns.

Machine-learning earthquake prediction in lab shows promise http://www.lanl.gov/discover/news-release-archive/2017/August/0830-m...

3 sur 3 03/09/2017 23:35


