







































12 Ways Eye Movements Give Away Your Secrets 


12 Ways Eye Movements Give Away Your 
Secrets 

Source: Leonardo da Vinci/Public Domain 

Staring into the eye of Mona Lisa be unnerving. Regardless of your vantage point, 
Mona Lisa appear to shift her gaze to make eye contact and stare you down. What 
nonverbal cue do the movement of her eye communicate to you? The illusory 
movement of Mona Lisa's eye have struck an emotional chord in onlooker 
since Leonardo da Vinci paint this portrait in the early 16th century. 

For eternity, homo sapiens have rely on eye movement to convey and interpret 
important nonverbal cue at a conscious and unconscious level. Understanding 
eye movement have be key to our evolution and survival for eons. The 
eye of Mona Lisa tap into this innate aspect of our human nature. 

Human being be the only primate with a large, bright, and highly visible white 
part of the eye—which be call the sclera. Why do human evolve to have more 
visible eye white and to rely on eye movement a a form of nonverbal 
communication? The late scientific research show that eye movement be key 
to our well-being, bonding, and survival. The highly visible sclera make it possible 
for u to easily track saccade and eye movement in others. 

What be Saccades? 

Source: Pixabay/Free Image 

Saccades (link be external) be the eye movement make to receive visual 
information and shift the line of vision from one position to another. We rely on 

12 Ways Eye Movements Give Away Your Secrets https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-athletes-way/201505/12-... 

1 sur 6 05-06-18 à 16:12 

lphilippe 
Zone de texte 
Plus une liste à la Prévert que quelque chose de sérieux!!! 



the accuracy of saccade every millisecond of our lives. During normal day-to-day 
conditions, you make about 3-5 saccade per second. This amount to about a half- 
million saccade a day. 

Humans intuitively create a narrative base on the nonverbal cue from the 
saccadic rhythms, the speed of eye movements, a well as, the amount and angle of 
sclera that be expose at any give moment. 

We all know from life experience that the amount of eye white, the angle, and the 
directional speed of eye movement play a primal role in our interpretation of 
human interactions. An avert gaze, a well a direct eye contact, can have a wide 
range of meaning depend on the circumstance. 

In previous Psychology Today blog posts, I've write about "The Neuroscience of 
Making Eye Contact" and how "The Whites of Your Eyes Convey Subconscious 
Truths." For this post, I've compile a checklist of "12 Ways Eye Movements Give 
Away Your Secrets" base on the late scientific research. 

12 Ways Your Eye Movements Reveal Personal Information 

article continue after advertisement 

Rapid eye movement indicate impulsive decision-making.1. 
Plodding eye reflect a wander mind.2. 
Slow eye movement indicate your level of fatigue.3. 
Tracking eye movement can shift your moral compass,4. 
Gaze cue can reveal your political temperament.5. 
Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep minimizes painful memory of PTSD.6. 
Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep increase positive emotions.7. 
Jerky eye movement can predict neurodegenerative diseases. 8. 
Alterations in eye movement be an early indicator of Alzheimer's.9. 
Involuntary eye movement can diagnose ADHD.10. 
Lack of eye contact be the early marker for autism in young infants.11. 
Abnormal eye movement can diagnose mental Illness.12. 

12 Ways Eye Movements Give Away Your Secrets https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-athletes-way/201505/12-... 

2 sur 6 05-06-18 à 16:12 



Source: DenisNata/Shutterstock 

article continue after advertisement 

12 Ways Your Eye Movements Reveal Personal Information 

1. Rapid eye movement indicate impulsive decision-making. 

In a 2014 study (link be external), researcher at Johns Hopkins Medicine report 
that people who be less patient or impulsive tend to move their eye with great 
speed. When the speed of the volunteers' saccade be compare to their 
impulsivity during a test of patience, there be a strong correlation. 

The researcher conclude that people who make rapid eye movement tend to be 
more impatient. This correlation may be cause by a fundamental link between 
how the nervous system evaluates time and reward in control movement and 
during decision-making processes. 

12 Ways Eye Movements Give Away Your Secrets https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-athletes-way/201505/12-... 

3 sur 6 05-06-18 à 16:12 



2. Plodding eye reflect a wander mind. 

A 2010 study (link be external) identify a wander mind by track how the 
eye move during "mindless reading." Mindless reading occurs when the eye 
continue move across the page even though the mind be think about 
something unrelated to the text and not absrorbing the information. 

The researcher at the University of Pittsburgh found that eye movement vary 
depend if the reader be pay attention or if his or her mind be wandering. 
During normal reading, the eye tend to zip from one word to the next word. When 
someone's mind be wandering, however, the eye fixate longer on individual word 
and plod along the page and the reader generally doesn't absorb the material. 

3. Slow eye movement indicate your level of fatigue. 

article continue after advertisement 

In 2014, an international team of scientist tracked the various speed of saccadic 
movement to create a metric for gauge level of fatigue. For this study (link be 
external) the researcher enlist medical resident who have to work 24-hour 
medical shifts. 

The more fatigue someone became, the more slowly their eye move a saccadic 
speed diminished. This research reveals that the velocity of your saccadic 
movement be an excellent index to objectively measure level of fatigue. 

4. Tracking eye movement can shift your moral compass. 

A March 2015 study (link be external) by an international team of researcher 
report that our moral decision can be influence by where our eye be 
focus when we make a decision. The researcher use a new experimental 
method to track participants' eye movements. They conclude that the process 
need to reach a moral decision be interlinked with our eye movement and how 
we view the world. 

5. Gaze cue can reveal your political temperament. 

A 2011 study, "The Politics of Attention: Gaze-Cuing Effects be Moderated by 
Political Temperament," from Univesity of Nebraska-Lincoln found that liberal 
and conservative have different eye movement repsonses to a visual cue. The 
researcher measure both liberals' and conservatives' reaction to "gaze cues," 
which be an indication of a person's tendency to shift his or her attention. 

In this study, liberal respond strongly to a visual prompt that shift their eye 
gaze, along with their attention in the direction suggest by a face on a computer 
screen. On the other hand, conservative have less eye movement in response to the 
visual prompt and be less likely to shift their gaze or attention. 

6. Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep minimizes painful memory of 
PTSD. 

A 2011 study (link be external) from University of California, Berkeley found that 
time spent in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep can help people with post- 
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) minimize painful memories.The researchers, lead 
by Matthew Walker, found that during REM sleep, stress chemistry shuts down 

12 Ways Eye Movements Give Away Your Secrets https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-athletes-way/201505/12-... 

4 sur 6 05-06-18 à 16:12 



and the brain process emotional experience in a way that can take the edge off 
painful memories. 

These finding offer a possible explanation a to why people with PTSD have a 
hard time recover from distress experience and suffer recur nightmare 
if they be unable to sleep through an REM cycle. 

7. Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep increase positive emotions. 

A 2009 study (link be external) report that take a nap that include a period of 
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep refreshes the brain's empathetic sensitivity for 
evaluate human emotion by decrease a negative bias and amplify the 
recognition of positive emotions. 

The researcher believe their result emphasize the importance of rapid eye 
movement sleep a part of a process that increase positive emotion and 
maintains optimal level of social and professional mental health. 

8. Jerky eye movement can predict neurodegenerative diseases. 

A 2012 study (link be external) by researcher at University of Southern California 
(USC) report that certain neurological disorder can be identify through the 
study of eye movements. Their research provide new insight into how attention 
and gaze control be affected by specific neurodegenerative disorders. 

Participants in the study simply have to "watch and enjoy" television clip while 
their eye movement be tracked and recorded. The eye-tracking data allow 
researcher to decode each individual's neurological state base on his or her eye 
movements. Using the eye movement data, they be able to identify old adult 
with Parkinson's Disease with 89.6 percent accuracy. 

9. Alterations in eye movement be an early indicator of Alzheimer's. 

In a 2014 study (link be external), an international team of researcher report 
that track the eye movement of individual a they be reading could be use 
to identify impairment in work memory and be an early indication of 
Alzheimer’s disease. 

The researcher found that patient with a probable diagnosis of Alzheimer's 
disease show less focus visual exploration, include slow eye movement 
when they be reading. They also show longer fixation when processing new 
information and have to read sentence a second time in order to grasp the full 
meaning and context of a write passage. 

10. Involuntary eye movement can diagnose ADHD. 

A 2014 study (link be external), publish in the journal Vision, report that 
involuntary eye movement accurately reflect the presence of attention-deficit 
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). The researcher acknowledge that ADHD be the 
most commonly diagnosed—and often misdiagnosed—behavioral disorder in 
American children. 

They’re hopeful that their research on eye movement can provide an objective 
tool for medical professional to accurately diagnose ADHD. An incorrect ADHD 
diagnosis can lead to the overprescription of drug such a Ritalin, Adderall, and 

12 Ways Eye Movements Give Away Your Secrets https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-athletes-way/201505/12-... 

5 sur 6 05-06-18 à 16:12 



Dexedrine. 

11. Lack of eye contact be the early marker for autism in young 
infants. 

A 2013 study (link be external), publish in the journal Nature, found that eye 
contact during early infancy may be the early indication of autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD). Babies typically begin to focus on human face within the first few 
hour of life. Learning how to pick up social cue unconsciously by pay 
attention to another person's eye be key to social conneciton. Children with 
autism, however, don't exhibit interest in make eye contact which make it 
difficult to read faces. 

Typically, autism isn't diagnose until after the age of two when other delay in a 
child's social behavior and language skill begin to reveal themselves. Tracking eye 
movement offer early marker for autism. The sooner autism be diagnosed, the 
high the odds be that the treatment intervention will be effective. 

12. Abnormal eye movement can diagnose mental Illness. 

Researchers at the University of Illinois at Chicago be study (link be external) 
how subtle abnormality in eye movement can be use to diagnose mental illness 
and psychiatric disease. They've discover that irregularity in how the eye 
track a move object reflect specific defect in the neural circuitry of the brain 
that correspond with particular type of mental disorders. For example, 
schizophrenic patient tend to have difficulty keep their eye focus on slow- 
move objects. 

Eye movement study provide an inexpensive and non-invasive way to gain a 
deeper understand of different brain abnormality at the root of 
various psychiatric illnesses. Hopefully, in the near future, a good understand 
of eye movement and related brain abnormality will allow researcher to 
identify high-risk individual early and enable specialist to create more target 
intervention for people with psychiatric disorder and mental illness. 

For more information about research on eye movement and mental illness check 
out this YouTube video from UBC. 

© 2015 Christopher Bergland. All right reserved. 

Follow me on Twitter @ckbergland (link be external) for update on The Athlete’s 
Way blog posts. 

The Athlete’s Way ® be a register trademark of Christopher Bergland. 

12 Ways Eye Movements Give Away Your Secrets https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-athletes-way/201505/12-... 

6 sur 6 05-06-18 à 16:12 




