









































sponsor by 

Co 
py 

rig 
ht 

© 
2 

01 
5 

H 
ar 

va 
rd 

B 
u 

in 
e 

s 
Sc 

ho 
ol 

P 
ub 

li 
hi 

ng 
. 

A H A RVA R D B U S I N E S S R E V I E W A N A LY T I C S E RV I C E S R E P O RT 

DATA BLENDING: 
A POWERFUL METHOD 
FOR FASTER, EASIER 
DECISIONS 



SPONSOR PERSPECTIVE 

We’re in the middle of a 
significant shift in the way 
organization blend and analyze 
data, affect not only the way 
decision be made, but also 
how business operate. Data 
analyst in the line of business, 
who formerly have no choice but 

to rely on highly skilled, highly paid data scientist for 
data access, can now take advantage of self-service 
technology to achieve analytic independence. These 
technology enable practically anyone—regardless of 
their technical proficiency—to be a data analyst and 
make data-driven business decisions. 

Data blending be the drive force behind this movement, 
free up people throughout the organization to 
experiment with data. Rather than put business data, 
such a valuable insight about customer behavior, into 
the hand of a few, company can place this data into 
the hand of the many—those, for instance, who will use 
this insight to bring about a good customer experience. 

Alteryx sponsor the study “Data Blending: A Powerful 
Method for Faster, Easier Decisions” by Harvard Business 
Review Analytic Services, to support the empowerment 
of these analysts. Harvard Business Review Analytic 
Services conduct a comprehensive survey of 
business professional across multiple industry and 
departments, and the result be clear. Data fuel the 
critical business decision that an organization need 
to make and have the ability to blend all of the various 
source of data together to discover insight can, and 
should, happen anywhere in the organization. 

At Alteryx, we be lead the enablement of self-service 
for data analyst through an intuitive workflow for data 
blending and advanced analytics that allows them to 
gain deeper business insight in hours, not the week 
of traditional approaches. Analysts around the world 
at company of all size be use Alteryx to easily 
blend internal, third-party, and cloud-based data, and 
then analyze it use spatial and predictive drag-and- 
drop tools. This be all do in a single workflow, with no 
program required. 

Some corporate technology manager might see this 
analytics-for-everyone trend a a threat to governance 
and security, much like the way the bring-your-own- 
device (BYOD) movement be viewed. But that would be 
a mistake, a it actually represent a huge opportunity 
for all. IT department will continue their critical role of 
ensure that certain highly private data be indeed secure, 
but by learn from mistake rather than shut down 
the data pipeline, they empower their organization to 
make better, more inform business decisions. 

We be excite by the result of this study, a it validates 
our goal to make data blending and analytics accessible 
to everyone. By overcome the struggle of legacy 
technology like spreadsheet that be not built to 
handle today’s data requirements, organization can 
build a more stable, data-driven culture and create an 
environment where business analyst revolutionize the 
way they use data to make decisions. 

Rick Schultz 
Senior Vice President, Marketing 
Alteryx, Inc. 



DATA B L E N D I N G : A P O W E R F U L M E T H O D F O R FA S T E R , E A S I E R D E C I S I O N S 1 

DATA BLENDING: 
A POWERFUL METHOD FOR 
FASTER, EASIER DECISIONS 
DATA ANALYTICS, the science of examine an organization’s raw data with the purpose of glean 
valuable business information from it, be become a critical tool for today’s business managers. 

New research from Harvard Business Review Analytic Services show tremendous bottom-line 
potential from use the late generation of powerful data analytics tools. Our global survey of 502 
business leader and executives, academics, and IT manager in more than 15 industry sector show 
that a vast majority of executive find data analytics important for their decision making. figure 1 

This importance be due to the grow pressure that manager face to find new way of squeeze 
more revenue and profit from exist operations. For example, market analyst firm IDC tell cli- 
ents they should be able to double the productivity of their business analyst by provide them 
with the right tool and decision-making culture. “There’s a genuine movement toward decision 
make base on data rather than heuristic today,” say Bob Parker, a group vice president at IDC. 

That’s certainly the case at home-improvement retailer The Home Depot. “We’re not building 
new store at nearly the rate we use to,” say Charles Coleman, a senior analyst at the company. 
“So to grow the company, we’ve come to rely on data analytics instead.” 

The trouble is, to make smart and fast business decision from data, business manager must over- 
come multiple challenge while use multiple analytics tools. Among the big challenge be the 
grow number of data source analyst must gain access to. For another, many of the analytical 
tool on which analyst rely be incapable of processing, or struggle to process. many of the data 
sources. These tools, include Microsoft’s Excel application, have analyst manually pore over 
spreadsheet and create complex formula from scratch each time out. All that mean business 
analyst rely heavily on their organizations’ data scientist and IT professionals. And that, in turn, 
can mean pull a support ticket and wait in line. 

A new solution offer help. Known a “data blending,” it’s essentially a data analytics meth- 
odology and tool set combined. Data blending give business analyst self-service solution 
to cleanse, enrich, and join together the data they require. This can all be deliver in an auto- 
mat process. Even better, the data can be take from any number of disparate areas, both 
internally and externally. Data blending solution also offer newfound speed and ease-of-use 
through graphical drag-and-drop interface that allow the user to see how data be transform 
through every step in the process and give the user the ability to drill down on details. All this 
empowers manager to make inform and intelligent business decision quickly and without 
the need to lean on a data scientist or IT professional. 



2 H A RVA R D B U S I N E S S R E V I E W A N A LY T I C S E RV I C E S 

RISING DATA SOURCES 
The extent of the data source challenge be remarkable. For typical organizations, the number of 
data source can range from a minimum of five to, in many cases, more than 15. Worse, nearly 
eight out of 10 survey respondent predict this number will increase within the next two years, 
with almost a third predict a substantial increase. figure 2 

The data source challenge be myriad. Data today can be found in both internal and external 
sources. Internal source include everything from spreadsheet to data warehouse and data 
mart contain information from enterprise ERP and CRM applications. Many organization 
also acquire data from third parties, include marketing service providers, trade associations, and 
governments. As for external data sources, these can include cloud-based enterprise application 
such a Salesforce.com and Marketo, social media, and even data generate from mobile devices. 

Some organization go even further. At department-store chain Belk Inc., business analyst use 
geographical information—along with customer feedback data from online surveys, social media, 
call centers, and emails—to get a full customer view. “Analyzing that view help u determine the 
customer’s ‘path to purchase,’ ” say Anu Brookins, Belk’s VP of customer insight and analytics. 

OLDER TOOLS CAN’T COPE 
With all this data come in from all these sources, old-school solution be no longer sufficient. 
That’s because these tool be design for a far simpler data environment, one that fea- 
tured few data types, with most data either raw or highly structured. They certainly weren’t 
design to handle unstructured data, such a social medium and videos, or data from the cloud 
and mobile devices. 

Extremely important (rating 10) 

Somewhat important (rating 6–9) 

Neither important nor unimportant (rating 4–5) 

Not important (rating 1–3) 

31 

57 

8 

FIGURE 1 

DATA ANALYTICS MATTER 
Percentage rating how important data analytics be to their organization’s decision 
and/or processes. 
On a scale of 1 to 10 where 1 = not at all important and 10 = extremely important 

4 



DATA B L E N D I N G : A P O W E R F U L M E T H O D F O R FA S T E R , E A S I E R D E C I S I O N S 3 

After Microsoft’s Excel spreadsheet application, the most prevalent tool use for analysis include 
analytics tool developed in-house, third-party tools, and even some cloud-based ones. figure 3 

While Excel be the prefer spreadsheet application for basic calculation and manipulate 
numeric data, it design date back well before the current age of big data. Today, access large 
number of data sources, and cleansing, processing, and blending both internal and external data 
from multiple sources, be de facto requirements. Excel wasn’t design to do that. As a result, 
whenever data be join from multiple sources, Excel require tedious and laborious formula and 
manual tweak that leave the result spreadsheet highly susceptible to errors. “Excel and in-house 
development tool tend to hit the point of diminish return fairly quickly,” say Parker of IDC. 

Little surprise, then, that only 7 percent of respondent rate their current data-analysis tool a 
very or extremely effective. “The dirty little secret of big data,” say Tom Davenport, a professor 
of IT and management at Babson College and the author or co-author of 17 book on those topics, 
“is that most data analyst spend the vast majority of their time cleaning and integrate data— 
not actually analyze it.” 

In his other role a a senior advisor to Deloitte Analytics, Davenport see many data analyst today 
manually pore over Excel spreadsheet all day, then generate the most basic cut-and-paste 
report to the department that need business insight. “Some company with a global reach can 
have hundred of data analysts,” he says, “which equates to a huge waste of time.” 

FIGURE 2 

MANY DATA SOURCES NOW—AND MORE COMING 
Percentage say how many different data source their organization currently access 
for most of it operational decision making. 

Percentage rating how they expect the number of data source to change over the 
next two years. 

33% 
13% 
18% 
9% 
27% 

5 TO 9 

10 TO 14 

15 OR MORE 

DON’T KNOW 

FEWER THAN 5 

IN 
CR 

EA 
SE 

S 
UB 

ST 
AN 

TI 
AL 

LY 

IN 
CR 

EA 
SE 

S 
O 

M 
EW 

H 
AT 

N 
O 

C 
H 

AN 
G 

E 

D 
EC 

RE 
AS 

E 
SO 

M 
EW 

H 
AT 

D 
EC 

RE 
AS 

E 
SU 

BS 
TA 

N 
TI 

AL 
LY 

D 
O 

N 
’T 

K 
N 

O 
W 

CURRENT 

48 

10 

29 

7 51 

50 

40 

30 

20 

10 

0 



4 H A RVA R D B U S I N E S S R E V I E W A N A LY T I C S E RV I C E S 

Further, a these business analyst struggle with multiple data type and sources, and the old- 
school tools, they often have no choice but to lean on in-house data professionals. These IT 
professional can help analyst both gain access to the data they need and squeeze more out of 
their Excel tools, but they often have to leverage much more sophisticated tool for combine 
data into a useful form for analysis. 

More than 60 percent of respondent say their business manager be at least somewhat dependent 
on their IT managers, data scientists, data managers, and other dedicate analytics professionals. 
But few than 2 percent say they’re extremely satisfied with those IT professionals’ efforts. And 
a much large group—nearly 40 percent—say they’re only moderately satisfied. 

What’s more, depend on data pro be risky; a a group, they’re become scarce. The McKinsey 
Global Institute predicts that the United States could face a shortage of nearly 200,000 skilled 
data pro by 2018. Adds Parker of IDC: “These kind of data professional can be hard to find, 
quantify, and keep.” 

Spreadsheets 

Analytics tool developed in-house 

Third-party analytics tool 

Consumer database 

Low-level SQL query 

Cloud-based analytics tool 

Don’t know/other 

92 

52 

37 

30 

3 

49 

FIGURE 3 

SPREADSHEETS STILL DOMINATE 
Percentage that say their organization us the follow tool for data analysis. 
Select all that apply. 

43 



DATA B L E N D I N G : A P O W E R F U L M E T H O D F O R FA S T E R , E A S I E R D E C I S I O N S 5 

A NEW SOLUTION: DATA BLENDING 
Add it all together, and business analyst be ask for good tool to help them provide the kind 
of information manager and executive need to make good decisions. Such a solution need to 
be “self service”—that is, one where the analyst no longer need to rely on centralize data staff 
for help. Roughly a quarter of respondent rank key feature of these tool a extremely import- 
ant, include the speed at which they can analyze data; the volume of data that can be processed; 
the ease-of-use of the tools, such a have an intuitive graphical user interface; and the ability 
to drag and drop specific data preparation and data-joining tool to create workflow that can be 
use repeatedly without tedious manual work. figure 4 

The good news be that the new methodology know a data blending be make such solution 
possible. Already, business analyst across several industry be work with data blending 
tool that include powerful data preparation capabilities. These include data extraction, cleans- 
ing, blending, and enrichment—all right on the desktop. And with no need for costly help from 
IT professionals. 

Data blending be the process of combine data from multiple source to create an actionable 
analytic data set either for business decision make or for drive a specific business process. 
Data blending be need when an organization’s data-management process and infrastructure 
be insufficient for bring together specific datasets require by business groups. For exam- 
ple, data blending can readily bring together disparate data like customer information from a 
cloud sale automation system such a Salesforce.com, clickstream Web data store in an open- 
source big data file system, and list of data from Excel. Data blending differs from data integra- 
tion and data warehouse in that it primary use be not to create a single unified version of the 
truth that’s store in data, but rather to build an analytic dataset that help business analyst 
answer specific business questions. 

Speed to analyze data 

Ease of use 

Ability to create reusable workflow 

Ability to process large volume of data 

29 

25 

25 

FIGURE 4 

SPEED, EASE, VOLUME, REUSE 
Percentage of manager who describe the feature of tool use to analyze data for 
business decision a extremely important. 

22 



6 H A RVA R D B U S I N E S S R E V I E W A N A LY T I C S E RV I C E S 

Bank of America Merrill Lynch, one of the large U.S. investment banks, have deployed a data blend- 
ing solution to provide self-service analytical tool for it hundred of business analysts. These 
analyst can now generate more in-depth and predictive client-profitability analyses. They’ve also 
gain true workflow automation, move far beyond manual processes. And they’ve improve 
their regulatory reporting. All these gain have also reduce the firm’s cost markedly. 

Data blending have also found a home at The Home Depot. The company originally sought to 
improve business analysis of it stock-keeping units, or SKUs. That’s the number retailer assign 
to a product to identify it price, product option, and manufacturer. At any give moment, 
The Home Depot us approximately 160,000 SKUs in it more than 2,000 stores. Until recently, 
analyze that information involve manually retrieve data from Excel spreadsheets. But now, 
thanks to it data blending solution, The Home Depot analyst can combine that mountain of data 
in an automate fashion. They can also do the work in just a fraction of the time it formerly took: 
a mere 30 to 60 minutes, down dramatically from the previous two weeks. 

For The Home Depot, this great speed be critical. The company can now more effectively price 
it merchandise accord to factor that include competition and market elasticity. Senior analyst 
Coleman say that have not only save thousand of hour of work, but also improve the com- 
pany’s bottom line by a much a 4 percent. “As we speed our rate of analysis,” he says, “we can 
give ourselves time to work through other analytics project and further develop data strategies.” 

Retailer Belk now us data blending in every corporate group serve it 300 stores. Its mer- 
chandising group can now generate deep, predictive report that precisely identify customer 
demographic and what customer be likely to buy. Belk’s marketing group, meanwhile, us 
data blending to determine which ad campaign have be most—and least—effective. And the 
real estate group us data blending to generate report in record time to anticipate the financial 
impact when a store be remodeled. “Across the organization, we’re now ask more and more 
sophisticated questions,” say Belk VP Brookins. “This help u understand how we can provide 
more value to our customer and increase the loyalty and retention of our customers—which 
ultimately lead to company growth.” 

Data blending differs from data integration and 
data warehouse in that it primary use be not to 
create a single unified version of the truth that’s 
store in data, but rather to build an analytic 
dataset that help business analyst answer 
specific business questions. 



DATA B L E N D I N G : A P O W E R F U L M E T H O D F O R FA S T E R , E A S I E R D E C I S I O N S 7 

It’s not just financial service and retailer that be use data blending. Cardinal Health Inc., which 
provide medical product to more than three quarter of all U.S. hospitals, be another. Looking 
to empower it sale and marketing analysts, Cardinal Health deployed a data blending tool. The 
solution’s built-in automation have dramatically speed up it work. Before data blending, Cardinal 
generate 100 customer report after a month of manually compile information. Now, with data 
blending, that have jumped to more than 2,000 reports, each packed with charts, graphs, and pre- 
dictive business insights. And Cardinal can generate them all in under an hour. 

How far might data blending and it associate tool go in the future? Advisory firm Ovum 
predicts that self-service tool will soon “enable a whole new universe of users.” One big area 
could be genomics healthcare, where clinician deploy such tool to analyze the generate data 
from a person’s DNA to detect, diagnose, and treat various form of cancer. 

Another area ripe for data blending be the Internet of Things. This catchall category comprises 
the vast array of machines, sensors, and wearable device generate ream of information, and 
it’s one of the main source of big data. As many a 25 billion “things” will be connect by 2020, 
predicts Gartner. Making that connectivity even smarter will be what data futurist Davenport call 
the “analytics of things.” That’s where these data blending solution would help make sense of 
the mountain of data these connect sensor amass. 

Fortunately, company don’t have to wait for the benefit of data blending. They’re here and 
now. “When I walk through our stores,” say Coleman of The Home Depot, “I see the impact data 
blending have made. I can see product change right on the shelf. And that’s really exciting.” 

METHODOLOGY AND PARTICIPANT PROFILE 
Harvard Business Review Analytic Services survey a total of 502 individuals. About one-quarter 
(26 percent) be from organization with over 10,000 employees, another 26 percent be from 
organization with from 1,000 to 10,000 employees, and 40 percent be from organization with 
few than 500 employees. Respondents’ own operating unit be primarily in North America (45 
percent), follow by Asia/Pacific (20 percent), Europe (19 percent), Latin America (9 percent), 
and the Middle East/Africa (6 percent). Participants represent a wide range of industry and 
functional areas, with 17 percent say they work in general/executive management, 13 percent in 
sales/business development, and 9 percent in marketing/communications. 



hbr.org/hbr-analytic-services 




