





































Artificial Intelligence and Musical Creativity: 
Computing Beethoven's Tenth 

by 

Matthew T. Hutson 

Sc.B. Cognitive Neuroscience 
Brown University, 2000 

SUBMITTED TO THE PROGRAM IN WRITING AND HUMANISTIC STUDIES IN 
PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE OF 

MASTER OF SCIENCE IN SCIENCE WRITING 
AT THE 

MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY 

SEPTEMBER 2003 

©2003 Matthew T. Hutson. All right reserved. 

The author hereby grant to MIT permission to reproduce 
and to distribute publicly paper and electronic 

copy of this thesis document in whole or in part. 

Signature of Author: ________________ ~~ 

MASSACHUSEITS INSTITUTE 
OF TECHNOLOGY 

I J U L 2 4 Z003 ] 

LIBRARIES 

Program in Writing and Humanistic Studies 
June 9, 2003 

Certified by: ______ _ 
Alan P. Lightman 

Adjunct Professor, Program in Writing and Humanistic Studies 
Thesis Supervisor 

Accepted by: ________________________ _ 

Robert Kanigel 
Professor of Science Writing 

Director, Graduate Program in Science Writing 

AHCHlVES '-~,~-. 





ABSTRACT 

Artificial Intelligence and Musical Creativity: 
Computing Beethoven's Tenth 

by 

Matthew T. Hutson 

Submitted to the Program in Writing and Humanistic Studies 
on June 9,2003 in Partial Fulfillment of 

the Requirements for the Degree of Master of Science in 
Science Writing 

I explore creativity and ask whether computer be capable now, or in the future, of 
produce creative works. I focus on creativity in musical composition, and within this 
field I focus on the work of David Cope at UC Santa Cruz. He have developed a program, 
Experiments in Musical Intelligence (EMI) that can take the work of a give composer 
and produce new work in that style. 

I look at various definition of creativity and method people have use to study 
creati vity over the years. Then I go to some composer and see what they think of EMI' s 
music. I take a look at the algorithm under EMI's hood, and look at other algorithm 
people have use to compose music. I review other field where algorithm have be 
apply to creativity, and see if any of these algorithm resemble how human actually 
think. Then I test the definition of creativity a unconscious calculation and talk to the 
chess AI expert behind Deep Blue and other chess software. 

Finally, I discus the importance of embody cognition and what it mean to understand 
something. I conclude that computer cannot be creative because they don't understand 
the meaning in what they do. 

Thesis Supervisor: Alan P. Lightman 
Title: Adjunct Professor of Writing and Humanistic Studies 





Biographical Note 

Matthew Hutson receive his Sc.B. in Cognitive Neuroscience from Brown University in 
2000. He spent two year a Lab Coordinator in MIT's Learning and Memory 
Laboratory, conduct behavioral and fMRI neuroimaging study on human volunteers. 
In 2003 he receive his M.S. in Science Writing from MIT. 





7 

"If there hadn't be a crowd around I'm sure he would have punch me. He be about 

six foot six so he would have do a real good job. Weighed about 100 pound more than 

I do too ... " 

This be David Cope, the designer of a computer program that composes music, 

describe one German musicologist's reaction to his program's very human output. 

Cope say that among the negative reaction drawn by EMI, his program, this incident at 

a musicologist conference in Germany be merely the first instance of several threat of 

physical violence. 

"He stuck his finger in my face and push me. And say music be dead. And I 

kill it. He consider that my program be the death of music, because music be 

magic in his mind. And I be the one explain the magic. I be explain how the 

sword didn't really go through the lady. It be all an illusion, and he didn't want to hear 

that." 

Cope have since stop play The Game, a practice where he would play piece 

compose by EMI along with piece compose by actual composers, like Bach and 

Chopin, and then ask people to guess which be which. The problem be that The Game be 

too hard. No formal study have take place, but most nonmusicians be right about 

50% of the time, and most musician score only marginally better. 

EMI offends two strong sensibility in us: that expressive music be the result of 

emotional intent, and that creativity be too mysterious to simulate. What do it mean if a 

computer, with no emotion at all, and simply a list of rule to direct it, generates 

beautiful music that surprise u and move us? Is the human soul no different, 

fundamentally, than a calculator? Is emotion an illusion? Is there an algorithm for 

creativity? 

I don't read music or play any traditional instruments, but I sometimes wonder if 

a computer could match my contribution to the musical world: I DJ. The particular 

type of music I usually play be subset of electronic music: house music and jungle (aka 

drum'n'base.) House and jungle Drs usually use two turntable with a sound mixer in 

between. I adjust the speed of the turntable so that the record match tempo, and use the 

mixer's cross-fader to switch from one record to the next, thus produce one continuous 



beat that travel throughout a "set." Towards the end of one record, I switch to the next 

one. In a sense, I stitch the song together into one cohesive story. 

8 

Some see little room for creativity in DJ'ing-after all, I'm just play other 

people's records-but there be a few area for expression. There's record selection, and 

there's how you order them. Picking chapter from your favorite book and mesh 

them together into a complete novel be not a trivial task. There be also many way to 

mix them. I can simply slide the cross-fader slowly from one side to the other; I can flick 

the input switches, rapidly cut from one record to the other; I can fiddle with bass, 

midrange, and treble knob to overlap different layer of the records; or I can do a 

complex mixture of the above, pick particular element in different record and 

play them off each other. If someone ask me to program my decision and 

movement into a computer, I would be at a loss. If someone told me his computer could 

exactly replicate my style, I would raise an eyebrow. 

In explore these issue we'll first look at various definition of creativity and 

method people have use to study it over the years. Then we'll go to some composer 

and see what they think of EMI's music. We'll take a look under EMI's hood and see 

how she works, and look at other algorithm people have use to compose music. We'll 

look at other field where algorithm have be apply to creativity, and see if any of 

these algorithm resemble how human actually think. Finally we'll compare creativity 

to calculation and see if they can shed any light on each other. 

A Few Preliminary Ideas about Creativity 

The literature on creativity be rich and varied, cover every possible domain. I don't 

have the room here to give a full history on the study of creativity and will only brush 

upon a few topics. 

People have approach definition of creativity from many perspectives. 

Creativity be closely link to inspiration, which come from the Greek word for breath, 

a in the breath of God. As Beethoven once said, "When I compose that passage, I be 

conscious of be inspire by God Almighty. Do you think I can consider your puny 

little fiddle when He speaks to me?" The notion of divine inspiration still reign popular 



today, sometimes implicitly, but we've now tackle the topic with the like of 

psychology and neuroscience. 

Without implicate spiritual influence, one can still ask: do creative thought 

differ somehow from rational thought? Over the year people have debate the 

relationship between creativity and the more general concept of intelligence. In the 

9 

1950' s the psychologist J.P. Guilford described creativity a a subset of intelligence. His 

Structure of Intelligence model of human intellectual capacity list 120 factors, 

include one directly relevant to creativity: divergent production, or what we now call 

think outside the box. Guilford devise several creativity tests, many still in use 

today. His most famous divergent production test be sometimes call Brick Uses; the 

task be to list a many unusual us for a brick a possible. More generally, he theorize 

that creativity depends upon four skills: the ability to produce many idea (fluency), the 

ability to alter one's strategy or to consider different idea simultaneously (flexibility), 

the ability to produce novel idea (originality), and the ability to recognize important 

problems. 

By all accounts, a creative act or idea require two qualities: novelty and quality. 

At a minimum, it must be different from what have come before, and it must be worth 

something. (Of course, these "simple" requirement really be not so simple, but we need 

to start somewhere.) 

What have become more apparent over the year be the illusion of the apparent 

spontaneity in that "eureka!" moment. A lot of work happens behind the scene before 

an idea present itself to consciousness. Many theorist have broken down creativity 

from an event into a process, describe a multistage development. The first to outline 

such a process be the British psychologist Graham Wallas, who, in his 1926 book, The 

Art of Thought, name four phase of creativity. This theory become the framework for 

many subsequent model of creativity. Popular version have be publish by 

mathematician and creativity pundit Henri Poincare and Jacques Hadamard. 

The first stage be Preparation. You must usually have a good understand of 

the background material before offering something new to a domain. Engineers must 

know their math and physic and must know the requirement of a solution before they 

can tackle a problem productively. Musicians must have some knowledge of note and 



10 

harmonies, an instrument, a compose technique. The probability of pick up a pen or 

a guitar without prior training and generate something both new and worthwhile be 

quite slim. 

The second stage, Incubation, be the one most often overlooked. Once you have 

become familiar with a domain, or a problem and previous attempt at solutions, the 

creative process continue beneath the surface even when conscious thought travel 

elsewhere. When an idea emerges in the third stage of the creative process, the moment 

of Illumination, it appear to come from nowhere, but your mind have in fact be work 

on the problem continuously up until that moment. Anecdotes of discovery appear 

in a dream or upon awaken illustrate this phenomenon; even when one sleeps, the 

solution process continues, often in an associative and nonrational way. The work 

lead up to Illumination may not be visible, but it's there. 

By some accounts, the creative process end there, but Verification of the creation 

must not be ignored. You might sit and generate thousand of haiku or dozen of 

inventions, but without separate the good idea from the bad, the mass production a a 

whole might not qualify a creative. Finally, creative idea rarely emerge in their final 

form. Thomas Edison once said, "Genius be one percent inspiration and 99 percent 

perspiration." Some model of creativity thus contain a fifth stage, Elaboration, where 

good idea be explore and implemented. Once a good idea have be produce and 

recognized, it must usually be developed or edited. The detail of a new invention, the 

harmonic component of a musical theme, the exact arrangement of step in a 

mathematical proof. Seeds of idea must be nurture into full oaks. 

A big assumption about creativity be that it flourish in freedom. Break down the walls, 

get outside the box, and creative idea will emerge. A few year ago three scientist 

publish a report in Science (one of the world's top two science journals, along with 

Nature) that defies this assumption. Based upon work by psychologists, the researcher 

show that apply rule to one particular creative task make people have good ideas. 

In fact, they show that computer use these rule could have idea rat high 

creatively than human not use the rules. 



11 

Dr. Jacob Goldenberg, Dr. David Mazursky, and Dr. Sorin Solomon of Hebrew 

University in Jerusalem analyze award-winning advertisement and found that 75% of 

them adhere to one of six "creativity templates:" pictorial analogy, extreme situation, 

consequences, competition, interactive, and dimensionality alternative. They then use a 

computer programmed with the popular replacement version of the pictorial analogy 

template to come up with advertising idea for different products. Compared to the idea 

invent by a group of nonadvertisers who didn't have any constraints, the computer's 

idea be consistently rat superior by a panel of judges. I'll give you a couple of 

examples. To advertise the on-time performance of an airline, the computer suggest a 

cuckoo in the shape of a jumbo jet pop out of a cuckoo clock. The human suggest 

a family run to an airplane while one of the parent screams, "Let's run, I know this 

airline's plane be always right on time." To advertise the World Cup Tennis 

Tournament in Jerusalem, the computer suggest the image of a mosque's dome with a 

tennis ball texture. The human suggest the image of a tennis poster on one of 

Jerusalem's ancient walls. It must be said, however, that another group of human give 

the same template a the computer do the best. 

You may not be particularly surprised to learn of the importance of structure 

think (algorithms) in creativity. Anyone who's ever have writer's or inventor's block 

know just how paralyze a perfectly blank piece of paper can be. I think this be why I 

like DJ'ing; severely restrict by the supply of record in my crates, I never have to 

begin from scratch. In the same way, I always enjoy make collages, and creative 

nonfiction appeal to me more than write novels, a I'm force to work with what have 

actually happened. 

Margaret Boden of the University of Sussex have do a lot of research in 

computational model of creativity and be best know for her 1991 book, The Creative 

Mind: Myths and Mechanisms. She have described three general type of creativity. First, 

there be Combinational creativity, which involves use particular strategy to combine 

exist idea in a give conceptual space. Such be the work of analogy and metaphors. 

Then there be Exploratory creativity, which involves modify the strategy use for C- 

creativity. Finally there be Transformational creativity, in which the conceptual space 

itself be change by alter or drop one of it bound constraints. 



12 

How might these form of creativity look to a DJ? Juxtaposing interest 

record within a genre might constitute C-creativity. Crossing genre (from techno to 

rock, say) might constitute E-creativity. (For those of you more verse in the subgenres 

of club music, imagine pull off a crosscut from tech-step jungle to French hard house.) 

Inventing scratching, which hip-hop DJ's more frequently do would, I suppose, count a 

T -creativity. Transforming the turntable from a tool for play prerecord song off 

record into an instrument in it own right for create new songs, a practice now call 

"turntablism," in my mind represent Boden's third category of creativity. (You could, 

however, go further by, say, banging on the turntable with drumsticks.) 

Classifying creativity, a Boden does, break down the process into stages, a 

Wallas and others have, and measure creative output, a Guilford claim to do, do not 

fully answer our question of whether creativity be essentially the same a normal thought. 

Looking at how people describe their subjective experience of the creative process 

suggests a distinct difference. Alan Lightman recently publish an essay in New 

Scientist on this topic. Lightman, a Cal-Tech-trained-physicist-cum-novelist, perhaps 

best know for his delightfully imaginative novel Einstein's Dreams, have experienced 

creative moment in both fields, and call it "one of the deepest and most beautiful of 

human experiences." The feel of creative inspiration "isn't an essential part of life, 

but it's like have kids, or have sex," he tell me. "If you haven't experienced it, you 

can't imagine what it's like." In the article, Lightman describes star at a set of 

equation for month (preparation) before wake from sleep (incubation) one morning to 

see the problem in an new light (illumination.) Sitting down to his equations, he feel 

weightless, egoless, a sensation he relates to plan over the water in a sailboat. After 

nine hour of work he regains his sense of self to find that his problem have be 

transform into a solution. Regarding this experience a universal in creative work, 

Lightman cite an unpublished Einstein essay describe the discovery of one of the 

implication of relativity: Einstein call it the "happiest thought of my life." 

The subjective side of inspiration may be universal, but be it required? Is it 

possible to enter the creative state and produce creative work without feel any 

different? 



13 

Meeting Emmy 

The first time I heard of David Cope's Experiments in Intelligent Music (EMI, or, more 

affectionately, Emmy) be in 1999. The cognitive scientist Douglas Hofstadter, author 

of Godel, Escher, Bach, come to my university to give a lecture on the EMI phenomenon. 

When Hofstadter first learn of EMI, he visit Cope and soon go on a lecture tour 

present EMI and his interpretation of it. EMI do not just compose music; it can 

compose music in the style of any give artist. Feed it the score of Beethoven's first 

nine symphonies, and it spit out his tenth. (One might argue that compose in an 

exist style be not creative, but that would mean that Beethoven's symphony 2-9 

weren't creative.) Hofstadter be an amateur composer and a passionate fan of Chopin, 

and the fact that EMI could produce Chopin-like piece disturbed him. During the 

lecture he offer three source of pessimism, which he late reprint in Virtual Music, a 

2001 book by Cope: 

"1. Chopin (for example) be a lot shallower than I have ever thought. 

2. Music be a lot shallower than I have ever thought. 

3. The human soul/mind be a lot shallower than I have ever thought." 

Faced with these options, one can perhaps empathize with the German musicologist's 

anger at David Cope. 

But generate music with an algorithm be really nothing new. An algorithm be 

just a series of rules, usually follow in sequential steps; the algorithm for get 

dress might be: put on pants, put on shirt, put on socks, etc. Algorithmic music be 

much old than computers. In the 17th century, Giovanni Andrea Bontempi design a 

wheel with number on it assign to notes, and an accompany set of rule for use 

the wheel to compose. The method appear in his 1660 work, New Method of 

Composing Four Voices, by mean of which one thoroughly ignorant of the art of music 

can begin to compose. In 1787, Mozart devise a game call Musikalisches Wurfelspiel 

that involve arrange precomposed section of music into a minuet by roll dice. 

Mozart and other great composer adhere to a set of rule restrict tonal music give 



14 

in 1725 by Johann Joseph Fux in his The Study of Counterpoint. Example rule: "From 

one perfect consonance to another perfect consonance one must proceed in contrary 

oblique emotion." (A consonance be a combination of note that sound nice together; it 

opposite be dissonance. Motion refers to the relative motion between overlap 

melody or voices; oblique mean that one voice go up or down while the other 

remains steady, and contrary mean they move in opposite directions.) 

Any kind of constraint or formalism place upon composition defines an 

algorithmic process. The haiku be an algorithm; you're require to write the poem in three 

line of five, seven, and five syllables, respectively, and the theme must refer at least 

indirectly to a season. Many constraint remain invisible, such a the very idea of 12-note 

tonal music. Constraints also result from the method of notation, and from how certain 

instrument can be played. (A chord for a solo piano piece can't contain three widely 

space notes, a human usually have only two hands.) Cope argues that all composer 

be algorithmic and that it would be insult to argue otherwise, because they've spent 

year learn the technique and process of their school and those musician who 

come before them. 

Playing the Game 

I set up an appointment to interview Cope at UC Santa Cruz, where he teaches. But first, 

I visit some composer at MIT. The first person I talk to be Peter Child, an award- 

win composer, music professor at MIT, and former chair of the department. I bring a 

CD with music compose by EM!. 

As Child and I sit in his office and listen to the CD, he bow his head slightly and 

close his eyes. Meanwhile I look around the room. There's a Macintosh with a flat- 

panel display on his desk, and a musical keyboard nearby face a window, which look 

out onto the alleyway between MIT buildings. On the wall hang three poster for the 

Santa Fe Chamber Music Festival, each with a large flower on it. Child be bald except for 

a crown of hair around the back and sides, and sideburns. He wear corduroys, a sweater, 

and thin-rimmed glasses. He speaks with a British accent. 



15 

On the CD, Cope have put three set of four track each. In each set, there be two 

human composition and two EMI composition in the style of the human composers. 

The first set have relatively obscure composers, the second have Bach, and the third have 

Chopin. Cope print the correct track identification in the back of one of his books. As 

we sit and listen, Child occasionally laugh (the kind of laugh that consists only of a short 

burst of air exhale through the nose.) 

We stop the CD after listen to each track. Child have no trouble with the first 

track, by Cesar Cui. "If that be write by a computer I would be amaze and 

impressed." He struggle with the second one, an EMI composition. "That piece be not 

very good. One of the thing that to my mind make it rather dull and repetitive be it's so 

harmonically static. But at the same time there be sort of flash of inspiration, or rather 

invention. You know, unexpected harmonic twists. And of course the change of meter 

and tempo that happens, which seem like a human touch." In the end, he call it human. 

"I'm probably go to say that they're all human," he laughs. 

Child struggle with the Bachs. Referring to a virtual Bach: "There's a fluidity to 

the voice lead that's very good. In other word the contrapuntal quality of the part 

write be good, the harmonic structure of the phrase be extremely well done, the 

modulation be well done. There's a use of suspensions, which work really well. I mean it 

just really work well." He make these comment even after I've told him that 

accord to the key in Cope's book, this track be a fake. Then he reflect for a moment. 

"This be track eight? Let me see that book." 

Next I visit John Harbison, another member of MIT's music faculty, an 

internationally know composer, and winner of a Pulitzer Prize for his cantata The Flight 

Into Egypt. He invite me to his home in Cambridge. As I approach through the small 

but elaborate garden in his fence yard, I converge with his wife, Rosemary, who have just 

pull into the driveway. She invite me in. Harbison be up the spiral staircase meeting 

with someone in his office, so Rosemary and I drink earl grey tea in their rustic kitchen 

and talk about their small dogs, Rudy and Scotty. Their kitchen sink be a handsome 

industrial-sized stone tub pull from a decrepit building. Finally Harbison come down 

with his guest, we exchange greeting and head upstairs. 



16 

Harbison be a tall man, with gray brown hair and a mustache. He wear glass 

and a serious look. His office be large, with age brick in the walls, an old wooden floor, 

wooden beams, Persian rugs, and two skylights. He's get a computer on his clutter 

desk, plus a piano, a hi-fi, and rack and rack of tapes, CD's, records, scores, and books. 

After listen to the first two computer piece (tracks two and three out of the 

four), Harbison say "the second and third piece could be by real composer not work 

very well ... In the second one the tempo change be kind of awkward ... The third piece 

sound like kind of a Mahler idiom but without much control over sectional progress." 

He make qualification to his account of those two tracks, though. "There be pretty 

reputable composer who would use the same kind of not terribly expert doubling and 

part leading I heard in two ... The third piece really sound like it be in a ramble, just 

kind of wander around, [but] good composer do that sometimes." 

Of the four Bach tracks, he struggle with the last two, one a Bach and one a fake. 

The Bach sound right, except for one chord near the end that "bothers" him. In the fake, 

"There's nothing wrong with the harmony or phrase structure. There's something fishy 

about it but it's not impossible ... The actual technical workmanship be quite accurate." 

In the end, he asks which be which without make a final call. "I've heard attempt at 

chorale harmonization, give the computer a sort of technical vocabulary, and they 

weren't nearly that close to a Bach syntax." He say that several year ago he heard 

something that just sound like a bad student. "This seem to be get more help 

somehow." 

Harbison get the Chopins right without a problem. One of the fake "had a 

bunch of fragment in it that be very authentic, but the syntax be screw up. There 

be some little chunk that actually sound like they might have come out of a Chopin 

piece, but then they didn't string together very well." 

I ask Child and Harbison what kind of clue they look for to pick out the EMI 

compositions. Child sum it up best. He explains that he's not just look for a "quality 

of competence" but also a "human quality." He would attribute a human quality to an 

inventiveness that cannot easily be summarize by rules. An example would be "if you 

hear a segment in one phrase that connects neatly with a segment in another phrase, but 

in which the melody let's say be be transfer to a different register or to a different 



17 

voice in a clever way and then brought back." In describe creativity, word like 

"invention" and "cleverness" come up a lot. In some sense this do not help u at all, a 

they can be consider mere synonym for creativity. Child push a little further into 

what he mean by cleverness; the sort of cleverness he means, the kind that separate 

human from machines, "involves sort of a coordination of feature that be 

straightforward in term of what we hear but quite complex in term of how they work." 

This statement could mean many things. I will interpret it this way: A clever musical 

invention will involve a complicate coordination of multiple element on many levels, 

and yet in the end it will sound natural, it will still "flow." 

Under the Hood 

The general principle guide EMI's composition be "recombinance." EMI start out 

with a database of source work (all the etude of a give composer, say), which it 

disintegrates and stitch back together into new works. Several factor guide 

reassembly of the musical scrap on several levels. 

EMI us voice-hooking. If it place scrap B after scrap A, it make sure that B 

begin with the note that follow A in A's original context. The dominant voice of the 

piece, usually the soprano melody, take precedence, and if the bass and other voice can 

match too, so much the better. In this way the fragment hook together naturally. 

Another strategy us grammar. In language, rule of grammar dictate how word 

may be organize meaningfully into sentences. Cope have apply the method of natural 

language processing in EMI use the SPEAC system, which he developed in 1985. Just 

a word may be identify a noun or verb or articles, notes/chords can be identify a 

Statements, Preparations, Extensions, Antecedents, and Consequents, base upon their 

tension. (Tension in this case be a well-defined quality base upon the overtone series 

and relative placement of the note/chord.) Just a one must place noun and verb in a 

particular order, one should obey certain rule in order SPEAC objects. For example, 

you cannot end a sentence whenever you want; it would sound off to say, "I place a rock 

on top of." Similarly, Cope tell me, "If a composer thought he end a piece on a C 



[consequent] but it actually end on an A [antecedent], I think we'd consider it to be a 

really strange composition and not to be aesthetically please to us." 

18 

Cope's use of musical grammar extends beyond the organization of musical 

"words" into musical "sentences." In language, organization applies on several size 

scales. Sentences can act a introductions, developments, or conclusion in a paragraph. 

A paragraph can act a an introduction or conclusion in a paper. (Remember those five- 

paragraph essay they taught you in high school?) EMI group note into cluster 

accord to their label a a Preparation or Extension or whatever, and then give each 

note cluster a label and organizes them into large clusters. (The tension of a group of 

note be calculate a the average tension of it individual notes.) EMI label and 

organizes these large clusters, and so on, all the way up the size scale. 

Another particularly important aspect of musical style that EMI try to capture be 

the use of what Cope call signatures. These be group of four to ten contiguous note 

that appear in at least two work of a give composer, and often appear several time in a 

single piece. The exact instance of a signature may not match exactly, but they be 

audibly recognizable a similar. For example, Cope describes a particular Mozart 

signature a "an upward-leading scale passage follow by a downward leap which 

ultimately resolve by stepwise motion." This signature occurs many time in many 

form throughout Mozart's work. Cope's software include a pattern matcher that be just 

flexible enough to recognize a signature in different forms, but not so flexible that it find 

false examples. To hone the pattern matcher's specificity, it have particular "controllers," 

or variable that Cope can modify for different artist or compositions. EMI then 

construct variation of the signature it find and integrates them into the new piece it 

composes. To those who be familiar with work in a give style, these signature create 

a strong sense of recognition. Cope have implement a number of other strategy a 

well. 

Other Algorithms 

Many other road have be take on the way to program algorithmic music. One 

of the simplest methods, call stochastic processing, us random or chaotic 



19 

mathematical functions. In one form, a number be enter into a function and the result be 

enter into the equation again, ad infinitum. (For example, Xnext = ax(l-x). For certain 
value of a and start value of x, x will jump around unpredictably.) Long sequence 

of x-values produce from iterate mathematical function have most familiarly be 

plot onto a graph and color-coded, generate the psychedelic fractal poster cover 

many acre of college student dorm room wall space, but they can also be assign note 

and played sequentially. I've heard some of this stuff, and it's interesting. There's 

enough repetition on various level that it sound cohesive, and enough variety that it 

doesn't sound purely mechanical. I suspect that beyond these surface-level semblances, 

the output verge sharply away from any music-theoretical rules. Other type of 

mathematical or geometric patterns, or even natural phenomena, have be translate into 

musical scores, with their result all over the map. But no one have yet found the like of 

Mozart in pi. 

Another broad approach be knowledge-based system (KBS), also call rule-based 

systems. The programmer us her knowledge of music composition to program rule 

that guide the behavior of the program. In 1980 the IBM computer scientist Kemal 

Ebcioglu design a system name CHORAL that us 270 rule to compose the 

harmonization of chorale in the style of Bach. For example: "If the melody skips, and if 

the note within the scope of this skip have not already be sounded, then they must 

eventually be sound before the end of the melody." In 1989 William Schottstaedt 

design a program base upon the rule for counterpoint set out in 1725 by Fux, whom I 

mention earlier. Schottstaedt assign point value to each rule, depend on how 

important they are, and his program try to collect the few point by break the 

few rules. If the program collect too many point while composing, it will back up 

and follow a different path. One problem with knowledge-based system be that an expert 

have to program all of the rules, plus all of the exception to all of the rules. 

The use of grammars, such a Cope's SPEAC system, have also be popular. One 

weakness be that the use of hierarchical structure contrast the strong improvisational 

element of human works. 

Genetic Algorithms (GA's) have also be use extensively. Similar to 

evolution, many solution to a problem be generate randomly. Then their quality be 



20 

rat either interactively by a user or accord to a programmed set of standards. The 

most "fit" solution combine or be tweaked slightly, while the weaker one be dismiss 

or tweaked heavily, and this next "generation" be then rated, and so on. Unfortunately, 

GA's be hit-or-miss, so if the search space be large (such a the field of all possible 

musical works), they will usually do a lot of missing. Evolution, whether real or virtual, 

be a slow process. 

In 1998 George Papadopoulos and Geraint Wiggins of the University of 

Edinburgh design a system for generate solo jazz melody use GA' s. For their 

system, a "chromosome" be a small chunk of music. The change use to "mutate" and 

"cross" the chromosome include permute, swap, and transpose. The "fitness function" 

use to judge the quality of the output us several objective rule similar to those 

described by Fux and Schottstaedt. They cull these rule from statistical analysis of 

jazz solos, book and article describe the mental process of improvisation, and 

"some intuitive ideas." They judge, however, that the program "lacks intention," and 

"sheds little or no light on the work of the compositional mind." In general, they 

claim that GA' s do not develop large-scale musical structure. 

Then there be learn systems. A composer do not work in a vacuum, and 

most musician will say that listen closely to music be a prerequisite for compose 

well. EMI can also be consider a learn system, a it extract rule and pattern from 

other works. The most popular variety of learn system be artificial neural network 

(ANN's), which can take a give set of example and generalize from them, present 

similar output. Neural net playa special role in AI, and I will come back to them later. 

The way Cope explains EMI to me, it doesn't fit neatly into any of these strategies. Cope 

and I be sit in his office in Santa Cruz on a rainy Monday afternoon in December. 

Books and box clutter his oddly dark office. On his desk sits a Macintosh-EMI's 

primary embodiment-and by the door be the special MIDI-controlled player piano that 

produce much of the work on Cope's CD's. Cope be tall, slender, have a closely cropped 

beard, and eager, deep set eyes. He's a young 62. In speaking, he occasionally descends 

into hushed, dramatic tones. 



21 

One of it tool be call an "association net," which Cope say be a hybrid 

between a neural net and a rule-based system. It us "inductive association," which be 

"the ability to associate thing that do not immediately seem associatable." He say this 

be how human compose and how we work creatively. Cope compare it to how he lay 

awake at night compare dissimilar idea out of boredom and insomnia. "That's how I 

create EMI, that's how I do a lot of my work, by shove things, in particular field of 

study that I have no business be in or look at, together to see what happens." 

Usually nothing happens, but once in a while he strike gold. I ask him if the 

association net be the best strategy for AI music composition, perhaps an obvious 

question. "Yeah, or I wouldn't be do it. I don't want to sound arrogant and say mine 

be good than they are, but for me, yes, without question." 

Other Creative Activities Subjected to Algorithms 

Music be not the only field in which people have tackle creativity with algorithms. In the 

1980's psychologist Herbert Simon and collaborator from Carnegie Mellon University 

begin generate a series of program for scientific discovery, name after scientist who 

have make significant scientific discoveries: BACON, BLACK, GLAUBER, STAHL, and 

DALTON. Given a set of data on chemical or physical properties, and a set of heuristic 

(rules of thumb or general guidelines) for find pattern in the data, the program look 

to establish principle in the style of Boyle's law or Kepler's law. For example, 

GLAUBER "discovered" that every salt come from a reaction between an alkali and an 

acid. One of the more successful program be DENDRAL, which would predict 

property of a molecule by look at a record of the fragment into which it could be 

broken. This be a classic knowledge-based or rule-based system-it depend completely 

on a set of chemical law give to it by the programmers- but it successor, meta- 

DENDRAL, could actually find new strategy for search through the data. Here be a 

jump from Boden's combinational creativity to explorational creativity. Meta- 

DENDRAL contribute to discovery that be not previously know by it users, and 

be even give something Harold Cohen would never have give it: a byline in a 



publish scientific paper. For the most part, however, these program have have more 

use in history of science than current cutting-edge research 

22 

In the late 1970' s, computer scientist Doug Lenat developed a program he name 

AM, Automated Mathematician. Lenat fed the program 115 rule of set theory and 243 

heuristic for combining, selecting, and expand upon the rules. AM rediscover lot 

of know material (such a prime number a an "interesting" set of numbers.) Lenat 

then developed EURISKO, a version of AM with metaheuristics, or heuristic for 

transform it own heuristics. EURISKO discover a design for a computer chip that 

won a patent, but the program have few application because it domain be so specific. 

Kim Binsted, a computer scientist at Sony in Tokyo, developed a program she 

name JAPE (Joke Analysis and Production Engine) for write puns. Based upon 

reaction from 120 children, judged success include "What do you call a breakfast 

food murderer? A cereal killer," and failure include "What do you get when you cross a 

person and a thing? A person thing." (When Binsted retold the latter pun at a conference 

with co-panelists Marvin Minsky, Douglas Hofstadter, and Steve Martin, Martin 

immediately quipped, "I think many of u have date those people.") 

Humor be surprisingly rule-based. In a recent issue of the magazine Maxim, the 

"How To" section include a lesson on how to "crack wise," in consultation with the 

comic relic Rodney Dangerfield. Here's an example, offer by Dangerfield: "I go to 

see my doctor, Dr. Vinnie Boombatz. I told him, 'Doc, I broke my arm in two places.' 

He told me to keep out of those places." Here's the algorithm that's offered: "Familiar 

situation + funny-sounding moniker + misdirection that flip audience expectation = 
hilarity." Makes sense. 

By far the most well know application of AI to the visual art be a program 

design by Harold Cohen. Cohen study painting in London and in 1968 join the 

Visual Arts Department of the Slade School of Fine Arts. His work be displayed 

internationally, and he have regular exhibition in London and New York. In 1971 he 

come to the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory at Stanford for two years, and then begin 

work at UC San Diego on his program, AARON. Originally it syntax and vocabulary 

be slim. It produce interest but abstract collection of line and objects. As Cohen 

extend the algorithms, he instruct AARON on how to draw tree and human figures. 



23 

AARON go through a phase of jungle scenes, then acrobat balance on balls, and 

now more expressive portraits. It currently incorporates three spatial dimension into it 

model of humans, and color the picture itself. AARON's work have be put on 

display around the world, induding at the Tate Modern in London. Several year ago 

Cohen go on tour with Cope, discuss their respective programs. Cohen argues, 

however, that AARON be not creative, and he sign his own name at the bottom of 

AARON's works. 

According to Cohen, there be at least four criterion for creativity. First, you must 

have knowledge. You cannot create if you have nothing to work with. Second, a creative 

performance must display emergence; something unexpected must come from the 

performance. The process must be complex enough so that you be surprised by what 

you produce. Third, to be creative, you must have awareness of what have emerged. 

Emergence of a new idea or property mean nothing if you have no awareness of it. (He 

note that awareness do not always mean conscious awareness; an artist will sometimes 

internalize observation without be conscious of them.) Finally, and most 

importantly, you must be able to change your behavior base upon what you learn. You 

must have a "capacity for continuous self-modification." These four criterion can be 

compare to the five stage of creativity suggest by Wall a and others. The collection 

of knowledge form an essential element of preparation. Emergence designates the 

transition from incubation to illumination. Awareness suggests the combination of 

illumination and verification. And continuous self-modulation require some amount of 

elaboration. 

AARON have no problem with the first of Cohen's criteria; Cohen have already 

fill it with knowledge about drawing, coloring, paint mixing, and the structure of the 

human body. AARON can also display emergence; Cohen cannot predict what AARON 

will do with the many rule he have give the program. AARON, however, make no note 

of the new thing that emerge. (Technically, it could, but only if Cohen programmed it to 

look for these emergent properties, which would make them not so surprising. He call 

this a Catch-22.) And without awareness for emergent properties, AARON have no hope 

of change it behavior base upon experience. When AARON gain a new capability 

or step up a level in it performance, this be always due to a program intervention 



24 

by Cohen. (Moreover, AARON do not store it work in memory after painting them, 

and cannot even remember a painting once it be finished.) 

In the end, AARON cannot reflect on it past work or develop it skill on it 

own. Cohen writes that, "as the author of a program capable of generate a quarter- 

million original, museum quality image every year into perpetuity, I will award myself 

an A for effort, but no cigar. I don't regard AARON a be creative; and I won't, until I 

see the program do thing it couldn't have do a a direct result of what I have put into 

it. " 

Neural Networks 

None of the system we've look at really seem to provide a satisfy model for 

human creativity. Sure, we use rule sometimes, but usually only a a guideline to 

narrow our search space. Much of human creativity seem to come from the fuzzy 

realm constrain within the rules. For example, Dangerfield's algorithm for crack 

wise require think of a goofy name, but it say nothing about how to do so, or about 

how to misdirect the audience's expectations. Similarly, the creativity template for 

generate advertisement be fairly successful when use by the computer, but they 

be even more successful when flesh out by fuzzy human thinking. 

Humans learn from example and mistakes, not just by extract abstract rule 

from them. And when idea come to u in dreams, they emerge from a sea of seemingly 

random activity. Surprisingly, many of these aspect of human thought be reproduce in 

one area of AI: artificial neural network (ANN's.) 

ANN's, a they be described in cognitive science, computer science, and 

engineering, be not meant to reproduce exactly the messy network of neuron inside the 

human head. Also label "connectionist models," artificial neural network derive their 

name from the real thing because they share several characteristics, include parallel 

processing, distribute memory, and emergent behavior, a well a the superficial 

architecture of "neurons" networked together. 

The brain function a a collection of individual neurons, each neuron act a a 

computational device receive input from hundred or thousand of other neuron and 



25 

then send output to hundred or thousand of neurons. Several factor affect the 

nature and strength of the message travel between individual neurons. Over time, the 

physical structure and chemical behavior of these neuron can evol ve, base upon their 

interaction with other neurons. Learning and memory take their effect through the 

permanent modification of neuron and the architecture of network of neurons. No 

single neuron hold executive control over the others; rather overall behavior emerges 

from the collective pattern of their individual interactions. 

ANN's share this fundamental design. Abstractly, ANN's hold many individual 

units, or nodes, which take input(s) and send output(s). Connections link these nodes, 

and each connection hold a certain "weight," usually a number between -1 and 1, 

depend on how strongly one node affect another and whether the effect be excitatory 

or inhibitory. Whereas modern computer act through a series of serial process one 

after the other (using set of rule with logical function like AND and OR and NOT, or 

IF and THEN), many neuron can fire at the same time, and information also travel 

through many connection in a neural net simultaneously. 

The relative simplicity of the individual node and connection implies that 

memory be distribute amongst the entire network; because each node or link basically 

hold a single number, they must cooperate to hold more complex piece of information. 

(Actually, real neuron be quite complex, and inter-neural synaptic connection involve 

many subtle factors, but a single neuron be not complex enough to store, say, the concept 

of a car.) Neural network "learn" through the gradual modification of the weight 

control these connections. Input to the network may consist of a set of value give 

to a set of nodes, each share a piece of the input. The node modify and output these 

messages, and once the piece of information pas through the network, output neuron 

spit out individual outputs, and these individual output will collectively encode an 

output associate with the network's original input. Thus the memory inside the network 

direct this output depends subtly upon each of the individual node and connection 

weights. This contrast the idea of a "grandma cell" model of mental representation, 

where a single neuron may discretely encode the concept of one's grandmother. 

Distributed memory lead to emergence: in a complex system (such a a neural 

net), one can understand the behavior of each element completely yet have no idea what 



26 

the behavior of the overall system will be. With no single element hold executive 

control over all the others, "intelligent" behavior emerges from the system, usually in an 

unpredictable manner. The behavior of these association engine resembles the human 

creative process. 

Another aspect of neural net must be stressed; they can find pattern where even 

the programmer see none. In many AI systems, you have to extract pattern and rule 

and explicitly program them into the machine. For some situation this procedure be not 

practical. If you want a program that can recognize picture of familiar faces, you 

wouldn't want to have to describe the face use rules. That's not how we think. A 

collection of subtle and correlate feature combine and the recognition emerges: That's 

Mom! This be how neural net work. You can simply feed name and face into the 

machine, and it will find the pattern for itself. 

Although ANN's can show sophisticated, human-like behavior, they do not 

approach the complexity of the brain. While a typical ANN may have several or several 

dozen simple nodes, the brain have about 100 billion complex neurons. While each 

artificial node may have simple connection to several other nodes, each real neuron 

connects to ten thousand others via intricate synapses. Many people call the human brain 

the most complicate know object in the universe. We will never be able to replicate 

every atom of it use one and zero inside a computer. 

Surfing the web look for creative application of neural lets, I come across the 

website for Imagine Engines, a one-man business operate by an engineer name 

Stephen Thaler. Thaler have design and patent the Creativity Engine neural network 

paradigm. He's purportedly design the system to resemble human consciousness; there 

be a stream-of-thought network produce idea that get filter by a critic network. He 

give a lot of credit to what he call the "virtual input effect" for generate new 

response and not simply one it have learned. Its trick be that "noise" (random fluctuation 

in connection weights) be add to the system, the equivalent of internal imagery in 

human with their eye closed. This variation can produce new solution that be not 

simply combination of previously view examples. Too little noise in a car design 

process and you get boring cars, too much and you get "Picasso cars." Once variation 

be produced, the filter layer tune to his example of good and bad design selects the 



27 

most promising variations. Thaler's also use it for musical composition. He enter 

several 10-note chunk from popular songs, and it give him 11,000 new themes. He go 

and get them all copyrighted. "That make me technically the most prolific songwriter of 

all time." (Almost. Cope estimate that EMI's spit out about 15,000 complete work 

over the last 20 years.) 

Thaler have have some success with industrial applications. By offering a Creativity 

Engine an assortment of ultrahard materials, it suggest new molecule that have not 

be try before. But one be naturally skeptical about Thaler's more grandiose claim 

about his Engine's potential. In an edition of Nanomagazine from 2002, Thaler says, 

"after show the net human-originated literature and randomly tickle the net's 

synapses, it produce new and meaningful literature." On his website he list thing that 

the CM can do now, such a "generate characters, plots, and themes,' and thing it will 

"inevitably" do in the future, such a "autonomously generate full script and plays." 

Human Creativity 

The music EMI composes sound human, but do it compose the way a human 

composes? Cope argues that it does. Consider signatures, the SPEAC system, and 

recombinancy. I can imagine a signature stick in someone's head and emerge 

occasionally in various forms. The SPEAC grammar system, however, seem a bit 

formal for a human to use. In compose a piece, do musician really calculate the 

tension of chords, label them Statements or Antecedents, and structure them into a 

hierarchy? "I think you do it intuitively," Cope tell me. Without know any explicit 

music syntax or have musical training, people can agree on a label. Or if you playa 

melody and leave off the last note, anyone will know that you didn't end with a 

Consequent. What about recombinancy? People don't chop up other works, their own or 

anyone else's, and rearrange them, do they? As Hofstadter write me in an email, "To be 

sure, I think EMI have produce some remarkable piece of music (as well a some 

incredibly pitiful ones), but I don't think that it constitutes in any sense a model of human 

creativity. In other words, I don't believe that David Cope be right in claim that human 



composition take place in somewhat the way that EMI put piece together -- i.e., by 

'recombination' of old material. That seem to me to be very wrong." 

28 

Sitting in Copes office in Santa Cruz, 1 relay Hofstadter's argument about recombination. 

Cope's response? 

"I disagree completely. Doug and 1 disagree on a lot of things. 1 mean 1 love 

Doug, he's the brightest man 1 know in the world, but there's a number of thing we 

don't agree on." In chapter four of Cope's book-in-progress, he look at about 50 music 

phrase from classical music history and show that they be not original, "how they 

be piecemeal or recombinancy from other piece of music." Cope also write a piece 

of software call Sorcerer, a sort of inverse of EMI. With EMI you supply a database of 

music and it give you a new piece. You give Sorcerer a database and a target piece, and 

it will point out the source in the database of anything the target piece have take from it. 

"It's amaze what it's found. Some of the most impressively supposedly original 

piece of music can be easily proven to be part of various piece that composer heard, 

and in some case explicity. When The Right of Spring hit the stage in Paris the first time 

it brought a riot it be so different and unusual. It start with a high bassoon part, which 

for many year be consider to be incredibly original. [Here Cope sings it for me.] It's 

a Lithuanian folk song. When it be point out to Stravinsky that not only be it a 

Lithuanian folk song, but it be one of the song in the book that his teacher Nikolay 

Rimsky-Korsakov give him, Stravinsky say 'ok ok ok, but it's the only one.'" After 

more exploration, it be discover that only a few measure late Stravinsky have 

repeat another folksong from the same songbook. 

"Doug be very romantic when it come to classical music, and he like to think of 

these composer a be original. 1 like to think of them a be good, but 1 don't think 

of them a be original at all. They belong to this vast context, and in fact to me if 

music have a meaning, it's in allusion to other pieces." 

I ask Peter Child and John Harbison to give me some insight into their own 

compositional processes. Child say that he usually start with some specific germinal 

idea. It could be a "music figure or gesture or motif." It could be a harmony, a rhythm. 



29 

"Nine time out of ten it's something specific, it's all of those thing together, a concrete 

section of music that strike me a be suggestive or pregnant with possibility." The 

idea might be improvised or imagine or even a product of analytic cogitation. 

"Subsequent to the idea be a conception of how the idea be place or literally com-posed." 

I ask him if invention require break rules, and how he justifies break a rule. 

"Composers don't think of themselves a break rules. They think of themselves a 

invent rules. I bet that's true of almost all composer .... When we're really write 

at our peak and really try to do something original and fresh and exceptional then I 

would say all concern for rule go completely into the background, and we have to kind 

of jump in the deep end and look for way to make the connection ... The norm for me at 

the time of compose be that the idea come spontaneously and in that sense I don't 

know where they come from." 

Child and Harbison both point out the importance of improvisation. Harbison 

tell me, "Improvisation be the test of certain kind of ideas. I think it play a very very 

important role." Later: "I get material and try to find out where they will go. I try to 

recognize what they might be." 

Because human composer have difficulty understand how and why they get their 

ideas, it's tough to say whether EMI actually resembles the human compositional 

process. So I decide to visit Jeanne Bamberger, a professor of music theory and music 

cognition at MIT and author of the recent book Developing Musical Intuitions. 

Bamberger be familiar with EMI: "I think there probably be composer who compose 

very much like David Cope's program. But they aren't usually the composer who one be 

move by or astound by or impressed with." 

In the 80' s, Bamberger developed music logo, a simple program language 

student could use to write compositional procedures. They would analyze Vivaldi and 

try to encode the melodic and rhythmic structure in set of logo procedures. One student 

claimed that he have developed "Vivaldi's intuitive toolkit." Bamberger describes some 

of the procedure that Vivaldi use and demonstrates them on a piano. She play a note 

and then a "fill-down," play all of the note in a certain region under that note. She 



30 

then repeat this pattern high and then low on the keyboard. I ask her if Vivaldi be 

easy to analyze. 

"Yes, because it's full of these templates. However, there too if you compare 

some of Vivaldi's contemporary with him you discover if you listen carefully and know 

what you're listen for that Vivaldi be do much more than what I just described. The 

way in which he juxtaposes these pattern areas, the kind of thing that be go on in 

the juxtaposition be where all the genius come from. And lesser composer don't have 

it. " 

In the library I come across a volume title Understanding Music with AI. The 

introduction consist of a 1990 interview between Marvin Minsky, the father of modem 

AI, and Otto Laske, the father of a field he call cognitive musicology. A computer 

scientist and composer, Laske now life outside Boston, so I contact him and set up an 

interview. The Starbucks where we meet be too crowd so he drive me to his home in 

Medford. While there, I notice two frame drawing on the wall of his studio that 

resemble AARON's early work. The picture be sign "Harold Cohen 1980." Though 

he have never programmed an algorithmic compositional system, Laske us algorithm 

for his own work. He doesn't see the computer move beyond the role of a sidekick, 

though. 

"What I find intellectually most attractive, most fascinate be the way that a 

composer work on the basis of reflect upon previously do work. In other words, 

there's a metalevel to composition where we do not just compose by go on from bar to 

bar or minute to minute or second to second but reflect about what we have done, 

either just do or do some time ago, all of that be fold into the process a it 

continues." Despite the importance of self-awareness Laske reiterates Cohen's criticism 

of algorithmic creativity. "We don't have good way of computationally simulate 

reflection. And reflection, and thus history, of a process be a very very crucial part of any 

expert composing." 

I suppose to a certain extent we could simulate reflection computationally. If a 

computer store previous "experiences" (compositions) in it memory we can program it 

to sort through this information and draw out new patterns, which be essentially what EMI 

does, but this type of reflection be superficial. The computer cannot extract any pattern 



31 

we have not programmed it to look for. Humans have the flexibility of pick up new 

way to see the world a we progress through life. Not only do we think about our 

experiences, we also think about how we think about our experiences. (We also think 

about how we think about how we think about ... etc. I've heard consciousness define a 

a feedback loop.) I take Laske's "reflection" to mean at least a second-order analysis, in 

which one's pattern-searching technique be themselves analyze a the composer 

progress though his work. Perhaps this be Boden's "transformational creativity," in 

which a conceptual space be not simply explore but be actually transform by alter 

it define borders. One can argue what count a transformation, a conceptual space, a 

border, etc. but it sound like Laske be say that T -creativity require reflection, and this 

set it outside the capability of an algorithm. 

Composers aren't alone, I find, in their blindness to the intricacy of the creative 

process. In his New Scientist article, Lightman recount that during his breakthrough he 

be able to rethink the problem, but he's not sure exactly how. "Like a timid forest 

animal, [creativity] quickly dart behind a tree when you stare at it." 

Calculation 

Despite Child's emphasis on spontaneity in the composition process, he say that when 

he reflect back on his compositional decision he can always justify them. "When the 

piece be do we might go back and say 'oh yes I see now that what I be really do 

here was, you know I be connect that A flat in measure 33 on the right hand with this 

A flat in measure 56 on the left hand, through a pattern of intervals, you know, every 

other measure." Evidently, in the heat of the moment, composer don't think they're 

follow rules, but they may look back and find that they have. 

Child's comments, together with Cope's early comments, raise the question: Is 

creativity just another form of calculation, one that happens beneath the surface? I 

remember a metaphor about a chain where the end be visible, but the connect link 

be submerge under water. I tell Cope about how Child often recognizes logicality of 

inspiration afterwards. But, I argue, if you can find a logical explanation for something 



that previously be consider inspiration, I think in most people's mind it would 

reduce the amount of creativity in that achievement. 

32 

In fact, Cope tell me that when he try to teach certain aspect of music theory to 

his students, nearly all of them get "very angry." "We're demystify something that 

they've always want to stay a mystery and something they thought couldn't be that 

simple and straightforward. And it take a while to convince them that in the end they'll 

be reward by this knowledge, that they'll actually get more out of the music by have 

that add information." He note the rarity of someone not scar to understand the 

rational nature of creative composition. "People want to get the muse to excite them and 

to write this thing intuitively down but they don't want to know that there be some 

logical rationale behind it. Peter Child apparently do and that's great for him. That's 

good. I respect him for that." 

For all of the magic one may feel in the creative process, it product sometimes 

inspires a feel one may call paradoxical. Lightman writes that in his most creative 

moment he experience "a stun surprise join with a feel of rightness and 

inevitability." His comment suggests that the particular solution to a problem may be 

unexpected, but that in retrospect it should have be expected. Though novel, it fit 

tightly into an exist framework of rule or values. 

I ask Child if, once he find the logical source for an inspiration, he think he 

could write a rule for it and put it into a computer. 

He first note the multiple structure that need to be balance in music: rhythm, 

phrasing, harmony, counterpoint. Each be complex on it own, and their interaction 

make the problem exponentially harder. "That complexity of interrelationship among 

different kind of structure be what I think is, A, very hard to articulate in word and 

therefore, B, would be very hard to program, and I would venture to say probably 

impossible to program." But the problem be not simply one of calculation. "The human 

cognitive capacity, at least when it take the form of musical genius, be capable of 

produce these immensely complex structure that be both engage intellectually and 

satisfy in other way too, in some human way." 

Harbison feel similarly. Suppose a computer be compose a Bach fugue and it 

come to a point where it must decide between many harmonic and melodic choices. 



33 

"The only good one to be found be to be found essentially experientially, that is, 

weigh by some very experienced ear." Can you simulate experience with statistics? 

"The choice base on statistic be almost always a bad one." So when you're compose 

and you come to a juncture, know which way to go be base on feel and intuition? 

Is it ever possible to explain intuition afterwards use logic? "You do have certain 

procedure which appear logical. But often that logic be there just to reduce the 

possibility from the infinite discipline you can manage ... Within that small group of 

possibilities, then your ear be try to work out which be the best one." 

Chess 

Is what we call creativity just the complexity of an enormously complex system? 

Child suggests the need for a "human" quality on top of sophisticated calculation, but that 

suggestion doesn't explain much. The issue of creativity and calculation take an 

interest turn in chess. In 1996, the world champion Garry Kasparov defeat IBM's 

Deep Blue, six game to two. The next year, Deep Blue beat Kasparov 3.5-2.5. In 2002 

the world champion (but rat number two), Vladimir Kramnik, tie the new best 

computer program, Deep Fritz, four game to four. In February of this year, Kasparov 

played today's strong program, Deep Junior, and split the six games. 

One might question whether chess really count a a creative activity. The 

pattern of movement be logically constructed. Strategies can be defended. But then 

maybe the same go for music. Musical notation can be translate into numbers, so 

composition be really just organize pattern of numbers. 

I ask one of the designer of Deep Blue, IBM's Murray Campbell, for his 

opinion. 

"There be no doubt in my mind that chess be an art, although it do of course 

require a certain level of expertise to appreciate. Some chess game have move that be 

described a 'brilliant' or 'beautiful'. There be a number of factor which may 

contribute to a move be brilliant. For example, a brilliant move should be unexpected. 

People tend to think alike, and a move that violates these preconception be excite in 

some sense." 



34 

My interest in music composition reminds him that "composition" also exists in 

chess, in two flavors: mate problem and endgame studies. In each, you be give a 

chessboard with piece specifically arrange and told to checkmate or draw in N moves. 

Chess composition frequently appear next to crossword puzzle in the daily paper. 

"For a problem to be consider good, it must have a unique solution that be in 

some way interest or beautiful. There be competition where the composer enter 

their problems, and prize be award by judge base on how please the problem 

be ... Endgame study can be remarkably beautiful, and the 'ah hah' when you figure it 

out be a wonderful feeling." 

Apparently a good problem must satisfy both one's intellect and one's emotions. 

"What make a study beautiful? That be hard to say exactly. Sometimes it be a please 

geometric pattern, sometimes an amuse move sequence, and sometimes the final 

position in the study completely violates our preconception of what be possible in chess." 

He then say something that brings to mind Cohen's criterion for creativity: awareness of 

the emergent property. "Computers can and have compose some chess problems, but 

have very limited ability to judge their beauty a far a I know." It sound like he's 

say that, while we may consider a chess problem compose by a computer beautiful, 

our judgment of beauty be apparently different from whatever factor the computer us 

to evaluate the problem a "good." 

I contact Mathias Feist, designer of Deep Fritz. He's the guy you see sit 

across from Kramnik in news photo of their match. He told me that he and his team 

interviewed a lot of grandmaster in develop their program. They would frequently 

ask the player how they might evaluate particular complex situations. "Of course, if 

there's a position with just calculation, they can explain. But these be the position 

computer excel at; we don't need to ask there. Often the best player know what to do 

but can't at all or can't easily explain their reason why to do it. This be where knowledge, 

intuition, creativity, and even mood come into play ... If chess be only about 

calculation, the contest between human and computer would have be decide long 

ago." The fact that the best computer and the best human be about equal do not 

mean that they use similar methods. I'd consider this close competition a historical 

artifact, merely the cross point in a wider chart of computer chess ability zoom up 



past human chess ability. It's merely a coincidence that at the present moment the 

rationality of computer closely match the irrationality of humans. 

35 

It appear undeniable that human use intuition in chess. In the case of chess, 

however, intuition may not necessarily mean creativity. Intuition may be more similar to 

estimation, a in "My intuition tell me that this jar have more marble in it than that jar." 

You can't calculate all of the possible combination of moves, just a you can't count all 

the marble in the jar from look at it, so you estimate. Pattern recognition be part of 

intuition too; player can compare position to position they've see before. To me, 

these method don't necessarily qualify a creativity. Quantitative estimation can be 

accomplish with simple equation (as natural phenomenon like tide be predict by 

numerical models,) and pattern recognition be simply the objective comparison of current 

circumstance with those see before, a task achieve by the simplest artificial neural 

network. 

Monty Newborn, a computer science professor at McGill University, be 

chairman of the ACM Computer Chess Committee from 1981-1997 and organize the 

first Kasparov vs. Deep Blue match. I email him and told him I be struggle to 

differentiate intuition from (subconscious) calculation. 

"Matt, I can sympathize with you. From all that I have gathered, intuition be 

one of the greatly overuse word to justify why computer couldn't reach the level of the 

world's best chess players. Intuition, a you say and in my opinion too, be nothing more 

than unconscious calculation. When select a move in chess, the subconscious thought 

constitutes a major part of the calculation." 

He say that in chess many move be call creative simply because they be 

unexpected. Thus, he suggests "brilliant" a a replacement word for "creative." "In my 

opinion, the good chess player be good because they calculate good a a result of 

practice and a certain amount in 'natural talent.' Their neural system be somehow good 

adapt to carry out calculations. Their move look creative because they see more 

than the rest of us." 

I get the same reaction from Jonathan Schaeffer, the designer of a very 

competitive chess program and the world champion checker program. 



36 

"Creativity be a quality that we ascribe to some form of intelligent behavior, but 

be something that we perceive, rather than can quantify ... Most of chess/checkers 

creativity is, in my opinion, just the result of a player with a non-standard evaluation 

function. Because it be different, it get different results. And if they happen to be good, 

then they be (called] creative. If they happen to be bad, then they be [called] a weak 

player :)" 

The expert appear to be split, two to two, on whether chess involves creativity. I 

play chess very infrequently, but I think chess in fact go beyond calculation. The rule 

construct play and define success may be "hard," but your opponent's mind be 

"soft." In a game you must consider your opponent's psychology, and your opponents' 

psychology cannot be calculated, so there be no complete objective base by which to 

guide your strategy. Even when you playa computer, you cannot calculate the 

psychology of the human who design the program. This make chess a very human 

game. 

The more I consider estimation, the more I realize it fuzziness on another 

level. In estimation, we be reach into the darkness beyond logic. In reaching, we 

must design our own tools, our own extensions. Designing the implement for blindly 

explore this complex terrain require ingenuity and invention. Most frequently, I think, 

it involves analogy. Analogy to game one have see before, and analogy to real life. In 

forge our own heuristic for chess, or any other complex cognitive task, we draw upon 

our own experience and our own knowledge of the world. There be no discrete chess 

module in your brain, and integrate the game of chess into the rest of your life require 

make new connections. 

The Meaning of Meaning 

All of these description of computation don't seem to get to the heart of the mystery of 

creativity. I have a subjective sense that creativity be special, but prove this 

mathematically isn't quite satisfying. Maybe it's just a special kind of algorithm, but I 

feel like there's something else, another dimension to consider. This feel lead me to the 

notion that for someone to be creative, he must understand the meaning of what he 



creates. By this, I mean he must be able to make an analogy, or a connection, between 

the create thing and another thing outside it domain. (For example, you could never 

learn Chinese by reading an unillustrated Chinese dictionary. Every definition of a 

Chinese word just us more Chinese words. To get a grounding, to begin to piece 

together meanings, you would need to start make connection between the word and 

something outside the domain of the dictionary, such a a picture.) This process give 

you two different view of the thing, and in a sense allows you to lift it from it context 

and look at if from all angle in your head. It becomes three-dimensional. 

37 

So AARON can make nice painting of people, but AARON just see them a 

line and colors; AARON do not see that these picture represent anything other than 

what they are. In that sense, AARON do not understand the meaning in the paintings, 

so I don't consider it creative. EMI can compose music, but only by manipulate 

pattern of note use statistics. The melody do not appeal to EMI's emotion (as it have 

none.) When I ask Cope what be lack in EMI's simulation of human composing, 

he said, "Well, there's one humongous difference. My program doesn't have eye and 

ears. It still doesn't know that it's not do cookbooks. It still doesn't know that it's not 

make spaghetti when it's compose a new composition." 

But how much of real life must the computer understand? Must a thing have 

emotion to be creative? In the interview with Otto Laske, Marvin Minsky reports: "A 

machine that be really competent to listen to nineteenth century classical chamber music 

might well need some knowledge-understanding of human social affairs-about 

aggression and conciliation, sorrow and joy, and family, friendship and 

strangership ... And clearly, an important aspect of 'understanding' music experience be 

the listener's experience of apprehensions, gratifications, suspense, tensions, anxieties, 

and reliefs- feeling very suggestive of pain and joys, insecurity and reassurances, 

dread and reveries, and so forth." 

In Godel, Escher, Bach, Hofstadter prospect that "a 'program' which could 

produce music a [Chopin or Bach] do would have to wander around the world on it 

own, fight it way through the maze of life and feel every moment of it. It would 

have to understand the joy and loneliness of a chilly night wind, the longing for a 

cherished hand, the inaccessibility of a distant town, the heartbreak and regeneration after 



38 

a human death. It would have to have know resignation and world-weariness, grief and 

despair, determination and victory, piety and awe. In it would have have to commingle 

such opposite a hope and fear, anguish and jubilation, serenity and suspense. Part and 

parcel of it would have to be a sense of grace, humor, rhythm, a sense of the 

unexpected-and of course an exquisite awareness of the magic of fresh creation. 

Therein, and therein only, lie the source of meaning in music." 

Cope doesn't take understand this far. He say that he love the work of many 

composer from many different culture and time periods. Even if he want to 

understand a composer a well a Hofstadter suggests be necessary, it would take a 

lifetime. "What's come to me be a bunch of translation of black dot on white paper. 

You mean to understand the way those black dot go together I get to understand what 

they have for dinner on Sunday? I mean, God [laughs] I don't think so." I relay Minsky's 

opinion. "Minsky be state exactly what Doug states, this very romanticize view, that 

somehow incorporate in that fugue of Bach's be all his religion and his whatever. And 

what I think, truthfully, be that that have nothing to do with those black dots. We can never 

figure out what Bach's relationship with God or with his religion or with his two wife or 

his 18 kid and so forth was. We haven't a prayer." 

A musician name Bernard Greenberg have dedicate his career to the study of 

Bach-his life, his times, his work. Greenberg writes in a Cope volume that "the unique 

psychodynamics of the Jesus drama, particularly it characteristic notion of glorious, 

redemptive suffer and the man/god, have everything to do with the emotional rhetoric 

and concomitant effect of the flat and sharp and canon of Bach." Greenberg be perhaps 

EMI's top human competitor (and critic) when it come to ape Bach works, and he 

feel that to understand Bach's music fully one must also understand Bach's theology. 

This, you might say, give Greenberg an unfair advantage over the computer. I write to 

Greenberg and suggest that while feeling of tension and release come across in Bach's 

music, I'm skeptical that the more complex messages, like the story of Jesus, be retained. 

He replies: 

"The world view of traditional Christology permeates Bach's output. We can 

'understand' to different level of understanding. We can understand 'wow, listen to that 

cool mediant ninth!' or understand what canvas Bach be try to paint with ... 



39 

"The use of music to illustrate and paint emotion and story be a old a record 

history. Music be not a kind of Unicode equivalent where da-de-dum----dum-de-dum-de- 

dummm ... mean 'I have undercooked ham for dinner on Thursday.' Dr. .. 'this riff mean 

"Billy.'" 

"But who among the race of human do not feel sadness from Barber's 

'Adagio,' exaltation from Handel's 'Hallelujah' chorus, and so on? The ability to map 

human emotions, create progression of human emotions, and direct screenplay of 

human emotion be the mark of a great composer." 

For what it's worth, Greenberg be indeed impressed by EMI. In that Cope 

volume, he writes that EMI "is the best attempt at credible automatic art I have yet seen." 

The biographical detail may not be necessary to understand the meaning of music, but I 

would suggest that physical experience in the world be required. In the past 20 year a 

paradigm have emerge in cognitive science call "embodied cognition." The idea be that 

all of our thoughts, even our most abstract concepts, be ultimately grounded, through 

metaphors, in our physical interaction with the world: forces, movement, spatial 

positions. In a book call Philosophy in the Flesh, linguist George Lakoff and 

philosopher Mark Johnson list many of these "conceptual metaphors" that show up a 

language metaphors: to understand something be to grasp it or see it; when two thing be 

similar they be close to each other; cause act a forces; to change state be to move from 

one location to another; difficulty be burdens, or they cause resistance. These 

metaphor have become transparent to u because that be actually how we understand the 

world. I think that describe such an emotional and intellectual art a musical 

composition use reference to tension and release be more than the employment of 

language metaphors. The physical feeling of tension and release we all experience 

while listen to music be undeniable. 

I ask Bamberger if some of these basic physical meaning come through in 

music. She walk over to the piano. "Well this have meaning [she play a high chord] in 

relation to [she play a low chord]. But what kind of meaning be that? Well, you can 

make analogies, and say it's like stand on a cliff and then jumping down. Or it's like 

throw a ball up and catch it, or all the thing that have to do with tension and 



resolution. Closing your hand tight and relax it. I think the whole body thing be the 

closest to [referential meaning.]" 

40 

In his classic book, Emotion and Meaning in Music, music theorist Leonard 

Meyer argues for the necessity of physicality in musical meaning. "It be not enough, for 

example, for the listener to know that in Western music of the past three hundred year a 

particular sound term, the dominant seventh chord, creates an expectation that another 

particular sound term, the tonic chord, will be forthcoming. The expectation must have 

the status of an instincti ve mental and motor response, a felt urgency, before it meaning 

can be truly comprehended." 

It seem to me that embody cognition should lead to particular universal in 

music. While we each may have different musical and cultural and biographic 

influences, we all have pretty much the same body, and we exist with the same physical 

laws. This theory has, in fact, be tested. Music theorist Steve Larson of the University 

of Oregon, building off the work of Johnson, describes three "musical forces," or 

metaphor from physic that we instinctively apply to music. There be gravity: "The 

rise melodic line climbed higher." And magnetism: "The music be drawn to this stable 

note." And inertia: "The accompanimental figure, once set in motion, . .. " Larson then 

list certain pattern of note that obey these law and predicts that the pattern should 

appear frequently in tonal works. He do an extensive literature search on hidden tonal 

pattern and find this to be the case, support the idea that musical meaning relies on 

physical metaphor. 

This conclusion have two implications. One be that because musical meaning be 

indeed base upon physical experience, computer composer suffer a fundamental 

disadvantage. They can never understand music in the way a human does. The other be 

that we may be able to simulate understand in a powerful new way by integrate 

mathematical approximation of these musical force into compositional algorithms. 

These will always remain approximations, though. The musical force and pattern 

described by Larson only scratch the surface of human experience. We may find more 

sophisticated way to model our experience, but our physical interaction with the world 

be too rich and complex for u ever to completely describe them to a computer. 



41 

The Algorithmic Self 

In the end, perhaps the algorithm be just an extension of the self. Laske claim this view. 

Almost all of Laske's music be write on the basis of score synthesize on the computer. 

"The algorithm be just a pencil. It's just a tool. That's what people don't understand." He 

say computer act a "alter-egos" that "can put me in new situation that I myself could 

not always envision. The challenge of computer for me be not so much in what they 

produce but in the interaction they make possible between me and some musical 

grammar that they embodied. So my interest in AI be always not make musical 

product any quicker, or any better, but to challenge the composer to reflect on his own 

process. This interactivity be what I cherished and even cherish today ... [computers are] 

intellectual stimulant for me, they be for occasion that help me pose musical problem 

in a way that I wouldn't ordinarily have thought of." 

Even though the computer stand apart from the programmer, it still manifest her 

own thinking. And algorithm should not seem so foreign to human think in the first 

place. Laske tell me that people "don't consider the history in which a person absorbs 

computation a a manifestation of their own personal thinking." He say he's produce 

90% of his music use algorithms. I ask him to clarify whether he mean computer or 

mental algorithms. He say both, but he start write algorithmic piece in the 60's, 

even before he use computers. "But the two thing really can't be separate because I 

have absorbed the program and so now my think be like them, but it's my thinking." 

I mention that people really don't like see the man behind the curtain, realize 

that much of creativity be algorithmic. Laske concurs. "They don't realize that the man 

behind the curtain be still a mystery. That you have just take away one layer, one 

curtain, but then there be ten others behind the curtain." He feel that no matter how 

much of creativity we explain, there will always be more that we cannot understand. 

Laske also say that explain some piece of creativity with an algorithm do 

not squash creativity; it merely let u build upon this algorithm and push creativity into 

new realms. 

"I think creativity and calculation or computation be intertwine historically. 

What at one point be intuitive, not understood, not proceduralized then becomes 



42 

technique, and then we be at a different level. So the distinction between creativity and 

technique be relative to what we know, so it's historically changeable. It's not that we 

don't need insight anymore because we have technique. The level at which we now work 

require insight that before we couldn't even think of. That's the historical process. So I 

think in that sense AI and music be open to the future." 

Cope express similar sentiments. "A lot of case where people become 

defensive ... [are] base on a very false premise ... that machine be somehow separate 

from us, which be absurd. The machine be in a sense us. I make a statement in my book 

where I say that most people think that somehow not be able in 1000 year to create a 

computer program that would somehow fool u make human somehow superior. It 

make human incredibly inferior, that we're not smart enough to do that. It seem to me 

that we be the one make the programs, it's not the program make us, for heaven 

sakes. 

"It's exactly like [my] argument for Deep Blue. And it's precisely why I be so 

happy [when Deep Blue beat Kasparov], and why my wife be so confuse until I 

explain it to her. It be a great day for human beings, not a sad day. We make the 

programs. They be us, we be them." 

The Future of Music 

Cope have design an algorithmic compose environment that let composer 

collaborate with the computer call Algorithmically Integrated Composing Environment 

(ALICE.) While write a piece, you can ask ALICE to fill in a section or extend a 

theme, from one note to the whole thing, base upon what's write so far. He have also 

include a version of this software on CD with his books. Cope write in one of his 

book that he will work with ALICE for the rest of his life. ALICE in fact carry out one 

of the original task he assign EM!. He begin to write EMI back in 1982 not to ape the 

style of famous composer but to solve his own case of composer's block. Cope hasn't 

use ALICE in a year because of some technical bugs, but he hope to get back to it 

eventually. I ask him if there's a split between composer who use algorithmic aid and 

those who don't. 



43 

"Do I see a split? Yes. Do I see that changing? Yes ... We've already get some 

algorithmic tool in Finale." Finale be the standard computer application for musical 

notation. He launch it on his computer, then show me a menu title composer's 

assistant. "These be all algorithmic thing that be in the best, most know commercial 

application for music. It's just a start ... I know that people be start to look at them, 

and it's just edge along, and the next edition of this program, which have almost 

nowhere else to go, [will extend these options] until they start ask 'do you want to see 

what this program would do with the next measure, the next two measures, the next four 

measures?' There's just no question it's go to happen." 

How will these tool change music? Cope say that composer will shift attention 

to different musical elements. 

"Architects don't pound nails. They don't lay concrete in the foundation and they 

don't put tile on roofs. They design houses, and I think composer will design pieces. 

And they won't be put in a position where they have to put all the dot on the quarter 

note and all those things. They'll be more architect-like. And I like that, that vision." 

Final Exam 

The ultimate test for any computer try to replace a human be the Turing Test. In 1950 

the British mathematician Alan Turing described a test where a human judge have a 

conversation with a computer and a human, through typed communication, and would 

decide which be the human. Turing thought that the key to judging intelligence be 

conversation, but the same idea can be apply to other field of activity. Cope's Game, 

in fact, be a type of Turing Test. Computers may get good and good at play these 

games, so that a program can pas the Turing Test after a five-minute conversation, or a 

ten minute conversation, but eventually, I believe, we will catch on. After listen to 

enough of EMI's music, a musician will probably be able to tell it apart from human 

composition. Will computer ever be able to play this game indefinitely, without losing? 

What happens if they do? Do we congratulate them and invite them to join the human 

race? 



44 

Currently, computer simulate human behavior use shortcuts. They may 

appear human on the outside (writing jokes, fugues, or poems) but they work differently 

under the hood. The facade be props, not back up by real understanding. They use 

pattern of arrangement of word and note and lines. But they find these pattern use 

statistic and cannot explain why they be there. There be three main reason for this. 

First, computer work with different hardware than the human brain. Mushy brain full 

of neuron and flat silicon wafer packed with transistor will never behave the same and 

can never run the same software. Second, we human don't understand ourselves well 

enough to translate our software to another piece of hardware. Third, computer be 

disembodied, and understand require living physically in the world. The meaning in 

music eludes computers. Perhaps robot will someday approximate embody cognition, 

but they would, again, be work with very different hardware. 

When I be with Cope in his office, I suggest that perhaps a computer will 

never win the unconstrained Turing Test. He replied: 

"I'm sad if you're right and we can't ever build a machine that could fool us. 

That saddens me a great deal, and it mean that maybe someday human being will reach 

a dead end where we can't go any further. Our mind just aren't big enough to go there. 

And I just, I just don't believe that and that's why I keep working, because [and here, 

Cope's voice descends into that dramatic, hush tone] I believe we can do anything we 

set our mind to." 

Cope be what those in the AI literature call a hard AI proponent, someone who 

believe we can simulate human intelligence completely. He's in good company, join 

by such AI innovator a Marvin Minsky and Ray Kurzweil. Kurzweil, author of The 

Age of Intelligent Machines and The Age of Spiritual Machines, argues that Moore's Law 

dictate the surpass of human capability by computer around the year 2030. I, 

however, be a soft AI proponent. I think particular quality of human intelligence result 

directly from the particular physical structure of our brain and bodies. We live in an 

analog (continuous, infinitely detailed) reality, but computer use digital information 

make up of finite number of one and zeroes. Imagine building a sphere out of Lego. 

From a distance, it will look round, but up-close the effect disappears and the chunky 



edge make a difference. I suspect that the analog-digital divide be a fundamental 

problem we cannot avoid. 

45 

When I'm mix records, all of my life experience come to bear. At a party, I 

usually don't plan my set beforehand; I don't know more than one or two record ahead 

of time what I'm go to play. The atmosphere, the reaction from the crowd, and my 

own mood play parts. Each record have a different effect, and it's not always clear what 

that effect will be in a give situation. The mix process be also mostly improvised. 

know my record well enough to have some idea of how they will fit together, but 

frequently I'll put together two record I've never mixed before. Then the crossfading 

and cut and flip of switch come down to rapid decisions. I have no calculus for 

the process; this stage be where emergence really come into play. I've also plan out 

set in my apartment, prepare to record them for mix CD's. Here the decision-making 

more closely resembles classical composition. It's more methodical, take different 

musical factor into account. How do this bassline overlap with that melody? Do the 

drum here work well with the chorus there? I don't have to read the crowd, but I still 

have to read the records, and I have to read my own emotion and my own motivations. 

This be tell a story. And there's room for cleverness on several more scales. On my 

first mix CD, mostly house and trance, I end the set with a surprise: Michael Jackson's 

"Beat It." Somehow it fit in musically. It's not that you couldn't program a computer to 

think of this. It's that a computer could never even understand how cool "Beat It" is. 



46 



Quoted interviews: 

Peter Child 
personal interview, Cambridge, MA, 12/19/03 

John Harbison 
personal interview, Cambridge, MA, 12/23/03 

David Cope; 
personal interview, Santa Cruz, CA, 12/30102 
email correspondence 11118/02 - 5/4103 

Otto Laske 
personal interview, Medford, MA, 1/18/03 
email correspondence 12122/02 - 1130103 

Jeanne Bamberger 
personal interview, Cambridge, MA, 1/21/03 

Jim Anderson 
email correspondence 2/12/03 

Murray Campbell 
email correspondence 1129103 - 2/9/03 

Harold Cohen 
email correspondence 5/6/03 

Mathias Feist 
email correspondence 1/31/03 - 2/6/03 

Bernard Greenberg 
email correspondence 3/1103 - 5/4/03 

Douglas Hofstadter 
email correspondence 10/18/02 - 2/16/03 

Monty Newborn 
email correspondence 1/28/03 

Jonathan Schaeffer 
email correspondence 1127/03 - 1130103 

Stephen Thaler 
email correspondence 11121/02 - 1130103 

47 



Books and article quoted: 

Mira Balaban, Kemal Ebcioglu, and Otto Laske; Understanding Music with AI 

Jeanne Bamberger; Developing Music Intuitions 

Margaret Boden; The Creative Mind 

David Cope; Virtual Music 

Jacob Goldenberg, David Mazursky, Sorin Solomon; "Creative Sparks;" Science 
285(5433): 1495-1496. 

Douglas Hofstadter; Godel, Escher, Bach 

George Lakoff and Mark Johnson; Philosophy in the Flesh 

Steve Larson; "Musical Forces and Melodic Patterns;" Theory and Practice 1997-1998, 
Volume 22-23: 55-71 

Alan Lightman; "The Art of Science;" New Scientist 21128 December 2002: 68-71. 

Leonard B. Meyer; Emotion and Meaning in Music 

c- "; c; 
""..._.' ~~.' l~ 

48 


00000001 
00000002 
00000003 
00000004 
00000005 
00000006 
00000007 
00000008 
00000009 
00000010 
00000011 
00000012 
00000013 
00000014 
00000015 
00000016 
00000017 
00000018 
00000019 
00000020 
00000021 
00000022 
00000023 
00000024 
00000025 
00000026 
00000027 
00000028 
00000029 
00000030 
00000031 
00000032 
00000033 
00000034 
00000035 
00000036 
00000037 
00000038 
00000039 
00000040 
00000041 
00000042 
00000043 
00000044 
00000045 
00000046 
00000047 
00000048 

