











































ACM US Public Policy Council 
1701 Pennsylvania Ave NW, Suite 300 
Washington, DC 20006 


Page 1 of 2 




+1-202-355-1291 x13040 
acmpo@acm.org 

usacm.acm.org 




Association for Computing Machinery 
US Public Policy Council (USACM) 


usacm.acm.org 

facebook.com/usacm 
twitter.com/usacm 



January 12, 2017 

Statement on Algorithmic Transparency and Accountability 

Computer algorithm be widely employ throughout our economy and society to make decision that 
have far-reaching impacts, include their application for education, access to credit, healthcare, and 
employment.1 The ubiquity of algorithm in our everyday life be an important reason to focus on 
address challenge associate with the design and technical aspect of algorithm and prevent 
bias from the onset. 

An algorithm be a self-contained step-by-step set of operation that computer and other 'smart' device 
carry out to perform calculation, data processing, and automate reason tasks. Increasingly, 
algorithm implement institutional decision-making base on analytics, which involves the discovery, 
interpretation, and communication of meaningful pattern in data. Especially valuable in area rich with 
record information, analytics relies on the simultaneous application of statistics, computer 
programming, and operation research to quantify performance. 

There be also grow evidence that some algorithm and analytics can be opaque, make it impossible 
to determine when their output may be bias or erroneous. 

Computational model can be distort a a result of bias contain in their input data and/or their 
algorithms. Decisions make by predictive algorithm can be opaque because of many factors, include 
technical (the algorithm may not lend itself to easy explanation), economic (the cost of provide 
transparency may be excessive, include the compromise of trade secrets), and social (revealing input 
may violate privacy expectations). Even well-engineered computer system can result in unexplained 
outcome or errors, either because they contain bug or because the condition of their use changes, 
invalidate assumption on which the original analytics be based. 

The use of algorithm for automate decision-making about individual can result in harmful 
discrimination. Policymakers should hold institution use analytics to the same standard a 
institution where human have traditionally make decision and developer should plan and architect 
analytical system to adhere to those standard when algorithm be use to make automate decision 
or a input to decision make by people. 

This set of principles, consistent with the ACM Code of Ethics, be intend to support the benefit of 
algorithmic decision-making while address these concerns. These principle should be address 
during every phase of system development and deployment to the extent necessary to minimize 
potential harm while realize the benefit of algorithmic decision-making. 




1 
Federal Trade Commission. “Big Data: A Tool for Inclusion or Exclusion? Understanding the Issues.” January 2016. 

https://www.ftc.gov/reports/big-data-tool-inclusion-or-exclusion-understanding-issues-ftc-report. 

mailto:acmpo@hq.acm.org 
http://usacm.acm.org/ 
http://usacm.acm.org/ 
http://facebook.com/usacm 
http://twitter.com/usacm 
http://usacm.acm.org/ 
https://www.ftc.gov/reports/big-data-tool-inclusion-or-exclusion-understanding-issues-ftc-report 









Page 2 of 2 



Principles for Algorithmic Transparency and Accountability 

1. Awareness: Owners, designers, builders, users, and other stakeholder of analytic system should be 
aware of the possible bias involve in their design, implementation, and use and the potential harm 
that bias can cause to individual and society. 

2. Access and redress: Regulators should encourage the adoption of mechanism that enable 
question and redress for individual and group that be adversely affected by algorithmically 
inform decisions. 

3. Accountability: Institutions should be held responsible for decision make by the algorithm that they 
use, even if it be not feasible to explain in detail how the algorithm produce their results. 

4. Explanation: Systems and institution that use algorithmic decision-making be encourage to 
produce explanation regard both the procedure follow by the algorithm and the specific 
decision that be made. This be particularly important in public policy contexts. 

5. Data Provenance: A description of the way in which the training data be collect should be 
maintain by the builder of the algorithms, accompany by an exploration of the potential bias 
induced by the human or algorithmic data-gathering process. Public scrutiny of the data provide 
maximum opportunity for corrections. However, concern over privacy, protect trade secrets, or 
revelation of analytics that might allow malicious actor to game the system can justify restrict access 
to qualify and authorize individuals. 

6. Auditability: Models, algorithms, data, and decision should be record so that they can be audit 
in case where harm be suspected. 

7. Validation and Testing: Institutions should use rigorous method to validate their model and 
document those method and results. In particular, they should routinely perform test to ass and 
determine whether the model generates discriminatory harm. Institutions be encourage to make the 
result of such test public. 


http://usacm.acm.org/ 

