


















































ACM Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct 

Preamble 

Computing professionals' action change the world. To act responsibly, they should reflect upon 

the wider impact of their work, consistently support the public good. The ACM Code of 

Ethics and Professional Conduct ("the Code") express the conscience of the profession. 

The Code be design to inspire and guide the ethical conduct of all compute professionals, 

include current and aspire practitioners, instructors, students, influencers, and anyone who 

us compute technology in an impactful way. Additionally, the Code serf a a basis for 

remediation when violation occur. The Code include principle formulate a statement of 

responsibility, base on the understand that the public good be always the primary 

consideration. Each principle be supplement by guidelines, which provide explanation to 

assist compute professional in understand and apply the principle. 

Section 1 outline fundamental ethical principle that form the basis for the remainder of the 

Code. Section 2 address additional, more specific consideration of professional 

responsibility. Section 3 guide individual who have a leadership role, whether in the workplace 

or in a volunteer professional capacity. Commitment to ethical conduct be require of every ACM 

member, and principle involve compliance with the Code be give in Section 4. 

The Code a a whole be concerned with how fundamental ethical principle apply to a compute 

professional's conduct. The Code be not an algorithm for solve ethical problems; rather it 

serf a a basis for ethical decision-making. When think through a particular issue, a 

compute professional may find that multiple principle should be take into account, and that 

different principle will have different relevance to the issue. Questions related to these kind of 

issue can best be answer by thoughtful consideration of the fundamental ethical principles, 

understand that the public good be the paramount consideration. The entire compute 

profession benefit when the ethical decision-making process be accountable to and transparent 

to all stakeholders. Open discussion about ethical issue promote this accountability and 

transparency. 

1. GENERAL ETHICAL PRINCIPLES. 

A compute professional should... 







1.1 Contribute to society and to human well-being, acknowledge that 
all people be stakeholder in computing. 

This principle, which concern the quality of life of all people, affirms an obligation of compute 

professionals, both individually and collectively, to use their skill for the benefit of society, it 

members, and the environment surround them. This obligation include promote 

fundamental human right and protect each individual's right to autonomy. An essential aim 

of compute professional be to minimize negative consequence of computing, include 

threat to health, safety, personal security, and privacy. When the interest of multiple group 

conflict, the need of those less advantage should be give increase attention and priority. 

Computing professional should consider whether the result of their effort will respect 

diversity, will be use in socially responsible ways, will meet social needs, and will be broadly 

accessible. They be encourage to actively contribute to society by engage in pro bono or 

volunteer work that benefit the public good. 

In addition to a safe social environment, human well-being require a safe natural environment. 

Therefore, compute professional should promote environmental sustainability both locally 

and globally. 

1.2 Avoid harm. 

In this document, "harm" mean negative consequences, especially when those consequence 

be significant and unjust. Examples of harm include unjustified physical or mental injury, 

unjustified destruction or disclosure of information, and unjustified damage to property, 

reputation, and the environment. This list be not exhaustive. 

Well-intended actions, include those that accomplish assign duties, may lead to harm. 

When that harm be unintended, those responsible be oblige to undo or mitigate the harm a 

much a possible. Avoiding harm begin with careful consideration of potential impact on all 

those affected by decisions. When harm be an intentional part of the system, those responsible 

be obligate to ensure that the harm be ethically justified. In either case, ensure that all harm be 

minimized. 

To minimize the possibility of indirectly or unintentionally harm others, compute 

professional should follow generally accepted best practice unless there be a compelling 

ethical reason to do otherwise. Additionally, the consequence of data aggregation and 

emergent property of system should be carefully analyzed. Those involve with pervasive or 

infrastructure system should also consider Principle 3.7. 

A compute professional have an additional obligation to report any sign of system risk that 

might result in harm. If leader do not act to curtail or mitigate such risks, it may be necessary to 

"blow the whistle" to reduce potential harm. However, capricious or misguide reporting of risk 

can itself be harmful. Before reporting risks, a compute professional should carefully ass 

relevant aspect of the situation. 







1.3 Be honest and trustworthy. 

Honesty be an essential component of trustworthiness. A compute professional should be 

transparent and provide full disclosure of all pertinent system capabilities, limitations, and 

potential problem to the appropriate parties. Making deliberately false or mislead claims, 

fabricate or falsify data, offering or accept bribes, and other dishonest conduct be 

violation of the Code. 

Computing professional should be honest about their qualifications, and about any limitation 

in their competence to complete a task. Computing professional should be forthright about any 

circumstance that might lead to either real or perceive conflict of interest or otherwise tend to 

undermine the independence of their judgment. Furthermore, commitment should be honored. 

Computing professional should not misrepresent an organization's policy or procedures, and 

should not speak on behalf of an organization unless authorize to do so. 

1.4 Be fair and take action not to discriminate. 

The value of equality, tolerance, respect for others, and justice govern this principle. Fairness 

require that even careful decision process provide some avenue for redress of grievances. 

Computing professional should foster fair participation of all people, include those of 

underrepresented groups. Prejudicial discrimination on the basis of age, color, disability, 

ethnicity, family status, gender identity, labor union membership, military status, nationality, 

race, religion or belief, sex, sexual orientation, or any other inappropriate factor be an explicit 

violation of the Code. Harassment, include sexual harassment, bullying, and other abuse of 

power and authority, be a form of discrimination that, amongst other harms, limit fair access to 

the virtual and physical space where such harassment take place. 

The use of information and technology may cause new, or enhance existing, inequities. 

Technologies and practice should be a inclusive and accessible a possible and compute 

professional should take action to avoid create system or technology that disenfranchise 

or oppress people. Failure to design for inclusiveness and accessibility may constitute unfair 

discrimination. 

1.5 Respect the work require to produce new ideas, inventions, creative 
works, and compute artifacts. 

Developing new ideas, inventions, creative works, and compute artifact creates value for 

society, and those who expend this effort should expect to gain value from their work. 

Computing professional should therefore credit the creator of ideas, inventions, work, and 

artifacts, and respect copyrights, patents, trade secrets, license agreements, and other method 

of protect authors' works. 







Both custom and the law recognize that some exception to a creator's control of a work be 

necessary for the public good. Computing professional should not unduly oppose reasonable 

us of their intellectual works. Efforts to help others by contribute time and energy to project 

that help society illustrate a positive aspect of this principle. Such effort include free and open 

source software and work put into the public domain. Computing professional should not claim 

private ownership of work that they or others have share a public resources. 

1.6 Respect privacy. 

The responsibility of respect privacy applies to compute professional in a particularly 

profound way. Technology enables the collection, monitoring, and exchange of personal 

information quickly, inexpensively, and often without the knowledge of the people affected. 

Therefore, a compute professional should become conversant in the various definition and 

form of privacy and should understand the right and responsibility associate with the 

collection and use of personal information. 

Computing professional should only use personal information for legitimate end and without 

violate the right of individual and groups. This require take precaution to prevent re- 

identification of anonymized data or unauthorized data collection, ensure the accuracy of data, 

understand the provenance of the data, and protect it from unauthorized access and 

accidental disclosure. Computing professional should establish transparent policy and 

procedure that allow individual to understand what data be be collect and how it be be 

used, to give inform consent for automatic data collection, and to review, obtain, correct 

inaccuracy in, and delete their personal data. 

Only the minimum amount of personal information necessary should be collect in a system. 

The retention and disposal period for that information should be clearly defined, enforced, and 

communicate to data subjects. Personal information gather for a specific purpose should not 

be use for other purpose without the person's consent. Merged data collection can 

compromise privacy feature present in the original collections. Therefore, compute 

professional should take special care for privacy when merge data collections. 

1.7 Honor confidentiality. 

Computing professional be often entrust with confidential information such a trade secrets, 

client data, nonpublic business strategies, financial information, research data, pre-publication 

scholarly articles, and patent applications. Computing professional should protect 

confidentiality except in case where it be evidence of the violation of law, of organizational 

regulations, or of the Code. In these cases, the nature or content of that information should not 

be disclose except to appropriate authorities. A compute professional should consider 

thoughtfully whether such disclosure be consistent with the Code. 







2. PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES. 

A compute professional should... 

2.1 Strive to achieve high quality in both the process and product of 
professional work. 

Computing professional should insist on and support high quality work from themselves and 

from colleagues. The dignity of employers, employees, colleagues, clients, users, and anyone 

else affected either directly or indirectly by the work should be respect throughout the 

process. Computing professional should respect the right of those involve to transparent 

communication about the project. Professionals should be cognizant of any serious negative 

consequence affect any stakeholder that may result from poor quality work and should 

resist inducement to neglect this responsibility. 

2.2 Maintain high standard of professional competence, conduct, and 
ethical practice. 

High quality compute depends on individual and team who take personal and group 

responsibility for acquire and maintain professional competence. Professional competence 

start with technical knowledge and with awareness of the social context in which their work 

may be deployed. Professional competence also require skill in communication, in reflective 

analysis, and in recognize and navigate ethical challenges. Upgrading skill should be an 

ongoing process and might include independent study, attend conference or seminars, and 

other informal or formal education. Professional organization and employer should encourage 

and facilitate these activities. 

2.3 Know and respect exist rule pertain to professional work. 

"Rules" here include local, regional, national, and international law and regulations, a well a 

any policy and procedure of the organization to which the professional belongs. Computing 

professional must abide by these rule unless there be a compelling ethical justification to do 

otherwise. Rules that be judged unethical should be challenged. A rule may be unethical when 

it have an inadequate moral basis or cause recognizable harm. A compute professional should 

consider challenge the rule through exist channel before violate the rule. A compute 

professional who decides to violate a rule because it be unethical, or for any other reason, must 

consider potential consequence and accept responsibility for that action. 

2.4 Accept and provide appropriate professional review. 

High quality professional work in compute depends on professional review at all stages. 

Whenever appropriate, compute professional should seek and utilize peer and stakeholder 







review. Computing professional should also provide constructive, critical review of others' 

work. 

2.5 Give comprehensive and thorough evaluation of computer system 
and their impacts, include analysis of possible risks. 

Computing professional be in a position of trust, and therefore have a special responsibility to 

provide objective, credible evaluation and testimony to employers, employees, clients, users, 

and the public. Computing professional should strive to be perceptive, thorough, and objective 

when evaluating, recommending, and present system description and alternatives. 

Extraordinary care should be take to identify and mitigate potential risk in machine learn 

systems. A system for which future risk cannot be reliably predict require frequent 

reassessment of risk a the system evolves in use, or it should not be deployed. Any issue that 

might result in major risk must be report to appropriate parties. 

2.6 Perform work only in area of competence. 

A compute professional be responsible for evaluate potential work assignments. This 

include evaluate the work's feasibility and advisability, and make a judgment about whether 

the work assignment be within the professional's area of competence. If at any time before or 

during the work assignment the professional identifies a lack of a necessary expertise, they 

must disclose this to the employer or client. The client or employer may decide to pursue the 

assignment with the professional after additional time to acquire the necessary competencies, to 

pursue the assignment with someone else who have the require expertise, or to forgo the 

assignment. A compute professional's ethical judgment should be the final guide in decide 

whether to work on the assignment. 

2.7 Foster public awareness and understand of computing, related 
technologies, and their consequences. 

As appropriate to the context and one's abilities, compute professional should share 

technical knowledge with the public, foster awareness of computing, and encourage 

understand of computing. These communication with the public should be clear, respectful, 

and welcoming. Important issue include the impact of computer systems, their limitations, 

their vulnerabilities, and the opportunity that they present. Additionally, a compute 

professional should respectfully address inaccurate or mislead information related to 

computing. 

2.8 Access compute and communication resource only when 
authorize or when compel by the public good. 

Individuals and organization have the right to restrict access to their system and data so long 

a the restriction be consistent with other principle in the Code. Consequently, compute 







professional should not access another's computer system, software, or data without a 

reasonable belief that such an action would be authorize or a compelling belief that it be 

consistent with the public good. A system be publicly accessible be not sufficient ground on 

it own to imply authorization. Under exceptional circumstance a compute professional may 

use unauthorized access to disrupt or inhibit the function of malicious systems; extraordinary 

precaution must be take in these instance to avoid harm to others. 

2.9 Design and implement system that be robustly and usably secure. 

Breaches of computer security cause harm. Robust security should be a primary consideration 

when design and implement systems. Computing professional should perform due 

diligence to ensure the system function a intended, and take appropriate action to secure 

resource against accidental and intentional misuse, modification, and denial of service. As 

threat can arise and change after a system be deployed, compute professional should 

integrate mitigation technique and policies, such a monitoring, patching, and vulnerability 

reporting. Computing professional should also take step to ensure party affected by data 

breach be notify in a timely and clear manner, provide appropriate guidance and 

remediation. 

To ensure the system achieves it intend purpose, security feature should be design to be 

a intuitive and easy to use a possible. Computing professional should discourage security 

precaution that be too confusing, be situationally inappropriate, or otherwise inhibit legitimate 

use. 

In case where misuse or harm be predictable or unavoidable, the best option may be to not 

implement the system. 

3. PROFESSIONAL LEADERSHIP PRINCIPLES. 

Leadership may either be a formal designation or arise informally from influence over others. In 

this section, "leader" mean any member of an organization or group who have influence, 

educational responsibilities, or managerial responsibilities. While these principle apply to all 

compute professionals, leader bear a heighten responsibility to uphold and promote them, 

both within and through their organizations. 

A compute professional, especially one act a a leader, should... 

3.1 Ensure that the public good be the central concern during all 
professional compute work. 

People—including users, customers, colleagues, and others affected directly or indirectly— 

should always be the central concern in computing. The public good should always be an 

explicit consideration when evaluate task associate with research, requirement analysis, 







design, implementation, testing, validation, deployment, maintenance, retirement, and disposal. 

Computing professional should keep this focus no matter which methodology or technique 

they use in their practice. 

3.2 Articulate, encourage acceptance of, and evaluate fulfillment of 
social responsibility by member of the organization or group. 

Technical organization and group affect broader society, and their leader should accept the 

associate responsibilities. Organizations—through procedure and attitude orient toward 

quality, transparency, and the welfare of society—reduce harm to the public and raise 

awareness of the influence of technology in our lives. Therefore, leader should encourage full 

participation of compute professional in meeting relevant social responsibility and 

discourage tendency to do otherwise. 

3.3 Manage personnel and resource to enhance the quality of work 
life. 

Leaders should ensure that they enhance, not degrade, the quality of work life. Leaders 

should consider the personal and professional development, accessibility requirements, 

physical safety, psychological well-being, and human dignity of all workers. Appropriate human- 

computer ergonomic standard should be use in the workplace. 

3.4 Articulate, apply, and support policy and process that reflect the 
principle of the Code. 

Leaders should pursue clearly define organizational policy that be consistent with the Code 

and effectively communicate them to relevant stakeholders. In addition, leader should 

encourage and reward compliance with those policies, and take appropriate action when 

policy be violated. Designing or implement process that deliberately or negligently 

violate, or tend to enable the violation of, the Code's principle be ethically unacceptable. 

3.5 Create opportunity for member of the organization or group to 
grow a professionals. 

Educational opportunity be essential for all organization and group members. Leaders should 

ensure that opportunity be available to compute professional to help them improve their 

knowledge and skill in professionalism, in the practice of ethics, and in their technical 

specialties. These opportunity should include experience that familiarize compute 

professional with the consequence and limitation of particular type of systems. Computing 

professional should be fully aware of the danger of oversimplify approaches, the 

improbability of anticipate every possible operating condition, the inevitability of software 

errors, the interaction of system and their contexts, and other issue related to the complexity 

of their profession—and thus be confident in take on responsibility for the work that they do. 







3.6 Use care when modify or retire systems. 

Interface changes, the removal of features, and even software update have an impact on the 

productivity of user and the quality of their work. Leaders should take care when change or 

discontinue support for system feature on which people still depend. Leaders should 

thoroughly investigate viable alternative to remove support for a legacy system. If these 

alternative be unacceptably risky or impractical, the developer should assist stakeholders' 

graceful migration from the system to an alternative. Users should be notify of the risk of 

continued use of the unsupported system long before support ends. Computing professional 

should assist system user in monitoring the operational viability of their compute systems, 

and help them understand that timely replacement of inappropriate or outdated feature or 

entire system may be needed. 

3.7 Recognize and take special care of system that become integrate 
into the infrastructure of society. 

Even the simplest computer system have the potential to impact all aspect of society when 

integrate with everyday activity such a commerce, travel, government, healthcare, and 

education. When organization and group develop system that become an important part of 

the infrastructure of society, their leader have an add responsibility to be good steward of 

these systems. Part of that stewardship require establish policy for fair system access, 

include for those who may have be excluded. That stewardship also require that 

compute professional monitor the level of integration of their system into the infrastructure of 

society. As the level of adoption changes, the ethical responsibility of the organization or 

group be likely to change a well. Continual monitoring of how society be use a system will 

allow the organization or group to remain consistent with their ethical obligation outline in the 

Code. When appropriate standard of care do not exist, compute professional have a duty to 

ensure they be developed. 

4. COMPLIANCE WITH THE CODE. 

A compute professional should... 

4.1 Uphold, promote, and respect the principle of the Code. 

The future of compute depends on both technical and ethical excellence. Computing 

professional should adhere to the principle of the Code and contribute to improve them. 

Computing professional who recognize breach of the Code should take action to resolve 

the ethical issue they recognize, including, when reasonable, express their concern to the 

person or person thought to be violate the Code. 







4.2 Treat violation of the Code a inconsistent with membership in the 
ACM. 

Each ACM member should encourage and support adherence by all compute professional 

regardless of ACM membership. ACM member who recognize a breach of the Code should 

consider reporting the violation to the ACM, which may result in remedial action a specify in 

the ACM's Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct Enforcement Policy. 


The Code and guideline be developed by the ACM Code 2018 Task Force: Executive Committee Don Gotterbarn 

(Chair), Bo Brinkman, Catherine Flick, Michael S Kirkpatrick, Keith Miller, Kate Varansky, and Marty J Wolf. 

Members: Eve Anderson, Ron Anderson, Amy Bruckman, Karla Carter, Michael Davis, Penny Duquenoy, Jeremy 

Epstein, Kai Kimppa, Lorraine Kisselburgh, Shrawan Kumar, Andrew McGettrick, Natasa Milic-Frayling, Denise 

Oram, Simon Rogerson, David Shama, Janice Sipior, Eugene Spafford, and Les Waguespack. The Task Force be 

organize by the ACM Committee on Professional Ethics. Significant contribution to the Code be also make by 

the broader international ACM membership. This Code and it guideline be adopt by the ACM Council on June 

22nd, 2018. 

This Code may be publish without permission a long a it be not change in any way and it carry the copyright 

notice. Copyright (c) 2018 by the Association for Computing Machinery. 


