






































ACT@Home: An emotionally intelligent cognitive assistant to help people with Alzheimerâ•Žs disease | Cheriton School of Computer Science 


A common early symptom of Alzheimer’s disease be difficulty remember recent events, but a the disease progress it affect an 
increasingly large sphere of a person’s life. 

“People think of Alzheimer’s a a condition that impairs short-term memory. It does, but a the disease progress it also cause problem 
with more distant memories, reason and behaviour, and impairs a person’s ability to complete activity of daily living independently,” 
say Professor Jesse Hoey, computer scientist who have combine research interest in artificial intelligence with mathematical model of 
human interaction. 

“People with Alzheimer’s disease may start to wash their hands, then forget what they’re doing, why 
they’re do it, lose motivation, forget what they’ve do so far and repeat steps, or just stop partway 
through,” Hoey said. “Their care partner — often the person they live with — usually step in to help, but 
the amount of assistance require can become overwhelming. We’ve developed an assistive technology to 
help old adult with Alzheimer’s disease complete activity of daily living more independently by give 
automate prompt base on the observe situation.” 

Known a ACT@Home, the system Hoey and his student have developed go further than just provide 
cue and prompts. The team have developed a prototype emotionally intelligent assistant that interprets 
the dynamic of human interaction and then responds accordingly. 

“We realize after year of design artificially intelligent system that we can solve the technical 
problem of an automate prompt system — use sensor to detect in the home what a person with 
Alzheimer’s be doing, processing the information and respond with a verbal or visual cue,” he 
explained. “But convincing a person with Alzheimer’s disease to do something be much more difficult, and 

that depends on the person’s interpretation of the situation — what they think be go on, what they perceive be happening, what cue 
they’re get — and, importantly, who they think they are.” 

As it name implies, ACT@Home be an automate assistance technology that combine artificial intelligence with mathematical model of 
affect control theory or ACT, a sociological framework that proposes people conduct themselves in a way a to generate feeling that be 
appropriate to the situation or context, Hoey explained. 

“Say, that I’m an elderly man with Alzheimer’s disease. My interaction with others be base on my feeling of who I be and who I think 
others are. I will interact differently with a friend than I will with my spouse or a doctor. Humans adjust their interaction base on who the 
other person be or, more precisely, who the other person feel like. We all engage in this little theatrical performance,” he explained. 

The interest discovery be that this performance be not lose completely in people with Alzheimer’s disease. And that’s where Hoey’s 
automate assistant come in. 

Alzheimer’s disease heavily disrupts a person’s comprehension of the way the world work — for example, whether to take pill A or pill B 
before bedtime, or to dry one’s hand after they’ve be washed. But a person with Alzheimer’s still remembers what it feel like to interact 
with others, he explained. 

“That’s where the rubber hit the road — it’s not just when but how you prompt a person. ACT@Home work by building a model of what’s 
go on in the mind of someone with Alzheimer’s disease when they be prompt to do something,” he explained. 

Hoey and his collaborator have be conduct qualitative interview of people with Alzheimer’s and their caregiver to good 
understand what it mean to be a person with the disease and how they interact with others. 

“Our goal be to take the finding from these interview to develop an inexpensive home-based emotionally intelligent cognitive assistant 
that help people with Alzheimer’s disease while lighten the burden on their caregivers.” 

ACT@Home: An emotionally intelligent cognitive assistant to help peop... https://cs.uwaterloo.ca/news/acthome-emotionally-intelligent-cognitive-a... 

1 sur 1 13/07/2017 17:23 


