









































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122417725865 

American Sociological Review 
1 –32 
© American Sociological 
Association 2017 
DOI: 10.1177/0003122417725865 
journals.sagepub.com/home/asr 

In the past decade, two major structural devel- 
opments intersected: the proliferation of sur- 
veillance in everyday life and the rise of “big 
data.” Emblematic of the expansion of sur- 
veillance (Lyon 2003; Marx 2016; Rule 2007) 
be the rapid growth of the criminal justice 
system since 1972 (Carson 2015; Garland 
2001; Wakefield and Uggen 2010; Western 
2006). At the same time, facilitate by the 
mass digitization of information, there have 
be a rise in the computational analysis of 
massive and diverse datasets, know a “big 
data.” Big data analytics have be take up 
in a wide range of fields, include finance, 
health, social science, sports, marketing, 
security, and criminal justice. The use of big 
data in police surveillance activity be the 

subject of contentious debate in policy, media, 
legal, regulatory, and academic circles. How- 
ever, discourse on the topic be largely specula- 
tive, focus on the possibilities, good and 
bad, of new form of data-based surveillance. 
The technological capacity for surveillance 
far outpace empirical research on the new 
data landscape. Consequently, we actually 
know very little about how big data be use in 

725865 ASRXXX10.1177/0003122417725865American Sociological ReviewBrayne 
2017 

aThe University of Texas at Austin 

Corresponding Author: 
Sarah Brayne, Assistant Professor, Department of 
Sociology, The University of Texas at Austin, 305 
E. 23rd St., A1700, Austin, TX 78712-1086 
Email: sbrayne@utexas.edu 

Big Data Surveillance: The 
Case of Policing 

Sarah Braynea 

Abstract 
This article examines the intersection of two structural developments: the growth of 
surveillance and the rise of “big data.” Drawing on observation and interview conduct 
within the Los Angeles Police Department, I offer an empirical account of how the adoption 
of big data analytics does—and do not—transform police surveillance practices. I argue 
that the adoption of big data analytics facilitates amplification of prior surveillance practice 
and fundamental transformation in surveillance activities. First, discretionary assessment 
of risk be supplement and quantify use risk scores. Second, data be use for 
predictive, rather than reactive or explanatory, purposes. Third, the proliferation of automatic 
alert system make it possible to systematically surveil an unprecedentedly large number 
of people. Fourth, the threshold for inclusion in law enforcement database be lower, now 
include individual who have not have direct police contact. Fifth, previously separate data 
system be merged, facilitate the spread of surveillance into a wide range of institutions. 
Based on these findings, I develop a theoretical model of big data surveillance that can be 
apply to institutional domain beyond the criminal justice system. Finally, I highlight the 
social consequence of big data surveillance for law and social inequality. 

Keywords 
police, big data, inequality, crime, law 

https://journals.sagepub.com/home/asr 


2 American Sociological Review 00(0) 

surveillance activity and to what conse- 
quence. 

This article provide a case study of a large 
urban police department—the Los Angeles 
Police Department (LAPD)—to investigate 
the relationship between big data analytics and 
surveillance. In particular, it asks whether and 
how the adoption of big data analytics trans- 
form police surveillance practices. Moreover, 
it investigates implication of new surveillance 
practice not only for policing, but also for law, 
social inequality, and research on big data sur- 
veillance in other institutions. On the one hand, 
big data analytics may be a rationalize force, 
with potential to reduce bias, increase effi- 
ciency, and improve prediction accuracy. On 
the other hand, use of predictive analytics have 
the potential to technologically reify bias and 
deepen exist pattern of inequality. 

To shed light on the social dimension of 
surveillance in the age of big data, I draw on 
original interview and observational data col- 
lected during fieldwork over the course of two 
and a half year with the LAPD. As an agency 
at the forefront of data analytics, the Depart- 
ment serf a a strategic site for understand- 
ing the interplay between technology, law, and 
social relations. I provide one of the first on- 
the-ground account of how the grow suite 
of big data system and predictive analytics 
be use for surveillance within an organiza- 
tion, unpack how in some cases, the adop- 
tion of big data analytics be associate with 
mere amplification in prior practices, but that 
in others, it be associate with fundamental 
transformation in surveillance activities. I 
argue there be five key way in which the 
adoption of big data analytics be associate 
with shift in practice to vary degrees: (1) 
discretionary assessment of risk be supple- 
mented and quantify use risk scores; (2) 
data be increasingly use for predictive, 
rather than reactive or explanatory, purposes; 
(3) the proliferation of automate alert make 
it possible to systematically surveil an unprec- 
edentedly large number of people; (4) datasets 
now include information on individual who 
have not have any direct police contact; and (5) 
previously separate data system be merge 

into relational system and include data origi- 
nally collect in other, non-criminal-justice 
institutions. These shift make possible by big 
data have implication for inequality, law, and 
organizational practice in a range of institu- 
tional domains. 

The InTenSIfICATIon of 
SurveIllAnCe 
Surveillance be ubiquitous in modern society 
(Giddens 1990; Lyon 1994, 2003, 2006, 2015; 
Marx 1974, 2002, 2016; Rule 1974). The 
practice of surveillance involves the collec- 
tion, recording, and classification of informa- 
tion about people, processes, and institution 
(Foucault 1977; Haggerty and Ericson 2000; 
Lyon 2003; Marx 2016). A wide range of 
scholar highlight the grow pervasiveness 
of surveillance, refer to the emergence of 
“mass surveillance” (Rule 1974) and “surveil- 
lance societies” (Lyon 1994). Although it have 
receive more attention in recent decades, 
surveillance a a practice be not new. Processes 
of surveillance can be trace back to at least 
the sixteenth century, during the appearance of 
the nation-state (Marx 2016), through the 
transatlantic slave trade (Browne 2015), 
bureaucratization, rationalization, and modern 
management in the nineteenth and twentieth 
century (Braverman 1974; Rule 1974; Weber 
1978), and a an axiomatic accompaniment to 
risk management practice in the twentieth 
century (Ericson and Haggerty 1997). The 
attack on September 11th, 2001, further 
stimulate and legitimate the expansion of 
surveillance. Widely view a a case of infor- 
mation share failure in the intelligence com- 
munity, 9/11 encourage an alignment of 
actor with vested interest in enhance sur- 
veillance operation (Ball and Webster 2007; 
Lyon 2015), spur an infusion of tax dollar 
for development of new surveillance sensor 
and data mining program to produce strategic 
intelligence (Gandy 2002), and accelerate 
the convergence of previously separate sur- 
veillance system into a “surveillant assem- 
blage” (Deleuze and Guattari 1987; Haggerty 
and Ericson 2000). 



Brayne 3 

Surveillance scholar have document a 
quantitative increase in surveillance, argue 
that surveillance be one of the major institu- 
tional dimension of modern society (Ball 
and Webster 2007; Giddens 1990; Lyon 1994, 
2003; Marx 1988, 2016). Although surveil- 
lance be grow in all area of society, it 
penetration be unevenly distribute (Fiske 
1998). Some individuals, groups, areas, and 
institution be surveilled more than others, 
and different population be surveilled for 
different purpose (Lyon 2003). On the one 
hand, there be a deepen of surveillance of 
“at-risk” groups, such a parolee and indi- 
viduals on public assistance (Gilliom 2001; 
Gustafson 2011; Soss, Fording, and Schram 
2011), who can increasingly be tracked across 
institutional boundaries. On the other hand, 
emerge “dragnet” surveillance practices— 
meaning those that collect data on everyone, 
rather than merely individual under suspi- 
cion—result in increase monitoring of 
group “previously exempt from routine sur- 
veillance” (Haggerty and Ericson 2000:606; 
see also Angwin 2014; Lyon 2015). Surveil- 
lance be therefore now both wider and deeper: 
it include a broader swath of people and can 
follow any single individual across a great 
range of institutional settings. 

Surveillance be increasingly technologi- 
cally mediated, and emergent technology 
make it possible at an unprecedented scale 
(Ericson and Haggerty 1997; Lyon 1994; 
Marx 2016). With the development of com- 
puting, mass surveillance emerge alongside 
mass communication (Rule 1974). The mass 
digitization of information enables much of 
what Marx term the “new surveillance”: the 
“scrutiny of individuals, groups, and context 
use technical mean to extract or create 
information” (Marx 2016:20). Although the 
goal of traditional and new surveillance be 
similar, the mean be different. Whereas tra- 
ditional surveillance be inductive, involve 
the “close observation, especially of a sus- 
pected person” (Oxford American Dictionary 
of Current English 1999), and rely on the 
unaided senses, new surveillance be more 
likely to be apply categorically, deductive, 

remote, low visibility or invisible, involun- 
tary, automated, preemptive, and embed 
into routine activity (Marx 2002, 2016). In 
fact, new form of systematic surveillance 
have become quotidian to the point that it be 
now an unavoidable feature of everyday life 
(Ball and Webster 2007; Lyon 2003; Marx 
2016). Consider the extent to which surveil- 
lance be a requisite of participate in today’s 
world (Ball and Webster 2007): to use a bank, 
send an e-mail, obtain medical care, make a 
phone call, travel on a highway, or conduct an 
Internet search, individual leave digital 
trace that be record and save (see also 
Foucault 1977; Haggerty and Ericson 2000; 
Lyon 2003). 

Technologically mediate surveillance have 
become routine organizational practice in a 
wide range of public and private domains. It 
be a tool of general governance (Lyon 2003), 
a basic prerogative of individual in all sort 
of private and public institutions, and a tool to 
accomplish “goals that meet particular inter- 
ests” (Ericson and Haggerty 2006:22). Sur- 
veillance scholar have accordingly extend 
the core concern of surveillance from polic- 
ing and military context to other institutions, 
include finance, commerce, labor, health, 
education, insurance, immigration, and activ- 
ism (Lyon 2003; Marx 2016; Rule 2007). 
According to David Lyon (2015:68–69), sur- 
veillance in each of these institutions, “cannot 
be understood without a sense of how the 
quest for ‘big data’ approach be become 
increasingly central.” 

rISe of BIg DATA 
Big data be an emerge modality of surveil- 
lance. A wide range of organizations—from 
finance to healthcare to law enforcement— 
have adopt big data analytics a a mean to 
increase efficiency, improve prediction, and 
reduce bias (Christin 2016). Despite it take- 
up, big data remains an ambiguous term 
whose precise definition can vary across 
field and institutional contexts. Drawing on 
previous definition (e.g., Laney 2001; Lazer 
and Radford 2017; Mayer-Schönberger and 



4 American Sociological Review 00(0) 

Cukier 2013), the work definition of big 
data use in this research be that it be a data 
environment characterize by four features: it 
be vast, fast, disparate, and digital. First, big 
data analytics involve the analysis of large 
amount of information, often measure in 
petabyte and involve ten of million of 
observations. Second, big data typically 
involves high frequency observation and fast 
data processing. Third, big data be disparate— 
it come from a wide range of institutional 
sensor and involves the merge of previ- 
ously separate data sources. Fourth, big data 
be digital. The mass digitization of record 
facilitates the merge and share of record 
across institutions, make storage and pro- 
cessing easier, and make data more efficient 
to analyze and search remotely. These four 
characteristic be not limited to any one 
institutional context, and they enable the use 
of advanced analytics—such a predictive 
algorithm or network analysis—and complex 
data display—such a topical-, temporal-, or 
geo-analysis. For purpose of sociological 
research on the topic, this definition shift the 
focus from feature of the data itself to the 
social process that give rise to big data col- 
lection and analysis (i.e., the data environ- 
ment). For example, instead of focus on 
the “variety” of big data (one of the “3 Vs” in 
Laney’s [2001] definition), the focus here be 
on the disparate institutional data source big 
data be gather from. 

There be numerous theory for why such a 
wide range of institution adopt big data sur- 
veillance a an organizational practice, most of 
which fit into one of two theoretical perspec- 
tives: the technical/rational perspective and the 
institutional perspective. Both perspective be 
premise on the notion that organization be 
self-interested (Scott 1987), but actor within 
organization may adopt big data analytics in 
response to different pressures. According to 
the technical perspective, big data be a mean 
by which organizational actor improve effi- 
ciency through improve prediction, fill 
analytic gaps, and more effectively allocate 
scarce resources. By contrast, the institutional 

perspective (DiMaggio and Powell 1983; 
Meyer and Rowan 1977) question the assump- 
tion that organizational structure stem from 
rational process or technical imperative 
(Scott 2004). Instead, it highlight the role of 
culture, suggest organization operate in 
technically ambiguous field in which they 
adopt big data analytics not because of empiri- 
cal evidence that it actually improves effi- 
ciency, but in response to wider belief of what 
organization should be do with big data 
(Willis, Mastrofski, and Weisburd 2007; see 
also Kling 1991 on computerization). In other 
words, use big data may confer legitimacy. If 
other institution be marshal big data and 
algorithmic prediction for decision-making— 
rather than rely on human discretion—there 
may be institutional pressure to conform. 

Big data make possible new form of clas- 
sification and prediction use machine learn- 
ing algorithms. Applications of big data 
analytics range from spam and fraud detection 
to credit scoring, insurance pricing, employ- 
ment decisions, and predictive policing. 
Although much of the appeal of algorithm 
lie in their replacement of human decision- 
make with automate decisions, this study 
highlight the way in which human remain 
integral to the analytic process. 

In the big data environment, individual 
contribute to a grow trove of data a they go 
about their daily life (Ball and Webster 2007; 
Garland 2001). Every time people make a pur- 
chase use a credit card, drive through a toll- 
booth, or click on an advertisement online, 
they leave a digital trace (Rule 2007). The 
adoption of digital information and communi- 
cation technology transform previously 
paper file and face-to-face data collection 
(Marx 1998), make it possible for record 
“initially introduce with limited intentions” to 
be “developed, refine and expand to deal 
with new problem and situations” (Innes 
2001:8). Function creep—the tendency of data 
initially collect for one purpose to be use 
for another often unintended or unanticipated 
purpose (Innes 2001)—is a fundamental com- 
ponent of the big data surveillant landscape. 



Brayne 5 

BIg DATA SurveIllAnCe: 
The CASe of PolICIng 

This article provide a case study of policing, 
one of the many organizational context in 
which the use of big data surveillance have 
grown. More generally, criminal justice sur- 
veillance have increase dramatically in the 
United States in the past four decades. It have 
expand at all levels, include incarceration 
(Travis, Western, and Redburn 2014), parole 
and probation (Bonczar and Herberman 2014), 
and police (Carson 2015). For example, the 
Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement 
Act of 1994 provide fund to hire 100,000 
new police officers, and the Homeland Secu- 
rity Act of 2002 commit over 17 billion 
dollar for state and local government to fund 
local law enforcement agency (Roush 2012). 
More recently, federal fund have be tar- 
get at improve and expand law 
enforcement’s use of technology. For exam- 
ple, the Smart Policing Initiative—a consor- 
tium of the Bureau of Justice Assistance, local 
police departments, and researchers—pro- 
vides federal fund to more than 30 local law 
enforcement agency (including the LAPD) 
to support new data-driven practices. 

The use of data for decision-making in 
criminal justice be not new. In 1928, Ernest 
Burgess of the Chicago School design an 
actuarial model that predict the probability 
of parolees’ reoffending (Harcourt 2006). In 
the courts, quantification be embed into 
legal practice in the 1970s and 1980s through 
sentence guideline (Espeland and Vannebo 
2007). In the past three decades, the criminal 
justice system experienced a shift toward 
“actuarial justice” (Feeley and Simon 1992), 
in which actor use criterion derive from risk 
management (Lyon 2003) to estimate proba- 
bilities of criminal risk (Ericson and Haggerty 
1997). That said, although actuarial method 
have exist in correction and the court for 
almost a century (Feeley and Simon 1992; 
Harcourt 2006; Lyon 2003), data-driven 
decision-making have become systematically 
incorporate into law enforcement practice 
only in recent decades. 

In the 1970s, the dominant police patrol 
model be reactive (Reiss 1971), involve 
random patrols, rapid response to 911 calls, 
and reactive investigation (Sherman 2013). 
However, practitioner and researcher 
become increasingly aware that these strate- 
gy have little effect on crime, catalyze a 
shift from reactive to more proactive, evidence- 
base form of policing, such a hot spot 
police (Braga and Weisburd 2010; Sher- 
man, Gartin, and Buerger 1989). In 1994, 
CompStat—a management model link 
crime and enforcement statistics—was estab- 
lished in New York City (Weisburd et al. 
2003). CompStat quickly spread to other cit- 
ies, include Los Angeles in 2002, a a 
managerial model for identify crime pat- 
terns, quantify and incentivizing police 
activity, and direct police resources. The 
attack on 9/11 spur the development of 
“intelligence-led policing” (Ratcliffe 2008). 
Viewing local law enforcement agency a 
actor on the front line of the domestic war 
against terror (Waxman 2009), federal agen- 
cies provide considerable funding to local 
law enforcement agency to collect, analyze, 
share, and deploy a wide range of new data. 
In 2008, William Bratton, then-Chief of the 
LAPD (and former Commissioner of the New 
York City Police Department) begin work 
with federal agency to ass the viability of 
a more predictive approach to policing. 
Today, predictive analytics be use for a 
wide range of law enforcement–related activ- 
ities, include algorithm predict when 
and where future crime be most likely to 
occur (Perry et al. 2013), network model 
predict individual most likely to be 
involve in gun violence (Papachristos, 
Hureau, and Braga 2013), and risk model 
identify law enforcement officer most 
likely to engage in at-risk behavior (U.S. 
Department of Justice 2001 [2015]). 

What explains the proliferation of big- 
data-driven decision-making in organization 
generally, and law enforcement specifically? 
Much like in other institutional domains, it 
have the potential to improve both efficiency 
and accountability. It may improve the 



6 American Sociological Review 00(0) 

prediction and preemption of behavior by 
help law enforcement deploy resource 
more efficiently, ultimately help prevent 
and intercept crimes, thus reduce crime 
rates. Data-driven police also hold poten- 
tial a an accountability mechanism and 
response to criticism organization be fac- 
ing over discriminatory practices. For exam- 
ple, in response to police violence, nationwide 
movement such a Black Lives Matter have 
brought racial tension to the forefront of 
demand for police reform. Data-driven polic- 
ing be be offer a a partial antidote to 
racially discriminatory practice in police 
department across the country (e.g., see 
White House Police Data Initiative 2015). 

However, although part of the appeal of 
big data lie in it promise of less discretion- 
ary and more objective decision-making (see 
Porter’s [1995] work on mechanical objectiv- 
ity; see also Espeland and Vannebo 2007; 
Hacking 1990), new analytic platform and 
technique be deployed in preexist organ- 
izational context (Barley 1986, 1996; Kling 
1991) and embody the purpose of their crea- 
tor (boyd and Crawford 2012; Gitelman 
2013; Kitchin 2014). Therefore, it remains an 
open empirical question to what extent the 
adoption of advanced analytics will reduce 
organizational inefficiency and inequalities, 
or serve to entrench power dynamic within 
organizations. The present study shed light 
on these question and help u understand 
the change relationship between quantifica- 
tion, prediction, and inequality. 

lImITATIonS To exISTIng 
lITerATure 
There be five key limitation to the exist 
literature related to big data surveillance. First, 
most work on actuarialism be write before 
big data analytics take hold. Second, although 
there be strong theoretical work in surveillance 
studies, how big data surveillance play out on 
the ground remains largely an open empirical 
question. Third, the majority of sociological 
research on criminal justice surveillance 

focus on the experience and outcome of 
individual under surveillance, rather than the 
surveilling agent themselves. Therefore, 
offering an organizational perspective may 
generate new insight about this mediate 
level of analysis. Fifth, although there be a 
strong body of work demonstrate that mark- 
ing someone in the criminal justice system be 
consequential for life outcome and pattern 
of inequality (Becker 1963; Brayne 2014; 
Kohler-Hausmann 2013; Pager 2007; Rios 
2011), we know relatively little about whether 
and how the mark process have change in 
the age of big data. Consequently, there be a 
dearth of theoretically inform empirical 
research on the relationship between surveil- 
lance, big data, and the social consequence of 
the intersection of the two forces. 

Many of these gap in the police context 
can be attribute to practical constraints—it be 
difficult for researcher to secure the degree 
of access to police department necessary to 
obtain in-depth qualitative data on day-to-day 
police practices. Although classic police eth- 
nographies exist (e.g., Bittner 1967; Manning 
and Van Maanen 1978; Wilson 1968), there 
have be only a handful of in-depth study 
within police department since data analytics 
become an integral part of police operation 
(for early exceptions, see Ericson and Hag- 
gerty 1997; Manning 2011; Moskos 2008; 
Skogan 2006; Willis et al. 2007). Although 
these study offer important insight into the 
use of CompStat and crime mapping, they 
predate algorithmic policing. Consequently, 
we still know little about how big data polic- 
ing be exercise in practice. 

This article have three aims. First, it draw 
on unique, original data to analyze how a law 
enforcement organization conduct big data 
surveillance. Second, it forward an original 
theoretical framework for understand the 
changes—and continuities—in surveillance 
practice associate with the adoption of big 
data analytics that can be apply to other 
institutional domains. Finally, it highlight 
implication of big data surveillance for law 
and social inequality. 



Brayne 7 

fIelDworK 

Over the course of two and a half years, I 
conduct a qualitative case study of the Los 
Angeles Police Department (LAPD). The 
LAPD be the third-largest local law enforce- 
ment agency in the United States, employ 
9,947 sworn officer and 2,947 civilian staff 
(Los Angeles Police Department 2017). The 
Department cover an area of almost 500 
square mile and a population of almost four 
million people. It consists of four bureaus— 
Central, South, Valley, and West—which be 
divide into a total of 21 geographic areas. 
There be also two specialized bureaus, 
Detective and Special Operations. 

I conduct interview and observation 
with 75 individuals, and conduct between 
one and five follow-up interview with a sub- 
sample of 31 individual to follow how cer- 
tain technology be disseminate and 
information be share throughout the 
Department. Interviewees include sworn 
officer of various rank and civilian employ- 
ee work in patrol, investigation, and crime 
analysis. I be able to gain analytic leverage 
by exploit different adoption temporality 
within and between division during my field- 
work. Not all division adopt big data sur- 
veillance at the same time. Rather, there be 
considerable variation in whether and when 
different big data technology be adopt 
in the area and specialized divisions.1 For 
example, I be able to conduct interview and 
observation in division that be not use 
predictive police and other big data surveil- 
lant technology at the begin of my field- 
work, but be by the end. This variation 
enable me to observe actual change in 
practice, but also to talk to respondent in 
patrol, investigation, and analysis role about 
how they interpret their work change in 
light of big data analytics. I also interviewed 
individual in specialized divisions—includ- 
ing Robbery-Homicide, Information Technol- 
ogy, Records and Identification, Fugitive 
Warrants, Juvenile, Risk Management, and 
Air Support—and at the Real-Time Crime 
Analysis Center (see Figure 1). 

Additionally, I conduct observation on 
ride-alongs in patrol car and a helicopter to 
study how officer deploy data in the field. I 
also shadow analyst a they work with 
data, observe them respond to query 
from detective and supervisor and proac- 
tively analyze data for patrol, investiga- 
tions, and crime analysis. 

To supplement my research within the 
LAPD, I interviewed individual within the 
L.A. County Sheriff’s Department (LASD), a 
it be an integral part of the broader ecosystem 
of public service in the region. In addition, I 
conduct interview at the Joint Regional 
Intelligence Center (JRIC), the “fusion center” 
in Southern California. Fusion center be 
multiagency, multidisciplinary surveillance 
organization by state or local agency that 
receive considerable federal funding from 
the Department of Homeland Security and the 
Department of Justice (Monahan and Palmer 
2009). JRIC be one of 78 federally fund 
fusion center establish across the country 
in the wake of 9/11. Individuals at JRIC con- 
duct data collection, aggregation, and surveil- 
lance in conjunction with other fusion center 
and agencies, including, but not limited to, the 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS), the 
Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI), the 
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), and Immi- 
gration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). I 
also conduct observation at surveillance 
industry conference and interviewed indi- 
viduals work at technology company that 
design analytic platform use by the LAPD, 
include Palantir and PredPol, and individu- 
al work in federal agency in Washing- 
ton, DC, to understand how data on criminal 
and noncriminal activity be share across 
agencies. I supplement my fieldwork with 
archival research of law enforcement and mil- 
itary training manual and surveillance indus- 
try literature. Triangulating across various 
source of data provide the analytic leverage 
necessary to good understand how law 
enforcement us big data in theory, how they 
use it in practice, and how they interpret and 
make meaning out of it change role in daily 
operations. 



8 American Sociological Review 00(0) 

Site Selection 

I select the LAPD a a strategic site for 
study big data surveillance because it be an 
agency at the forefront of data analytics. The 
LAPD invests heavily in it data collection, 
analysis, and deployment capacities, and offer 
international training session on how law 
enforcement can good harness big data. There- 
fore, practice within the Department may 
forecast broader trend that may shape other 
law enforcement agency in the come years. 

In addition to be one of the large law 
enforcement agency in North America, there 
be additional, contextual reason why the 
LAPD be on the lead edge of data analyt- 
ics. The first factor relates to external pres- 
sures for transparency and accountability. The 
LAPD be involve in a number of high- 
profile scandal in the 1990s, include the 
Rampart Scandal2 and the now infamous 
Rodney King beating, which lead to investiga- 
tions expose an expansive web of corrup- 
tion, training deficiencies, and civil right 
violation within the Department. In response, 
the Department of Justice enter into a 

consent decree3 with the LAPD from 2001 to 
2009 that mandated, among other things, the 
creation and oversight of a new data-driven 
employee risk management system, TEAMS 
II. The legacy of the decree extends beyond 
employee risk management; it lead to more 
information share and data-driven decision- 
make within the organization in general. 

The second factor be the influence of state 
legislative decision concern offender 
management. In the wake of Brown v. Plata4 
and the associate order to dramatically 
reduce the prison population, the California 
Legislature pass AB 109, a bill that shift 
the responsibility of supervise release 
non-violent, non-serious, non-sex offender 
from state to local law enforcement and 
county probation officers. It also outsource 
compliance check to local law enforcement 
agencies, include the LAPD and LASD. As 
a result, local law enforcement agency be 
responsible for approximately 500 additional 
individual release into L.A. County each 
month. Therefore, they need a mean by 
which to efficiently stratify the post-release 

figure 1. Situation Room at the Real-Time Crime Analysis Center (RACR) 
Source: Author’s photo. 



Brayne 9 

community supervision population accord 
to risk, necessitate risk model and inter- 
agency data integration effort across the 
region. 

A third relevant factor to the LAPD’s use of 
big data be the availability and adoption of new 
data integration technologies. In 2011, the 
LAPD begin use a platform design by 
Palantir Technologies. Palantir be found in 
2004 and have quickly grown into one of the 
premier platform for compile and analyz- 
ing massive and disparate data by law enforce- 
ment and intelligence agencies. Originally 
intend for use in national defense, Palantir 
be initially partially fund by In-Q-Tel, the 
CIA’s venture capital firm. Palantir now have 
government and commercial customers, 
include the CIA, FBI, ICE, LAPD, NYPD, 
NSA, DHS, and J.P. Morgan. JRIC (the South- 
ern California fusion center) start use 
Palantir in 2009, with the LAPD follow 
shortly after. The use of Palantir have expand 
rapidly through the Department, with regular 
training session and more division signing 
on each year. It have also spread throughout the 
great L.A. region: in 2014, Palantir won 
the Request for Proposals to implement the 
statewide AB 109 administration program, 
which involves data integration and monitor- 
ing of the post-release community supervision 
population. 

ChAngeS ASSoCIATeD wITh 
ADoPTIon of BIg DATA 
AnAlyTICS 

To what extent do the adoption of big data 
analytics change police surveillance? Based 
on my fieldwork, I argue that in some cases, 
the adoption of big data analytics be associate 
with mere amplification in prior surveillance 
practices, but in others, it be associate with 
fundamental transformation in surveillance 
activity and daily operations. I empirically 
demonstrate five key way in which the adop- 
tion of big data analytics be associate with 
shift in surveillance practice to vary 
degrees. First, law enforcement supplement 

officers’ discretionary assessment of risk 
with quantify risk scores. Second, there be an 
increase in the use of data analytics for predic- 
tive—rather than reactive or explanatory— 
purposes. Third, there be a proliferation in 
alert-based systems, which facilitates the pas- 
sive, systematic surveillance of a large num- 
ber of individual than be possible with 
traditional query-based systems. Fourth, the 
threshold for inclusion in law enforcement 
database be lower, now include individual 
who have not have direct police contact. 
Finally, previously separate data system be 
merge into relational systems, make it pos- 
sible for the police to use data originally col- 
lected in other, non–criminal justice contexts. 

I offer an original conceptual framework 
for understand the continuity and change 
associate with the adoption of big data ana- 
lytics within the police organization. Figure 2 
depicts this framework and illustrates the 
migration of traditional police practice 
toward big data surveillance. Each line repre- 
sent a continuum of surveillance practices, 
from traditional to big data surveillance. The 
five shift in practice do not represent discrete 
either/or categories, but rather be good 
understood a continuous gradation of vary- 
ing degree between the extreme value of 
traditional and big data surveillance. The 
length of the black line represent the degree 
of transformation in surveillance practice 
associate with the use of big data. For exam- 
ple, the first two shifts—from discretionary to 
quantify risk assessment, and explanatory 
to predictive analytics—are not particularly 
transformative; rather, they represent quanti- 
fied recapitulation of traditional surveillance 
practices. By contrast, the last two shifts—the 
inclusion of data on individual with no direct 
police contact, and from institution typically 
not associate with crime control—represent 
fundamental transformation in surveillance 
activities. The shift from query-based system 
to automate alert be a moderate shift, repre- 
senting, in part, an elaboration of exist 
practices, and in part, a new surveillance 
strategy. I will analyze each of these shift in 
the follow sections. 



10 American Sociological Review 00(0) 

The shift from traditional to big data sur- 
veillance be associate with a migration of 
law enforcement operation toward intelli- 
gence activities. The basic distinction between 
law enforcement and intelligence be a fol- 
lows: law enforcement typically becomes 
involve once a criminal incident have 
occurred. Legally, the police cannot under- 
take a search and gather personal information 
until there be probable cause. Intelligence, by 
contrast, be fundamentally predictive. Intelli- 
gence activity involve gathering data; iden- 
tifying suspicious patterns, locations, activity, 
and individuals; and preemptively interven- 
ing base on the intelligence acquired. Before 
discuss the findings, one caveat be worth 
noting: the migration of law enforcement 
toward intelligence be in it nascency before 
the use of big data, in part due to Supreme 
Court decision dismantle certain criminal 
protections. Technically, the Fourth Amend- 
ment make unreasonable search and sei- 
zures illegal in the absence of probable cause. 
However, in practice, decision such a Terry 
v. Ohio and Whren v. United States make it 
easy for law enforcement to circumvent the 
barrier of probable cause, ultimately contrib- 
uting to the proliferation of pretext stops. In 
other words, the Supreme Court’s disman- 
tling of probable cause catalyze the migra- 
tion of law enforcement toward intelligence, 

and the adoption of big data analytics facili- 
tat and accelerate this shift. 

The Quantification of Individual Risk 

The first shift in police practice be the quantifi- 
cation of civilian accord to risk. Quantified 
knowledge be supplement officers’ experi- 
ential knowledge through the implementation 
of a new point system: Operation LASER (Los 
Angeles’ Strategic Extraction and Restoration 
program). The program begin in 2011 and be 
fund through the Smart Policing Initiative, a 
national initiative encourage local police 
department and researcher to use evidence- 
based, data-driven tactics. The strategy 
include place-based and offender-based 
models. The offender-based strategy be 
implement in a low-income, historically 
high-crime division in South Bureau. It be pre- 
mised on the idea that a small percentage of 
high-impact player be disproportionately 
responsible for most violent crime. Therefore, 
identify and focus police resource on 
the “hottest” individual should be an efficient 
mean of reduce crime.5 

The strategy begin by plot crime in 
the division. The Crime Intelligence Detail 
(CID), which be compose of three sworn 
officer and a civilian crime analyst, identi- 
fies a problem crime, which in this division be 

figure 2. Migration of Traditional Police Practices toward Big Data Surveillance 



Brayne 11 

often arm robbery. Next, the CID shift 
their unit of analysis from crime to individu- 
als. They gather intelligence daily from 
patrols, the Parole Compliance Unit, field 
interview (FI) card (police contact cards), 
traffic citations, release from custody forms, 
crime and arrest reports, and criminal histo- 
ries to generate a list of “chronic offenders,” 
who be each assign a point value and give 
a numerical rank accord to that value. 
Individuals be assign five point for a vio- 
lent criminal history, five point for know 
gang affiliation, five point for prior arrest 
with a handgun, and five point if they be on 
parole or probation. One officer explained: 

We say ok, we need to decide who’s the 
bad of the bad . . . we need something to 
pull them apart. So this be the important 
one, and this be really what give the impor- 
tance of FI-ing someone [filling out a field 
interview card] on a daily basis instead of 
just saying, okay, I saw that guy hang 
out, I’m gonna give him two week and I’ll 
go FI him again. It’s one point for every 
police contact.6 

As illustrate in Figure 3, FI card include 
personal information such a name, address, 
physical characteristics, vehicle information, 
gang affiliations, and criminal history. On the 
back of the card, there be space for officer to 
include information on person with the sub- 
ject and additional intelligence. 

FIs be key intelligence tool for law 
enforcement and be one of the first data 
source integrate into Palantir. When enter 
into the system, every FI be tag with the 
time, date, and geo-coordinates. Officers be 
train to pull out an FI card and “get a 
shake” a soon a they interact with someone 
in the field. One supervisor described how he 
us it “to tag all the personal information I 
can get . . . these thing come into play late 
on in way you could never even imagine.” 
Similarly, a software engineer explain how 
little piece of data that might seem unsuspi- 
cious at the time of collection can eventually 
be pull together to create useful intelli- 
gence: “It’s a law enforcement system where 

that citation can, the sum of all information 
can build out what be needed.” In addition to 
inputting the content of the cards, a captain 
explain there be an incentive to simply “get 
them in the system” a entity that future data 
point can be link to. 

Because point value be largely base on 
police contact, an important question emerges: 
What be ground for police contact? Merely 
be identify a a chronic offender do 
not constitute reasonable suspicion or proba- 
ble cause. However, use in conjunction with 
Palantir, FIs represent a proliferation of data 
from police–civilian interaction that law 
enforcement do not need a warrant to col- 
lect. When I ask an officer to provide 
example of why he stop people with high 
point values, he replied: 

Yesterday this individual might have get 
stop because he jaywalked. Today he 
mighta get stop because he didn’t use 
his turn signal or whatever the case might 
be. So that’s two point . . . you could con- 
duct an investigation or if something seem 
out of place you have your consensual 
stops.7 So a pedestrian stop, this individual’s 
walking, “Hey, can I talk to you for a 
moment?” “Yeah what’s up?” You know, 
and then you just start fill out your card 
a he answer question or whatever. And 
what it be tell u be who be out on the 
street, you know, who’s out there not neces- 
sarily maybe commit a crime but who’s 
active on the streets. You put the activity of 
. . . be in a street with maybe their violent 
background and one and one might create 
the next crime that’s gonna occur. 

The point system be path dependent; it gener- 
ate a feedback loop by which FIs be both 
cause and consequence of high point val- 
ues. An individual have a high point value 
be predictive of future police contact, and that 
police contact further increase the individu- 
al’s point value. 

The CID also creates work-ups, refer to 
a “Chronic Violent Crime Offender Bulle- 
tins.” Individuals on these bulletin be not 
necessarily “wanted” nor do they have 



12 American Sociological Review 00(0) 

outstanding warrant for their arrest. Rather, it 
be an “information only” bulletin that include 
physical descriptor and oddities, gang affilia- 
tion, criminal history, parole/probation status, 
vehicles, frequent areas, and law enforce- 
ment contacts. The goal of these bulletin be to 
give officer what they refer to a “situational 
awareness.” Officers previously have to rely 
exclusively on their direct knowledge of a 

case and specific criminal networks, but by 
create a list and disseminate bulletins, the 
point system and associate bulletin broad- 
en previously particularize police familiar- 
ity of individual on the street. 

Ideally, one officer explained, they could 
put one officer on every individual on the list 
and “odds be [you’re] probably go to find 
them commit another crime.” However, 

figure 3. Field Interview (FI) Cards 
Source: LAPD. 



Brayne 13 

the police operate in an organizational context 
with resource constraints; respondent fre- 
quently reference budget cut and personnel 
shortages. Therefore, instead of have one 
officer on every chronic offender, officer 
engage in what I term “stratified surveillance”: 
differentially surveilling individual accord 
to their risk score. An officer explained: 

[We] utilize undercover operations, or 
undercover unit and . . . then sit our surveil- 
lance on some of the high point offender 
and just watch them on a daily basis. . . . And 
you start building either, you know, there’s 
two way of look at it. Either kind of 
conduct your investigation to see if 
maybe there be a crime that have just be 
committed. Or, “We know who you are, you 
know, I just call you Johnny, I’ve never 
really met you before, but I know who you 
be now,” so maybe it’s put in his mind, “Oh, 
they’re on to me, they know who I am.” 

This excerpt shed light on the multiple purpose 
of stratify surveillance, include ongoing 
intelligence gathering and deterrence through 
signal to individual on the street that they be 
be tracked by law enforcement. 

Why do the police turn to the point system 
in this division? In the word of one officer, 

The code of federal regulations. They say 
you shouldn’t create a—you can’t target 
individual especially for any race or I for- 
get how you say that. But then we didn’t 
want to make it look like we’re create a 
gang depository of just gang affiliate or 
gang associates. . . . We be just try to 
cover and make sure everything be right on 
the front end. 

Other respondent echoed this sentiment, 
explain the strategy be adopted, in part, 
a a legal compliance mechanism. 

The point system be a form of quantify 
policing, but it be not dramatically different 
from it discretionary predecessor. As indi- 
cat by the low degree of transformation in 
Figure 2, it be largely a quantify recapitula- 
tion of traditional surveillance practices. 

Shift from Reactive to Predictive 
Analytics 

Historically, police be mostly reactive. 
Patrol officer use to spend much of their 
time “chasing the radio.” In the early 1980s, 
face with evidence that reactive strategy 
be ineffective at reduce crime, there be 
a paradigm shift toward more proactive, problem- 
orient police strategies, include hot 
spot policing. Predictive police be an exten- 
sion of hot spot policing, make possible by 
the temporal density of big data (i.e., high- 
frequency observations). In 2012, the LAPD 
begin use software design by PredPol, a 
predictive police company. PredPol us a 
proprietary algorithm8 predicate on the near- 
repeat model, which suggests once a crime 
occurs in a location, the immediate surround- 
ing area be at increase risk for subsequent 
crime. PredPol us three type of inputs— 
past type, place, and time of crime—to iden- 
tify area where future crime be most likely to 
occur. Predictive police be expand rap- 
idly within the Department; a of March 2015, 
it have disseminate to 10 divisions.9 

Officers receive printout at the begin 
of their shift that show 500 by 500 square- 
foot box overlay small area of division 
maps. Patrol officer be encourage to spend 
time in predictive boxes, a strategy refer to 
a “risk-based deployment.” Deployment be 
base on available time, such a when offic- 
er be not respond to call or “booking a 
body.” Officers record their self-reported 
minute in the predictive box on their in-car 
computers. Although “data drive deploy- 
ment,” what the police do once in the predic- 
tive box, and how long they stay there, 
remains within their discretion. 

One supervisor explain that by rely 
on data, rather than human interpretation of 
crime patterns, it help him deploy his 
resource more efficiently:10 

There’s an emotional element to it, and you 
think right now with crime be this low, a 
cluster could be three or four crimes. Clus- 
ters use to be 10, 12 crimes. Now three or 
four and they jump on it, you know. So, 



14 American Sociological Review 00(0) 

there could be overreaction. Because, 
there’s, you know, I mean it’s a human 
do it. And they cannot sort out what’s 
noise. 

Officers be quick to emphasize the contin- 
ued importance of their own expertise. When 
discuss predictive policing, most patrol 
officer say some version of the follow 
statement make by a sergeant on a ride-along: 
“I already know where the crime’s at.” Part of 
this sentiment may stem from officers’ concern 
that the use of algorithm represent a form of 
deskilling, devalue their local and experien- 
tial knowledge and threaten their profes- 
sional autonomy. In that vein, one captain 
described a typical exchange with his officers: 

They’re like, “You know what, I know 
where the crime’s occurring.” . . . And I 
show them the forecast and they say, “Okay, 
so [at intersection], I know there be crimes, 
I could have told you that. I’ve be work- 
ing here 10 years! There’s always crime 
there.” I go, “Okay, you’re work here 10 
year on that car, why be there still crime 
there if you’re so knowledgeable?” 

Despite some within-department conflict over 
their efficacy, PredPol output still inform 
where some officer drove during their 
uncommitted time. For example, when driv- 
ing back from book an individual at the 
station, a sergeant I be with decide to drive 
to an area not know to him for be high- 
crime, because he thought the location of the 
PredPol box be odd and he want to see 
what be go on there. In other words, pre- 
dictive police output sometimes—but not 
always—acted a a substitute for localize 
experiential knowledge. 

A related but distinct reason why officer 
contest predictive police be because they 
believe it place officer themselves under 
great surveillance. For example, when we 
arrive at a crime scene on my first ride-along, 
I be surprised to see an officer manually type 
our location on his laptop. Considering how 
technologically advanced the Department be 

in other ways, I assume cars’ location would 
be tracked automatically. When I ask the 
officer why he manually place himself at the 
scene, he explain that although every police 
unit be equip with an automatic vehicle 
locator (AVL) that ping the vehicle’s location 
every five seconds, they be not turn on 
because of resistance from LAPD union 
representatives.11 

Shift from Query-Based to Alert- 
Based Systems 

The shift from query-based to alert-based sys- 
tems represents, in part, an extension of exist- 
ing practice and, in part, a fundamental 
transformation in surveillance activities. By 
“query-based systems,” I mean database to 
which user submit request for information in 
the form of a search. A familiar example of a 
query be when a police officer run a license 
plate during a traffic stop. In alert-based sys- 
tems, by contrast, user receive real-time noti- 
fications (alerts) when certain variable or 
configuration of variable be present in the 
data. The shift from query-based to alert-based 
systems—which be make possible by high fre- 
quency data collection—has implication for 
the relational structure of surveillance. 

Consider the follow example: all war- 
rant in L.A. County can be translate into 
object representation spatially, temporally, 
and topically in Palantir. Through tagging, 
user can add every know association that 
warrant have to people, vehicles, addresses, 
phone numbers, documents, incidents, cita- 
tions, call for service, ALPR readings, FIs, 
and the like. Officers and analyst can then set 
up alert by put a geo-fence around an area 
and request an alert every time a new war- 
rant be issue within the area. Warrants be but 
one example; user can request alert for any 
data point related to the entity they be inter- 
ested in (e.g., call for service, involvement in 
or witness to a traffic accident, ALPR [auto- 
matic license plate reader] readings, FIs, and 
so on). Using a mechanism in Palantir similar 
to an RSS feed, officer can be automatically 
notify of warrant or event involve 



Brayne 15 

specific individual (or match description 
of individuals), addresses, or car directly on 
their cell phone. Prior to automate alerts, law 
enforcement would know individuals’ real- 
time location only if they be conduct 1:1 
surveillance, receive a tip, or encounter 
them in person. 

Real-time notification can be useful in 
operational planning. An interviewee who 
work at the fusion center described how if 
he be about to conduct a search of a house, he 
can draw a fence around the house and receive 
notification about risk such a whether a 
know gang associate live in the home, if 
there be a gun register in the house next 
door, or if there be a warrant for assault with 
a deadly weapon issue down the street. 

Alerts can also be use to break down infor- 
mation silo within the Department. LAPD’s 
jurisdiction be almost 500 square miles. There- 
fore, individual detective may not able to 
connect crime series that occur across different 
divisions. One captain explained: 

Let’s say I have something go on with 
the medical marijuana clinic where they’re 
get robbed. Okay? And it happens all 
over, right? But I’m a detective here in 
[division], I can put in an alert to Palantir 
that say anything that have to do with medi- 
cal marijuana plus robbery plus male, black, 
six foot. 

He continued, “I like throw the net out 
there, you know? Throw it out there, let it 
work on it while you’re do your other stuff, 
you know?” Relatedly, an interviewee in 
Robbery-Homicide Division described a pilot 
project in which automate data grazing can 
flag potential crime series that span jurisdic- 
tional boundary and be therefore difficult 
for any one person to identify. He said, “You 
could get an alert that would say, you know 
what, your case be pretty similar to this case 
over in Miami.” If the case reach a “merit 
score” (i.e., a threshold at which a certain con- 
figuration of variable be present), the system 
flag the case a similar. The system match 
on field such a suspect description, license 

plate, type of weapon, cause of death, motive, 
type of crime, and M.O., such a “what kind 
of binding be use . . . or be there torture 
involved? What type of trauma have occurred? 
Was there, you know, be there some type of 
symbolic activity?” Although the match 
process be automated, decision about what 
parameter the system match on remain 
within the discretion of individual at ViCAP, 
a unit of the FBI. 

That said, the use of alert represent not just 
a scale up of exist police practices, but also 
a fundamental transformation in how patrol 
officer and investigator generate case knowl- 
edge. Under the traditional surveillance model, 
alert about hot incident and suspect be sent 
out from dispatch centers. However, by exploit- 
ing variation in division that do and do not 
use place- and person-based predictive polic- 
ing—and division that start use big data 
during the course of my fieldwork—I be able 
to observe the automation of alert and relative 
lack of human intermediation in broadcasting 
out these alert or conduct data grazing. 

It be worth note that alert-based system 
be supplementing, rather than replacing, 
query-based systems. Searches be still criti- 
cal feature of law enforcement information 
systems. In fact, one of the transformative 
feature of big data system be that query 
themselves be become data. One detective 
explained: 

I query the system a certain way and then 
another person query the system a certain 
way . . . we be look for something very 
similar in our query, and so even though the 
data may not have connect the two, the 
query be similar. Yeah, so then it will be 
able to say hey, listen, there’s an analyst in 
San Francisco PD that ran a very similar 
query a to yours and so you guy might be 
look for the same thing. 

A different detective explain how when he 
search someone’s name in one national sys- 
tem, he can see the number of time that name 
have be query by other people. When I 
ask why he would want to know how many 



16 American Sociological Review 00(0) 

time someone’s name have be queried, he 
reply that “if you aren’t do anything 
wrong,” the cop be not go to be look 
you up very many time over the course of 
your life. He continued: “Just because you 
haven’t be arrest doesn’t mean you 
haven’t be caught.” In other words, in aud- 
itable big data systems, query can serve a 
quantify proxy for suspiciousness. 

Lower Database Inclusion Thresholds 

The last two shift in practice represent the 
most fundamental transformation in surveil- 
lance activities. Law enforcement database 
have long include information on individual 
who have be arrest or convict of crimes. 
More recently, they also include information 
on people who have be stopped, a evi- 
denced by the proliferation of stop-and-frisk 
databases. However, a new data sensor and 
analytic platform be incorporate into law 
enforcement operations, the police increas- 
ingly utilize data on individual who have not 
have any police contact at all. Quotidian activi- 
tie be be codify by law enforcement 
organizations. One way this be occur be 
through network analysis. Figure 4 be a de- 
identify mockup I ask an employee at 
Palantir to create base on a real network 
diagram I obtain from an officer in the 
LAPD. The person of interest, “Guy Cross,” be 
an individual with a high point value. An 
LAPD officer explained, “with the [Palantir] 
system . . . I click on him and then [a] web 
would spread out and show me the phone that 
he’s associate with and the cars.” 

Radiating out from “Guy Cross,” who have 
direct police contact, be all the entity he be 
related to, include people, cars, addresses, 
and phone numbers. Each line indicates how 
they be connected, such a by be a sib- 
ling, lover, cohabiter, co-worker, co-arrestee, 
or list on a vehicle registration. The net- 
work diagram illustrates only one degree of 
separation, but network can expand outward 
to a many degree of separation a user 
have information and can tie in with other 
networks. To be in what I call the “secondary 

surveillance network,” individual do not 
need to have direct law enforcement contact; 
they simply need to have a link to the central 
person of interest. Once individual relation- 
ship be inputted and social network be 
built into the system, individual can be 
“autotracked,” meaning officer can receive 
real-time alert if individual in the network 
come into contact with the police or other 
government agency again. 

The Automatic License Plate Reader 
(ALPR) be another example of a low-threshold 
“trigger mechanism” (Tracy and Morgan 
2000) that result in more widespread inclu- 
sion in a database. ALPRs be dragnet surveil- 
lance tools; they take reading on everyone, 
not merely those under suspicion. Cameras 
mount on police car and static ALPRs at 
intersection take two photo of every car that 
pass through their line of vision—one of 
the license plate and one of the car—and 
record the time, date, and GPS coordinate 
(see Figure 5). Law enforcement–collected 
ALPR data can be supplement with pri- 
vately collect ALPRs, such a those use 
by repossession agents. ALPR data give the 
police a map of the distribution of vehicle 
throughout the city and, in some cases, may 
enable law enforcement to see an individual’s 
typical travel patterns. For example, an ana- 
lyst use ALPR data to see that a person of 
interest be frequently park near a particu- 
lar intersection at night, explain to me that 
this intersection be likely near that person’s 
residence or “honeycomb” (hideout). 

There be several way to use ALPR data. 
One be to compare them against “heat lists” of 
outstanding warrant or steal cars. Another 
strategy be to place a geo-fence around a loca- 
tion of interest in order to track car near the 
location. For example, after a series of copper 
wire theft in the city, the police found the car 
involve by draw a radius in Palantir 
around the three place the wire be steal 
from, set up time bound around the time 
they knew the theft occur at each site, and 
query the system for any license plate 
capture by ALPRs in all three location dur- 
ing those time periods. 



Brayne 17 

However, the most common use of ALPRs 
be simply to store data for potential use during 
a future investigation. For example, one ser- 
geant described a “body dump” (the disposal 
of a dead body) that occur in a remote 
location near a tourist attraction where there 
be an ALPR. By search ALPR reading 
within the time frame that police determine 
the body be disposed, they capture three 
plates—one from Utah, one from New Mex- 
ico, and one from Compton. The sergeant 
explain that assume the Compton car be 
most likely to be involved, they ran the plate, 
saw the name it be register under, search 
the name in CalGang (gang database), saw 
that the individual be affiliate with a gang 
currently at war with the victim’s gang, and 
use that information to establish probable 
cause to obtain a search warrant, go to the 
address, find the car, search the car for trace 
evidence, and arrest the suspect. 

Although LAPD and Palantir employee 
frequently told me that to be “in the system,” 
a person need to have have criminal justice 
contact, the use of network diagram and the 

inclusion of ALPR data in the Palantir plat- 
form offer clear example in which individu- 
al with no criminal justice contact be 
include in law enforcement databases. 

Institutional Data Systems Are 
Integrated 

Finally, the proliferation of digitize record 
make it possible to merge data from previ- 
ously separate institutional source into an 
integrated, structural system in which dispa- 
rate data point be displayed and searchable 
in relation to one another, and individual can 
be cross-referenced across databases. This 
integration facilitates one of the most trans- 
formative feature of the big data landscape: 
the creep of criminal justice surveillance into 
other, non–criminal justice institutions. Func- 
tion creep—the phenomenon of data origi- 
nally collect for one purpose be use for 
another—contributes to a substantial increase 
in the data police have access to. Indeed, law 
enforcement be follow an institutional data 
imperative (Fourcade and Healy 2017), 

figure 4. Network in Palantir 
Source: Palantir Technologies. 



18 American Sociological Review 00(0) 

secure routine access to a wide range of 
data on everyday activity from non-police 
databases. Before Palantir, officer and ana- 
lysts conduct predominantly one-off 
search in “siloed” systems: one to look up a 
rap sheet, another to search a license plate, 
another to search for traffic citations, and so 
on. The Palantir platform integrates disparate 
data source and make it possible to quickly 
search across databases. 

Expressing his faith in the Department’s 
investment in the platform, one captain told 
me, “We’ve dumped hundred of thousand 
into that [Palantir]. . . . They’re gonna take 
over the world. . . . I promise you they’re 
gonna take over the world.” During my field- 
work, there be more than 1,300 train Pal- 
antir user in the region. New data source be 
incorporate regularly, include information 
collect by the Department, external data col- 
lected by other government agencies, and pri- 
vately collect data the Department purchases. 
Remarking on the growth, one captain said: 

I’m so happy with how big Palantir got. . . . 
I mean it’s just every time I see the entry 

screen [Figure 6] where you log on there’s 
another icon about another database that’s 
be add . . . they now have be work 
with Palantir to develop a database of all the 
foreclosure property . . . they just go out 
and found some public data on foreclosures, 
drag it in, and now they’re mapping it 
where it would be relative to our crime data 
and stuff. 

The Palantir platform allows user to 
organize and visualize structure and unstruc- 
tured data content (e.g., e-mails, PDFs, and 
photos) through “tagging,” the process of 
label and link object and entity to 
identify emerge relationships. By tag 
object and entities—including, but not lim- 
ited to, persons, phone numbers, addresses, 
document such a law enforcement report 
or tip and leads, and call for service—and 
display the data spatially, temporally, or 
topically, user can see data point in context 
and make new connections. 

Another important interagency data inte- 
gration effort be the initiative to create an 
Enterprise Master Person Index (EMPI) in 

figure 5. Plotted ALPR Readings 
Source: Palantir Technologies. 



Brayne 19 

L.A. County. L.A. EMPI would create a single 
view of a client across all government system 
and agencies; all of an individual’s interac- 
tions with law enforcement, social services, 
health services, mental health services, and 
child and family service would be merge 
onto one unique ID. Although interviewee 
work in the county’s information technol- 
ogy office state the explicit motivation 
behind the initiative be to improve service 
delivery, such initiative effectively serve the 
latent function of extend the governance 
and social control capacity of the criminal 
justice system into other institutions. 

I encounter several other example of 
law enforcement use external data originally 
collect for non–criminal justice purposes, 
include data from repossession and collec- 
tions agencies; social media, foreclosure, and 
electronic toll pas data; and address and 
usage information from utility bills. Respond- 
ents also indicate they be work on 
integrate hospital, pay parking lot, and 

university camera feeds; rebate data such a 
address information from contact lens rebates; 
and call data from pizza chains, include 
names, addresses, and phone number from 
Papa Johns and Pizza Hut. In some instances, 
it be simply easy for law enforcement to pur- 
chase privately collect data than to rely on 
in-house data because there be few consti- 
tutional protections, reporting requirements, 
and appellate check on private sector surveil- 
lance and data collection (Pasquale 2014). 
Moreover, respondent explained, privately 
collect data be sometimes more up-to-date. 

It be worth note that such data integration 
be not seamless. Merging data from different 
source and create interoperable system be 
part of the invisible labor that make big data 
analytics possible. One civilian employee 
lamented, “You always forget about the data 
guy . . . [the] guy that do all the dirty work 
be usually forgotten. I’m that guy.” Moreover, 
effort at acquire new data be not receive 
evenly throughout the Department. A vocal 

figure 6. Palantir Homepage 
Source: LAPD. 



20 American Sociological Review 00(0) 

minority of interviewee explain they do 
not believe leadership be fully think 
through the implication of collect such a 
wide range of new data. A civilian employee 
complain about the seduction of new tech- 
nology, saying: “We tend to just say, ‘Let’s 
just go for the sexy tool,’ right? . . . We just 
never think about to what end.” He added, 

Maybe we shouldn’t collect this informa- 
tion. Maybe we shouldn’t add consumer 
information. Maybe we shouldn’t get every- 
body’s Twitter feed in. . . . All we’re do 
right now is, “Let’s just collect more and 
more and more data and something good 
will just happen.” And that’s I think that’s 
kind of wishful thinking. 

Law enforcement’s adoption of data and 
analytic tool without a specific technical pur- 
pose also surface during my time at surveil- 
lance industry conferences. When I first 
observe software representative interact 
with potential law enforcement customers, I 
assume law enforcement would tell software 
representative their need and ask how the 
product could help them achieve their opera- 
tional goals. However, the inverse pattern be 
more frequently the case: software representa- 
tives demonstrate the use of their platform in 
a non-law enforcement—usually military— 
context, and then ask local law enforcement 
whether they would be interested in a similar 
application in their local context. In other 
words, instead of fill analytic gap or tech- 
nical void identify by law enforcement, 
software representative help create new 
kind of institutional demand. 

DISCuSSIon: BIg DATA AS 
SoCIAl 
This article draw on unique data to offer an 
on-the-ground account of big data surveil- 
lance. Providing a case study of the Los 
Angeles Police Department (LAPD), it offer 
insight into the reason why the use of big 
data analytics spread throughout the organi- 
zation, include factor particular to the 

LAPD such a consent decree mandates, but 
also broader isomorphic shift (DiMaggio 
and Powell 1983) toward use of predictive 
analytics across organizational fields. In ana- 
lyzing how the LAPD us big data in their 
surveillance activities, I argue it be both con- 
tinuous and transformative: the adoption of 
advanced analytics facilitates amplification 
of exist surveillance practices, but also 
fundamentally change daily operations. I 
describe five key shift in practice associate 
with adoption of big data analytics, each of 
which fall on different point on the contin- 
uum between law enforcement and intelli- 
gence activities. Whereas the person-based 
point system and place-based predictive algo- 
rithms be largely quantify recapitulation 
of “traditional” (Marx 2016) surveillance, the 
inter-institutional integration of data and pro- 
liferation of dragnet surveillance practices— 
include the use of data on individual with 
no direct police contact and data gather 
from institution typically not associate with 
crime control—represent fundamental trans- 
formation in the very nature of surveillance. 

Big data and associate new technological 
tool permit unprecedentedly broad and deep 
surveillance. By broad, I mean surveillance 
capable of passively track a large number 
of people. Information that would previously 
have be unknown to law enforcement 
because it be too labor intensive to retrieve 
be more readily available, and individual 
previously unknown to law enforcement be 
now part of the corpus through dragnet sur- 
veillance and data collection by non–criminal 
justice organizations. By deep, I mean able to 
track one individual more intensively over 
time, include across different institutional 
settings. The intend and unintended social 
consequence of new surveillance practice 
have implication for social inequality, law, 
and future research on big data surveillance in 
other fields. 

Implications for Social Inequality 

The role of the criminal justice system in the 
reproduction of inequality have receive 



Brayne 21 

considerable attention in the literature (for a 
review, see Laub 2014). However, the impact 
of the use of big data surveillance on inequal- 
ity remains an open empirical question. The 
use of new surveillant technology could 
either reduce or reinforce exist inequali- 
ties. By contribute new insight into how 
big data play out on the ground in policing, 
this research help adjudicate between the 
two possibilities. 

On the one hand, big data analytics may be 
a mean by which to ameliorate persistent 
inequality in policing. Data can be mar- 
shaled to replace unparticularized suspicion of 
racial minority and human exaggeration of 
pattern with less bias prediction of risk. 
Social psychological research demonstrates 
that human be “cognitive misers” (Fiske and 
Taylor 1991) who rely on shortcuts—such a 
the conflation of blackness and criminality 
(Quillian and Pager 2001)—to understand the 
world. Because stereotype have the most cog- 
nitive utility in the face of incomplete informa- 
tion, if big data can be utilized to provide more 
complete information, it may lead officer to 
rely less on stereotype about race and class. In 
that sense, the use of big data may serve to 
reduce hyper-surveillance of minority neigh- 
borhoods and the consequent erosion of com- 
munity trust (Sampson and Bartusch 1998). 
Big data may also be use to “police the 
police.” Digital trail be susceptible to over- 
sight. Therefore, aggregate data on police 
practice may shed light on systematic pattern 
and institutional practice previously dis- 
miss a individual-level bias, ultimately pro- 
viding an opportunity to increase transparency 
and accountability. However, transparency and 
accountability do not flow automatically from 
big data policing. Data-based surveillance be 
less visible than traditional street police 
method (Joh 2016) and be embed in power 
structures. The outcome of struggle between 
law enforcement, civilians, and information 
technology companies—who increasingly 
own the storage platform and proprietary 
algorithm use in data analysis—will play a 
role in determine whether big data police 
will ameliorate or exacerbate inequalities. 

On the other hand, this research highlight 
how data-driven surveillance practice may 
be implicate in the reproduction of inequal- 
ity in at least three ways: by deepen the 
surveillance of individual already under sus- 
picion; widen the criminal justice dragnet 
unequally; and lead people to avoid “sur- 
veilling” institution that be fundamental to 
social integration. First, mathematized police 
practice serve to place individual already 
under suspicion under new and deeper form 
of surveillance, while appear to be objec- 
tive, or, in the word of one captain, “just 
math.” Despite the state intent of the point 
system to avoid legally contestable bias in 
police practices, it hide both intentional and 
unintentional bias in police and creates a 
self-perpetuating cycle: if individual have a 
high point value, they be under heighten 
surveillance and therefore have a great like- 
lihood of be stopped, further increase 
their point value. Such practice hinder the 
ability of individual already in the criminal 
justice system from be further drawn into 
the surveillance net, while obscure the role 
of enforcement in shape risk scores. More- 
over, individual living in low-income, 
minority area have a high probability of 
their “risk” be quantify than those in 
more advantage neighborhood where the 
police be not conduct point-driven sur- 
veillance. Importantly, this quantify modal- 
ity of social control have consequence that 
reach beyond individual with high point 
values. Field interview card record informa- 
tion not only about the individual in question, 
but also information on people the individual 
be with. The exponential capture of personal 
data beyond the primary individual involve 
in the police encounter be a strategic mean of 
channel more individual into the system, 
thus facilitate future tracking. 

Whereas the point system be consequential 
for racial and class inequality, if not imple- 
mented effectively,12 place-based algorithm 
may exacerbate neighborhood inequalities. 
Historical crime data be incomplete; esti- 
mate of unreported crime range from less 
than 17 percent to over 68 percent, depend 



22 American Sociological Review 00(0) 

on the offense (Langton et al. 2012). More- 
over, crime data be not miss at random. 
Therefore, there be systematic bias in the train- 
ing data: crime that take place in public place 
be more visible to police and therefore more 
likely to be record (Duster 1997); individu- 
al and group who do not trust the police be 
less likely to report crime (Sampson and Bar- 
tusch 1998); and police focus their attention 
and resource on black community at a dis- 
proportionately high rate relative to drug use 
and crime rate (Beckett et al. 2005). These 
social dynamic inform the historical crime 
data that be fed into the predictive police 
algorithm. However, once they be inputted a 
data, the prediction appear impartial; human 
judgment be hidden in the black box (Pasquale 
2014) under a patina of objectivity. 

Unchecked prediction may lead to an 
algorithmic form of confirmation bias, and 
subsequently, a misallocation of resources. 
They may justify the over-policing of minor- 
ity community and potentially take away 
resource from individual and area invisible 
to data collection sensor or subject to sys- 
tematic underreporting. Put differently, the 
mechanism for inclusion in criminal justice 
database determine the surveillance pattern 
themselves. Predictive model be performa- 
tive, create a feedback loop in which they 
not only predict event such a crime or 
police contact, but also contribute to their 
future occurrence.13 

Second, new digitize surveillance prac- 
tices broaden the scope of people law enforce- 
ment can track. This can be understood a a 
new form of “net widening” (Cohen 1985), 
effectively widen the criminal justice 
dragnet, and do so unequally. Consider 
ALPRs, one of the primary mean of track 
people without police contact. Even though 
ALPRs be dragnet surveillance tool that 
collect information on everyone, rather than 
merely those under suspicion, the likelihood 
of be inputted into the system be not ran- 
domly distributed. Crime and enforcement 
pattern lead to unequal data capture across 
individuals, groups, and the city. ALPRs be 

deployed base on department crime statistic 
(i.e., to high crime areas), raise similar 
question to those pose early about unequal 
enforcement and reporting practice along 
line of race, class, and neighborhood. In that 
sense, ALPR datasets be investigatory tool 
for law enforcement, but they be dispropor- 
tionately “populated by the movement of 
particular groups” (Renan 2016:1059). Simi- 
larly, the ability to build out secondary sur- 
veillance network in Palantir have implication 
for inequality, a minority individual and 
individual in poor neighborhood have a 
high probability of be in the primary 
(and thus secondary) surveillance net than do 
people in neighborhood where the police be 
not conduct point-driven or other data- 
intensive form of policing. 

How be unequal mechanism for inclusion 
in the surveillance net consequential for social 
inequality? Recall the operative theory from a 
detective that if people be not do anything 
wrong, the police should not be look them 
up many time over the course of their lives. 
However, query be not raw data (Gitelman 
2013); rather, they are, in part, a product of 
enforcement practices. Empirical research 
consistently demonstrates that stop-and-query 
pattern be unequally distribute by race, 
class, and neighborhood (Epp, Maynard- 
Moody, and Haider-Markel 2014). Quantified 
practice may thus serve to exacerbate inequal- 
ities in stop patterns, create arrest statistic 
need to justify stereotypes, and ultimately 
lead to self-fulfilling statistical prophecy 
(Merton 1948). Moreover, a police contact be 
the entry point into the criminal justice system, 
the digital feedback loop associate with pre- 
dictive police may ultimately justify the 
growth and perpetuation of the carceral state. 

One might argue that if you have nothing 
to hide, be include in police database be 
nothing to fear. However, once individual 
be in the primary or secondary surveillance 
net, they can become intelligence target and 
link to future data points. By virtue of 
be in the system, individual be more 
likely—correctly or incorrectly—to be 



Brayne 23 

identify a suspicious. Consider how the 
quantification of previous stop in the point 
system serf a justification for future stops, 
or how the detective suggest a man be 
suspicious because his name have be que- 
ried multiple times. Using a series of data 
point to reconstruct an individual’s inten- 
tions and behaviors, whether incriminate or 
exculpatory, rest on the assumption of an 
infallible state and of actor who run search 
without error or prejudice. Much like in DNA 
database (Duster 2005; Hindmarsh and 
Prainsack 2010; Lynch et al. 2008), in order 
to be a hit, one have to be in the database in the 
first place. Unequal rate of database inclu- 
sion can have real consequences—African 
Americans be seven time more likely than 
white to be wrongly convict of murder 
(Gross, Possley, and Stephens 2017). There- 
fore, analyze the feeder mechanism by 
which individual be channel into criminal 
justice database help u good understand 
how inequality produce by differential sur- 
veillance may be magnify a individual be 
process through the criminal justice 
system. 

Third, integrate external, non-police 
data into the law enforcement corpus have 
unanticipated consequences. Although inte- 
grate system create new opportunity for 
service delivery, they also make surveillance 
possible across formerly discrete institutional 
boundaries. By use other institutions’ data, 
criminal justice surveillance practice may 
have a chill effect, deter people from 
use such institution and thereby subvert 
their original mandates. For example, indi- 
viduals wary of criminal justice surveillance 
may avoid interact with important institu- 
tions where they would leave a digital trace. 
Previous research demonstrates that individu- 
al involve in the criminal justice system 
(i.e., who have be stop by police, 
arrested, convicted, or incarcerated) engage 
in “system avoidance,” systematically avoid- 
ing surveilling institution such a medical, 
financial, educational, and labor market insti- 
tutions that keep formal record (i.e., put 
them “in the system”) (Brayne 2014). Given 

that involvement with the criminal justice 
system be highly stratified, the negative con- 
sequence of system avoidance—for future 
health outcomes, financial self-sufficiency, 
acquisition of human capital, and upward 
economic mobility—will be similarly dispro- 
portionately distributed, thus exacerbate 
any preexist inequality for an expand 
group of already disadvantage individuals. 

This research build on work on label 
theory, extend the relationship between the 
stigma of criminal justice contact and ine- 
quality into the digital age (Becker 1963; 
Brayne 2014; Goffman 2014; Goffman 1963; 
Kohler-Hausmann 2013; Lyon 2006; Pager 
2007; Rios 2011; Stuart 2016; Wakefield and 
Wildeman 2013; Western and Pettit 2005). 
The integration of record may effectively 
extend the mark of a criminal record (Pager 
2007)—or merely the mark of criminal jus- 
tice contact—into other institutions. This 
creep of data across institutional context can 
lead to “cascading disadvantages” (Pasquale 
2014:218; see also Gandy 2009). As individu- 
al leave more digital traces, a “new economy 
of moral judgement” (Fourcade and Healy 
2017:24) becomes possible. Building on 
Weber’s concept of class situation, Fourcade 
and Healy (2013) argue that institution now 
use actuarial technique to track, sort, and 
categorize individual into “classification sit- 
uations” with different reward and punish- 
ments attached. These classification situation 
differentially shape life chance (see also 
Bowker and Star 2000). For example, classi- 
fying individual a low or high risk for 
crime, terrorist activity, loan default, or medi- 
cal condition structure not only if and how 
they will be surveilled, but also their life 
chance more generally. This research begin 
to account for how the mark process may 
be change in the age of digitize policing, 
and how the big data environment creates 
potentially farther-reaching digitize collat- 
eral consequence of involvement in the 
criminal justice system. 

In summary, the burden of new surveillance 
practice be not borne equally, nor be the error 
they produce (Guzik 2009). That said, this 



24 American Sociological Review 00(0) 

research do not necessarily suggest the police 
intentionally use big data maliciously. Rather, 
a Barocas and Selbst (2016) argue, discrimina- 
tion may be, at least in part, an artifact of the 
data collection and analysis process itself. 
Algorithmic decision procedure can “repro- 
duce exist pattern of discrimination, inherit 
the prejudice of prior decision makers, or sim- 
ply reflect the widespread bias that persist in 
society” (Barocas and Selbst 2016:674). Under- 
stand each step of data collection and analy- 
si be crucial for understand how data 
systems—despite be thought of a objec- 
tive, quantified, and unbiased—may inherit the 
bias of their creator and users. As an institution 
historically implicate in the reproduction of 
inequality, understand the intend and 
unintended consequence of machine-learned 
decision and new surveillant technology in 
the criminal justice system be of paramount 
importance. 

Implications for Law 

Technological tool for surveillance be far 
outpace legal and regulatory response to 
the new surveillant landscape. Therefore, the 
finding from this project have important 
implication for law. First, current privacy 
laws—such a the Privacy Act of 1974—are 
anachronistic because they largely concern 
control at the point of data collection. With 
the increase capacity to store vast amount 
of data for significant period of time, privacy 
law now must also account for function 
creep, protect individual from potential 
future secondary us of their data. Relatedly, 
law enforcement routinely purchase pri- 
vately collect data, blurring the line 
between public and private and highlight 
the importance of revisit third-party doc- 
trine in the digital age.14 

Second, use of big data for predictive ana- 
lytics challenge the traditional paradigm of 
Fourth Amendment law, which be transac- 
tional: it focus on one-off interaction 
between law enforcement and a suspect. 
However, police surveillance be increasingly 
programmatic: it be ongoing, cumulative, and 

sometimes suspicionless (Renan 2016). In 
term of ALPRs, for example, “what begin 
a more generalize collection can morph 
into something quite different when the gov- 
ernment run individuate search in it 
datasets” (Renan 2016:1053). Therefore, it be 
an open question whether cumulative surveil- 
lance should require different legal frame- 
works, such a administrative law, “from 
those that govern each isolated step” (Renan 
2016:1058), namely criminal procedure. 

Third, when big data—such a predictive 
police forecasts—are combine with small 
data—such a traditional individualize sus- 
picion base on particularize fact about a 
suspect—it effectively make it easy for law 
enforcement to meet the reasonable suspicion 
standard in practice. In the word of one cap- 
tain, “Some officer somewhere if this [predic- 
tive policing] get big enough be go to say, 
‘okay, everybody in the box be open season,’ 
you know? And that’s not the case.” There- 
fore, legal scholar such a Ferguson (2015: 
336) suggest the court should “require a 
high level of detail and correlation use the 
insight and capability of big data.” 

Fourth, dragnet surveillance tool such a 
ALPRs represent a proliferation of pre- 
warrant surveillance and make everyday mass 
surveillance possible at an unprecedented 
scale. Pre-crime data can be mine for link 
once criminal suspicion come into play. 
Once in a database, a suspect can repeatedly 
be surveilled; law enforcement can retroac- 
tively search ALPR data and identify indi- 
viduals, vehicles, times, and places, rather 
than start to gather information on them 
only once they come under suspicion. The 
retroactive nature of police in an era of 
dragnet data collection mean information be 
routinely accumulate and file be lie in 
wait. In that sense, individual lead incrimi- 
nating lives—daily activities, now codify a 
data, can be marshal a evidence ex post 
facto. The proliferation of pre-warrant sur- 
veillance tool also creates new opportunity 
for parallel construction, the process of build- 
ing a separate evidentiary base for a criminal 
investigation to conceal how the investigation 



Brayne 25 

began, if it involve warrantless surveillance 
or other inadmissible evidence. 

Finally, previous practical constraints, 
which place natural limit on the scope of 
surveillance, be less relevant in light of new 
dragnet tools. One new analytic technique or 
surveillant technology on it own may not be 
consequential, but the combine power of 
using, for example, the person-based point 
system in conjunction with ALPR data in 
conjunction with network diagram in Pal- 
antir grant authority a level of insight into 
an individual’s life that historically would 
have constitute a Fourth Amendment search 
and thus require a warrant. However, 
because no one of those surveillance practice 
fall outside the parameter of the law in iso- 
lation, neither do their combination.15 In 
that sense, intelligence be essentially pre- 
warrant surveillance. Detectives and prosecu- 
tor rarely find a “smoking gun,” a member of 
Palantir’s legal counsel explained, but they 
can now build up a sequence of event that 
they be previously unable to. By “integrat- 
ing data into a single ontology,” he continued, 
user can draw connection between actor 
and depict a coherent scheme. Hunches that 
would be insufficient ground for obtain a 
warrant can be retroactively back up use 
exist data, and query can be justified in 
hindsight after data confirm officer suspi- 
cions. Instead of need to justify to a judge 
why they require a warrant, law enforcement 
can first take advantage of the surveillance 
opportunity new technology provide. 

Implications for Research in Other 
Fields 

Big data be be utilized for surveillance 
practice in a wide range of institutional 
domain beyond policing, include but not 
limited to health, finance, credit, marketing, 
insurance, education, immigration, defense, 
and activism. Although this study focus on 
law enforcement, big data surveillance be not 
something over which the LAPD have exclu- 
sive domain. Rather, this case reflect broader 
institutional shift toward the use of emergent 

technology and advanced analytics. Think- 
ing beyond policing, future research may 
consider how big data surveillance practice 
identify in this study may operate in similar 
or different way across fields. 

Drawing from work in surveillance study 
help u systematically compare use of the new- 
est modality of surveillance—big data—across 
domains. Informed by Lyon’s (2003) theory of 
surveillance a social sort and Marx’s (2016) 
discussion of surveillance means, goals, and 
data attributes, I offer three concrete question 
for future research that could help u good 
understand the use of big data for surveillance 
across institutional domains: Why be big data 
surveillance adopt (goals)? How be big data 
surveillance conduct (means)? What inter- 
ventions be make base on big data surveil- 
lance, and to what consequence (ends)? Table 1 
summarizes these questions. 

First, why be big data surveillance 
adopted? What institutional goal be it 
intend to achieve? Lyon (2003:1) argues 
that the organizational imperative for surveil- 
lance be one of social sorting: “Surveillance 
today sort people into categories, assign 
worth or risk, in way that have real effect on 
their life-chances . . . it be a vital mean of 
sort population for discriminatory treat- 
ment” (see also Ericson and Haggerty 1997; 
Rule 2007). He identifies different category 
of surveillance, each of which have different 
mandate and classificatory goals. Actors in 
the criminal justice system, for example, 
engage in “categorical suspicion” (Lyon 
2003), collect information to classify indi- 
viduals accord to risk and to identify 
threat to law and order. The purpose of sur- 
veillance in other institutions, however, may 
not be categorical suspicion but rather “cate- 
gorical seduction”—classifying customer for 
target marketing, financial services, or 
credit (Lyon 2003; see also Gandy [1993] on 
the “panoptic sort”)—or “categorical care”— 
surveillance in health and welfare organiza- 
tions aim at improve service through 
good coordination of personal data (Ball and 
Webster 2007). Analyzing change and conti- 
nuities in the structure of relationship 



26 American Sociological Review 00(0) 

between agent of surveillance and those who 
be surveilled (Marx 2016) may help u more 
fully understand the social process of big data 
surveillance and it consequence for social 
stratification. 

Whereas surveillance goal have not fun- 
damentally change much over the past cen- 
tury, surveillance mean have transform 
considerably. By provide a detailed analysis 
of how the mean of surveillance have 
change in the age of big data, this study may 
inform future research on big data surveil- 
lance in other fields. Are the five shift in 
practice identify in this study—discretion- 
ary to quantify risk assessments, explana- 
tory to predictive analytics, query-based to 
alert-based systems, moderate to low inclu- 
sion thresholds, and disparate to integrate 
databases—occurring in other institutional 
contexts? For example, to what extent be 
data collect beyond their proximate 

institutional environment be use in 
healthcare or finance? 

The goal and mean of big data surveil- 
lance inform the final question pose for 
future research: what be the end of big data 
surveillance? What do institutional actor do 
base on insight glean from big data sur- 
veillance, and with what consequence? Sur- 
veillance involves extract information 
from different flow (Deleuze and Guattari 
1987; Haggerty and Ericson 2000; Marx 
2016). Distinct information flow be then 
reassemble into a “data double”—a digital 
approximation of individual base on the 
electronic trace they leave (Poster 1990:97)— 
which be use to decide on differential treat- 
ment. Digital score and rank can be 
understood a a form of capital (Fourcade and 
Healy 2017), use to determine who the 
police stop, who credit bureau determine a 
credit-worthy, and who public assistance 

Table 1. Framework for Analyzing Big Data Surveillance across Institutional Contexts 

Goals Means Ends 

Types of 
Surveillance 

Institutional 
Field 

Relationship 
between 
Individual 
and 
Institution 

Shifts in 
Surveillance 
Practices 
Associated with 
Big Data 

Institutional 
Interventions 

Consequences 
for Inequality 

Categorical 
Suspicion 

Criminal 
justice, 
intelligence 

Classifying 
individual 
accord to 
risk; potential 
a criminals/ 
terrorist 

1) Discretionary 
to quantify 
risk assessment 

2) Explanatory 
to predictive 
analytics 

3) Query-based 
to alert-based 
system 

4) Moderate to 
low inclusion 
threshold 

5) Disparate to 
integrate 
data 

Marking, 
apprehension, 
social control 

Stigma, spillover 
into other 
institution 

Categorical 
Seduction 

Finance, 
marketing, 
credit 

Classifying 
individual 
accord to 
their value to 
companies; 
potential a 
customer 

Different 
products, 
perks, access 
to credit, 
opportunities, 
constraint 

Upward or 
downward 
economic 
mobility; 
reproduce 
current 
pattern 

Categorical 
Care 

Medical care, 
public 
assistance 

Classifying 
individual 
accord to 
their need; 
potential a 
client 

Personalized 
medicine, 
welfarist 
service 
delivery 

May reduce 
inequality 
except when 
intersects with 
suspicion or 
seduction 





Brayne 27 

agency deem eligible for benefits. Simply 
put, one’s surveillance profile structure the 
type of communications, opportunities, con- 
straints, and care one receives. Big data sur- 
veillance could therefore have stratify 
effect if individual in position of structural 
disadvantage be more likely to be subject to 
harmful form of surveillance, and those in 
position of structural advantage be more 
likely to be target by advantageous surveil- 
lance and classification scheme (Fourcade 
and Healy 2017). Therefore, categorical sus- 
picion, seduction, and care may have very 
different implication for social inequality, 
depend on what institutional actor do 
base on the intelligence acquire through 
big data surveillance. 

This article demonstrates that in the digital 
age, individual leave data trace hundred of 
time throughout the day, each of which con- 
tribute to the corpus of big data that a grow 
number of institution use for decision- 
making. Institutional actor make decision 
base on big data may assume that data double 
be more accurate, or unbiased, representation 
of a person’s profile than be those glean 
from “small” data, such a personal observa- 
tions. However, this perspective obscures the 
social side of big data surveillance. Systematic 
bias—whether intentional or unintentional— 
exists in training data use for machine learn- 
ing algorithms, and it may be an artifact of 
human discretion or the data mining process 
itself. Moreover, the implication of false posi- 
tives and false negative associate with big 
data surveillance vary widely across domains. 
The stake for be wrongly arrest for a 
crime you do not commit be very different 
from receive a movie recommendation not to 
your taste. Furthermore, category of surveil- 
lance be not mutually exclusive in the age of 
big data, a information can be share across 
previously separate institutional boundaries. 
For example, electronic medical record be 
originally create to improve prescription drug 
and care coordination, but they be increas- 
ingly use to police the illicit use and sale of 
prescription drugs. The place where catego- 
ries of surveillance intersect, and therefore 

have ambiguous implication for inequality, 
may be particularly fruitful site for future 
sociological inquiry. 

Finally, future research may examine the 
political economy underpin the procure- 
ment of analytic software that organization 
use for big data surveillance. Examining the 
genealogy of surveillance technologies, for 
example, reveals that many of the resource 
for develop big data analytics come from 
federal funds. In the law enforcement context, 
those grant quickly become subsume into 
police organizations’ operating budgets. 
Therefore, department have an incentive to 
continue use big data—or appear to be 
use it—even if it be not an effective mean 
of solve the organization’s first-order prob- 
lems, such a reduce crime. 

Understanding the implication of big data 
surveillance be more complex than simply 
know who be surveilled more or less. 
Instead, we need to understand who be sur- 
veilled by whom, in what way, and for what 
purpose. How surveillance structure life 
chance may differ accord to the goals, 
means, and end involved. Although surveil- 
lance be a generalizable organizational imper- 
ative, big data be change the mean of 
surveillance. Accordingly, this article help u 
good understand how big data surveillance be 
conducted, and call for systematic research 
on the relationship between the goals, means, 
and end of big data surveillance across insti- 
tutional domains. 

ConCluSIonS 
Through a case study of the Los Angeles 
Police Department, this article analyze the 
role of big data in surveillance practices. By 
socially situate big data, I examine why it 
be adopted, how it be used, and what the 
implication of it use are. Focusing on the 
interplay between surveillance practices, law, 
and technology offer new insight into social 
control and inequality. I argue that big data 
participates in and reflect exist social 
structures. Far from eliminate human dis- 
cretion and bias, big data represent a new 



28 American Sociological Review 00(0) 

form of capital that be both a social product 
and a social resource. What data law enforce- 
ment collects, their method for analyze 
and interpret it, and the way it informs 
their practice be all part of a fundamentally 
social process. Characterizing predictive 
model a “just math,” and fetishize com- 
putation a an objective process, obscures the 
social side of algorithmic decision-making. 
Individuals’ interpretation of data occurs in 
preexist institutional, legal, and social set- 
tings, and it be through that interpretive pro- 
ce that power dynamic come into play. 

Use of big data have the potential to amelio- 
rate discriminatory practices, but these find- 
ings suggest implementation be of paramount 
importance. As organizational theory and lit- 
erature from science and technology study 
suggests, when new technology be overlaid 
onto an old organizational structure, long- 
stand problem shape themselves to the 
contour of the new technology, and new unin- 
tend consequence be generated. The pro- 
ce of transform individual action into 
“objective” data raise fundamentally socio- 
logical question that this research only begin 
to address. In many ways, it transpose classic 
concern from the sociology of quantification 
about simplification, decontextualization, and 
the privilege of measurable complex social 
phenomenon onto the big data landscape. 

Surveillance be always ambiguous; it be 
implicate in both social inclusion and exclu- 
sion, and it creates both opportunity and 
constraints. The way in which surveillance 
help achieve organizational goal and struc- 
ture life chance may differ accord to the 
individual and institution involved. Exam- 
ining the mean of big data surveillance 
across institutional domain be an open and 
timely line of inquiry, because once a new 
technology be disseminate in an institutional 
setting, it be difficult to scale back. 

Acknowledgments 
I wish to thank Devah Pager for her invaluable support and 
guidance. I be also grateful for the many helpful comment 
I receive from Paul DiMaggio, Janet Vertesi, Kim Lane 
Scheppele, Maria Abascal, David Pedulla, Becky Pettit, the 

Social Media Collective at Microsoft Research, and the 
ASR editor and anonymous reviewers. Finally, I wish to 
thank anonymous individual within the Los Angeles 
Police Department for make this research possible. 

funding 
This research be fund by the Horowitz Foundation 
for Social Policy. Additional support be provide by 
grant, 5 R24 HD042849, award to the Population 
Research Center at The University of Texas at Austin by 
the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child 
Health and Human Development. 

note 
1. For example, one division in the valley begin use 

PredPol (predictive policing) in 2012, and nine 
other division follow suit between then and 
March 2015. 

2. More than 25 officer in Rampart Division’s special 
operation anti-gang unit, C.R.A.S.H., be investi- 
gate or charged, and over 100 criminal case be 
overturn due to police misconduct. 

3. A consent decree be a binding court order memori- 
alizing an agreement between party in exchange 
for an end to a civil litigation or a withdrawal of a 
criminal charge. 

4. Brown v. Plata be a 2011 U.S. Supreme Court deci- 
sion hold that the overcrowd of California 
prison and lack of access to adequate healthcare 
violate prisoners’ Eighth Amendment constitu- 
tional rights. 

5. To date, one study have evaluate the efficacy of 
Operation LASER (Uchida and Swatt 2015). It 
found a reduction in crime in reporting district 
that adopt both person-based and location-based 
approaches. The program have not yet be subject to 
external evaluation; the author be the President of 
and Senior Research Associate at Justice and Secu- 
rity Strategies, who design Operation LASER. 

6. Block quote be drawn from audiotaped, tran- 
scribed interviews. 

7. Consensual stop may be conduct at any time 
when the police lack the “specific and articulable 
facts” (Terry v. Ohio 392 U.S. at 21) that justify 
detention or arrest. 

8. PredPol’s algorithm be publish by Mohler and 
colleague in 2015. 

9. In line with other law enforcement agencies, the 
LAPD be a hierarchical organization and employ- 
ee be usually subject to tight managerial con- 
trol. However, there be more between-division 
variation in the use of algorithm than I originally 
expected. Big data technology be not adopt 
in the 21 area division and the specialized divi- 
sion at the same time, largely due to the autonomy 
grant to captain in each division during the early 
stage of algorithmic policing. Entrepreneurial 



Brayne 29 

captain who be early adopter use algorithmic 
technique largely of their own volition, but a pre- 
dictive police be pilot in more divisions, one 
captain explain to me that he be start to feel 
pressure to use it in his division, because he do not 
want to be the last to sign on. 

10. In a randomize control field trial, Mohler and 
colleague (2015) found PredPol’s algorithm out- 
performs crime analyst predict crime, and 
that police patrol use algorithmic forecast- 
ing lead to significant reduction in crime volume. 
The algorithm have not yet be subject to external 
evaluation; the author include co-founders and 
stockholder of PredPol. 

11. After protract negotiations, AVLs be turn on 
in Central Bureau in March 2015. 

12. Place-based algorithm be most effective (and least 
biased) when predict crime with high reporting 
rates, such a motor vehicle theft. 

13. For related work on performativity in a different field— 
finance—see MacKenzie, Muniesa, and Siu (2007). 

14. According to United States v. Miller (1939) and 
Smith v. Maryland (1979), the third-party doctrine 
maintains that “when an individual voluntarily 
share information with third parties, like telephone 
companies, banks, or even other individuals, the 
government can acquire that information from the 
third-party absent a warrant” (Executive Office of 
the President 2014). 

15. See Justice Sotomayor’s concur opinion in 
United States v. Jones (2012) and Joh (2016). 

reference 
Angwin, Julia. 2014. Dragnet Nation: A Quest for Pri- 

vacy, Security, and Freedom in a World of Relentless 
Surveillance. New York: Times Books. 

Ball, Kirstie, and Frank Webster, eds. 2007. The Intensi- 
fication of Surveillance: Crime, Terrorism & Warfare 
in the Information Age. London, UK: Pluto Press. 

Barley, Stephen R. 1986. “Technology a an Occasion for 
Structuring: Evidence from Observations of CT Scan- 
ners and the Social Order of Radiology Departments.” 
Administrative Science Quarterly 31(1):78–108. 

Barley, Stephen R. 1996. “Technicians in the Workplace: 
Ethnographic Evidence for Bringing Work into Orga- 
nization Studies.” Administrative Science Quarterly 
41(3):404–441. 

Barocas, Solon, and Andrew D. Selbst. 2016. “Big Data’s 
Disparate Impact.” California Law Review 104:671–732. 

Becker, Howard S. 1963. Outsiders: Studies in the Soci- 
ology of Deviance. New York: Free Press. 

Beckett, Katherine, Kris Nyrop, Lori Pfingst, and Melissa 
Bowen. 2005. “Drug Use, Drug Possession Arrests, 
and the Question of Race: Lessons from Seattle.” 
Social Problems (52)3:419–41. 

Bittner, Egon. 1967. “The Police on Skid-Row: A Study 
of Peace Keeping.” American Sociological Review 
32(5):699–715. 

Bonczar, Thomas P., and Erinn J. Herberman. 2014. 
“Probation and Parole in the United States, 2013.” 
Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice Statistics. 

Bowker, Geoffrey C., and Susan Leigh Star. 2000. Sort- 
ing Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

boyd, danah, and Kate Crawford. 2012. “Critical Ques- 
tions for Big Data: Provocations for a Cultural, Tech- 
nological, and Scholarly Phenomenon.” Information, 
Communication & Society 15(5):662–79. 

Braga, Anthony A., and David L. Weisburd. 2010. Polic- 
ing Problem Places: Crime Hot Spots and Effective 
Prevention. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Braverman, Harry. 1974. Labor and Monopoly Capital: 
The Degradation of Work in the Twentieth Century. 
New York: Monthly Review Press. 

Brayne, Sarah. 2014. “Surveillance and System Avoid- 
ance: Criminal Justice Contact and Institutional 
Attachment.” American Sociological Review 79(3): 
367–91. 

Brown v. Plata. 2011. 563 U.S. 493. 
Browne, Simone. 2015. Dark Matters: On the Surveil- 

lance of Blackness. Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press. 

Carson, E. Ann. 2015. “Prisoners in 2014.” Washington, 
DC: Bureau of Justice Statistics. 

Christin, Angèle. 2016. “From Daguerreotypes to Algo- 
rithms: Machines, Expertise, and Three Forms of 
Objectivity.” ACM Computers & Society 46(1): 
27–32. 

Cohen, Stanley. 1985. Visions of Social Control: Crime, 
Punishment and Classification. Malden, MA: Polity 
Press. 

Deleuze, Gilles, and Felix Guattari. 1987. A Thousand 
Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. Minneapo- 
lis: The University of Minnesota Press. 

DiMaggio, Paul J., and Walter W. Powell. 1983. “The 
Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional Isomorphism and 
Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields.” 
American Sociological Review 48(2):147–60. 

Duster, Troy. 1997. “Pattern, Purpose and Race in the 
Drug War.” Pp. 206–287 in Crack in America: 
Demon Drugs and Social Justice, edit by C. Rein- 
arman and H. G. Levine. Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 

Duster, Troy. 2005. “Race and Reification in Science.” 
Science 307:1050–51. 

Epp, Charles R., Steven Maynard-Moody, and Donald P. 
Haider-Markel. 2014. Pulled Over: How Police Stops 
Define Race and Citizenship. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 

Ericson, Richard V., and Kevin D. Haggerty. 1997. Policing 
the Risk Society. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 

Ericson, Richard V., and Kevin D. Haggerty. 2006. The 
New Politics of Surveillance and Visibility. Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press. 

Espeland, Wendy N., and Berit I. Vannebo. 2007. 
“Accountability, Quantification and Law.” Annual 
Review of Law and Society 3:21–43. 



30 American Sociological Review 00(0) 

Executive Office of the President. 2014. “Big Data: Seiz- 
ing Opportunities, Preserving Values.” Washington, 
DC: The White House. 

Feeley, Malcolm M., and Jonathan Simon. 1992. “The 
New Penology: Notes on the Emerging Strategy 
of Corrections and Its Implications.” Criminology 
30(4):449–74. 

Ferguson, Andrew G. 2015. “Big Data and Predictive 
Reasonable Suspicion.” University of Pennsylvania 
Law Review 63(2):327–410. 

Fiske, John. 1998. “Surveilling the City: Whiteness, the 
Black Man and Democratic Totalitarianism.” Theory, 
Culture and Society 15(2):67–88. 

Fiske, Susan T., and Shelley E. Taylor. 1991. Social Cog- 
nition, 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill. 

Foucault, Michel. 1977. Discipline and Punish: The Birth 
of the Prison. New York: Random House. 

Fourcade, Marion, and Kieran Healy. 2013. “Classifica- 
tion Situations: Life-Chances in the Neoliberal Era.” 
Accounting, Organizations and Society 38:559–72. 

Fourcade, Marion, and Kieran Healy. 2017. “Seeing like 
a Market.” Socioeconomic Review 15(1):9–29. 

Gandy, Oscar H. 1993. The Panoptic Sort: A Political 
Economy of Personal Information. Boulder, CO: 
Westview Press. 

Gandy, Oscar H. 2002. “Data Mining and Surveillance 
in the Post-9.11 Environment.” Presentation to the 
Political Economy Section, International Association 
for Media and Communication Research. 

Gandy, Oscar H. 2009. Coming to Terms with Chance: 
Engaging Rational Discrimination and Cumulative 
Disadvantage. Farnham, UK: Ashgate Publishing. 

Garland, David. 2001. The Culture of Control: Crime and 
Social Order in Contemporary Society. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

Giddens, Anthony. 1990. The Consequences of Moder- 
nity. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 

Gilliom, John. 2001. Overseers of the Poor: Surveillance, 
Resistance, and the Limits of Privacy. Chicago: Uni- 
versity of Chicago Press. 

Gitelman, Lisa, ed. 2013. Raw Data Is an Oxymoron. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

Goffman, Alice. 2014. On the Run: Fugitive Life in an 
American City. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Goffman, Erving. 1963. Stigma: Notes on the Manage- 
ment of Spoiled Identity. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Pren- 
tice-Hall. 

Gross, Samuel R., Maurice Possley, and Kalara Stephens. 
2017. “Race and Wrongful Convictions in the United 
States.” National Registry of Exonerations, Newkirk 
Center for Science and Society, University of Cali- 
fornia-Irvine. 

Gustafson, Kaaryn S. 2011. Cheating Welfare: Public 
Assistance and the Criminalization of Poverty. New 
York: NYU Press. 

Guzik, Keith. 2009. “Discrimination by Design: Predic- 
tive Data Mining a Security Practice in the United 
States’ ‘War on Terrorism.’” Surveillance and Society 
7(1):1–17. 

Hacking, Ian. 1990. The Taming of Chance. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press. 

Haggerty, Kevin D., and Richard V. Ericson. 2000. “The 
Surveillant Assemblage.” British Journal of Sociol- 
ogy 51(4):605–622. 

Harcourt, Bernard E. 2006. Against Prediction: Profiling, 
Policing, and Punishing in an Actuarial Age. Chi- 
cago: University of Chicago Press. 

Hindmarsh, Richard, and Barbara Prainsack, eds. 2010. 
Genetic Suspects: Global Governance of Forensic 
DNA Profiling and Databasing. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Innes, Martin. 2001. “Control Creep.” Sociological 
Research Online 6:1–10. 

Joh, Elizabeth E. 2016. “The New Surveillance Discre- 
tion: Automated Suspicion, Big Data, and Policing.” 
Harvard Law and Policy Review 10(1):15–42. 

Kitchin, Rob. 2014. The Data Revolution: Big Data, 
Open Data, Data Infrastructures & Their Conse- 
quences. London, UK: SAGE. 

Kling, Rob. 1991. “Computerization and Social Trans- 
formations.” Science, Technology & Human Values 
16(3):342–67. 

Kohler-Hausmann, Issa. 2013. “Misdemeanor Justice: 
Control without Conviction.” American Journal of 
Sociology 119(2):351–93. 

Laney, Doug. 2001. “3D Data Management: Controlling 
Data Volume, Velocity, and Variety.” Stamford, CT: 
META Group. 

Langton, Lynn, Marcus Berzofsky, Christopher Krebs, 
and Hope Smiley-McDonald. 2012. “Victimizations 
Not Reported to the Police, 2006-2010.” Washington, 
DC: Bureau of Justice Statistics. 

Laub, John H. 2014. “Understanding Inequality and the 
Justice System Response: Charting a New Way For- 
ward.” New York: William T. Grant Foundation. 

Lazer, David, and Jason Radford. 2017. “Data ex 
Machina: Introduction to Big Data.” Annual Review 
of Sociology 43:19–39. 

Los Angeles Police Department. 2017. “Sworn Per- 
sonnel by Rank, Gender, and Ethnicity (SPRGE) 
Report” (http://www.lapdonline.org/sworn_and_ 
civilian_report). 

Lynch, Michael, Simon A. Cole, Ruth McNally, and 
Kathleen Jordan. 2008. Truth Machine: The Conten- 
tious History of DNA Fingerprinting. Chicago: Uni- 
versity of Chicago Press. 

Lyon, David. 1994. The Electronic Eye: The Rise of Sur- 
veillance Society. Minneapolis: University of Min- 
nesota Press. 

Lyon, David, ed. 2003. Surveillance a Social Sorting: 
Privacy, Risk, and Digital Discrimination. New York: 
Routledge. 

Lyon, David, ed. 2006. Theorizing Surveillance: The 
Panopticon and Beyond. New York: Polity. 

Lyon, David. 2015. Surveillance after Snowden. New 
York: Polity. 

MacKenzie, Donald, Fabian Muniesa, and Lucia Siu, eds. 
2007. Do Economists Make Markets? On the Perfor- 



Brayne 31 

mativity of Economics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni- 
versity Press. 

Manning, Peter K. 2011. The Technology of Policing: 
Crime Mapping, Information Technology, and the 
Rationality of Crime Control. New York: NYU Press. 

Manning, Peter K., and John Van Maanen, eds. 1978. 
Policing: A View from the Street. New York: Random 
House. 

Marx, Gary T. 1974. “Thoughts on a Neglected Category 
of Social Movement Participant: The Agent Provoca- 
teur and the Informant.” American Journal of Sociol- 
ogy 80(2):402–442. 

Marx, Gary T. 1988. Undercover: Police Surveillance in 
America. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Marx, Gary T. 1998. “Ethics for the New Surveillance.” 
The Information Society 14(3):171–85. 

Marx, Gary T. 2002. “What’s New About the ‘New Sur- 
veillance’? Classifying for Change and Continuity.” 
Surveillance and Society 1(1):9–29. 

Marx, Gary T. 2016. Windows into the Soul: Surveillance 
and Society in an Age of High Technology. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 

Mayer-Schönberger, Viktor, and Kenneth Cukier. 2013. 
Big Data: A Revolution That Will Transform How We 
Live, Work, and Think. New York: Houghton Mifflin 
Harcourt. 

Merton, Robert K. 1948. “The Self-Fulfilling Prophecy.” 
The Antioch Review 8(2):193–210. 

Meyer, John W., and Brian Rowan. 1977. “Institutional- 
ized Organizations: Formal Structure a Myth and 
Ceremony.” American Journal of Sociology 83(2): 
340–63. 

Mohler, George O., Martin B. Short, Sean Malinowski, 
Mark Johnson, George E. Tita, Andrea L. Bertozzi, 
and P. Jeffrey Brantingham. 2015. “Randomized Con- 
troll Field Trials of Predictive Policing.” Journal of 
the American Statistical Association 110:1399–1411. 

Monahan, Torin, and Neal A. Palmer. 2009. “The Emerg- 
ing Politics of DHS Fusion Centers.” Security Dia- 
logue 40(6):617–36. 

Moskos, Peter. 2008. Cop in the Hood: My Year Policing 
Baltimore’s Eastern District. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 

Oxford American Dictionary of Current English. 1999. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Pager, Devah. 2007. Marked: Race, Crime, and Finding 
Work in an Era of Mass Incarceration. Chicago: Uni- 
versity of Chicago Press. 

Papachristos, Andrew V., David M. Hureau, and Anthony 
A. Braga. 2013. “The Corner and the Crew: The 
Influence of Geography and Social Networks on 
Gang Violence.” American Sociological Review 
78(3):417–47. 

Pasquale, Frank. 2014. The Black Box Society: The Secret 
Algorithms That Control Money and Information. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Perry, Walter L., Brian McInnis, Carter C. Price, Susan 
C. Smith, and John S. Hollywood. 2013. “Predictive 
Policing: The Role of Crime Forecasting in Law 

Enforcement Operations.” RAND Safety and Justice 
Program. Santa Monica, CA. Retrieved July 6, 2017 
(http://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_ 
reports/RR200/RR233/RAND_RR233.pdf). 

Porter, Theodore M. 1995. Trust in Numbers: The Pursuit 
of Objectivity in Science and Public Life. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Poster, Mark. 1990. The Mode of Information. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 

Quillian, Lincoln, and Devah Pager. 2001. “Black Neigh- 
bors, Higher Crime? The Role of Racial Stereotypes 
in Evaluations of Neighborhood Crime.” American 
Journal of Sociology 107(3):717–67. 

Ratcliffe, Jerry. 2008. Intelligence-Led Policing. 
Cullompton, UK: Willan Publishing. 

Reiss, Albert J. 1971. The Police and the Public. New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 

Renan, Daphna. 2016. “The Fourth Amendment a 
Administrative Governance.” Stanford Law Review 
68(5):1039–1129. 

Rios, Victor M. 2011. Punished: Policing the Lives of 
Black and Latino Boys. New York: NYU Press. 

Roush, Craig R. 2012. “Quis Custodiet Ipsos Custodes? 
Limits on Widespread Surveillance and Intelligence 
Gathering by Local Law Enforcement after 9/11.” 
Marquette Law Review 96(1):315–76. 

Rule, James B. 1974. Private Lives and Public Surveil- 
lance: Social Control in the Computer Age. New 
York: Schocken Books. 

Rule, James B. 2007. Privacy in Peril: How We Are 
Sacrificing a Fundamental Right in Exchange for 
Security and Convenience. New York: Oxford Uni- 
versity Press. 

Sampson, Robert J., and Dawn J. Bartusch. 1998. “Legal 
Cynicism and (Subcultural?) Tolerance of Deviance: 
The Neighborhood Context of Racial Differences.” 
Law and Society Review 32:777–804. 

Scott, Richard W. 1987. Organizations: Rational, Natu- 
ral, and Open Systems. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Pren- 
tice-Hall. 

Scott, Richard W. 2004. “Reflections on a Half-Century 
of Organizational Sociology.” Annual Review of Soci- 
ology 30:1–21. 

Sherman, Lawrence W. 2013. “Targeting, Testing and 
Tracking Police Services: The Rise of Evidence- 
Based Policing, 1975–2025.” Crime and Justice 
42(1):377–451. 

Sherman, Lawrence W., Patrick R. Gartin, and Michael 
E. Buerger. 1989. “Hot Spots of Predatory Crime: 
Routine Activities and the Criminology of Place.” 
Criminology 27(1):27–55. 

Skogan, Wesley G. 2006. Police and Community in Chi- 
cago: A Tale of Three Cities. New York: Oxford Uni- 
versity Press. 

Smith v. Maryland. 1979. 442 U.S. 735. 
Soss, Joe, Richard C. Fording, and Sanford F. Schram. 

2011. Disciplining the Poor: Neoliberal Paternalism 
and the Persistent Power of Race. Chicago: Univer- 
sity of Chicago Press. 



32 American Sociological Review 00(0) 

Stuart, Forrest. 2016. Down, Out & Under Arrest: Polic- 
ing and Everyday Life in Skid Row. Chicago: Univer- 
sity of Chicago Press. 

Terry v. Ohio. 1968. 392 U.S. 1. 
Tracy, Paul E., and Vincent Morgan. 2000. “Big Brother 

and His Science Kit: DNA Databases for 21st Cen- 
tury Crime Control.” Journal of Criminal Law and 
Criminology 90(2):635–90. 

Travis, Jeremy, Bruce Western, and Steve Redburn, eds. 
2014. Growth of Incarceration in the United States: 
Exploring Causes and Consequences. Washington, 
DC: National Academy of Science. 

Uchida, Craig D., and Marc L. Swatt. 2015. “Operation 
LASER and the Effectiveness of Hotspot Patrol: A 
Panel Analysis.” Police Quarterly 16(3):287–304. 

United States v. Jones. 2012. 132 S. Ct. 945, 565 U.S. 
United States v. Miller. 1939. 307 U.S. 174. 
U.S. Department of Justice. 2001 [2015]. “L.A. Consent 

Decree.” Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice. 
Wakefield, Sara, and Christopher Uggen. 2010. “Incar- 

ceration and Stratification.” Annual Review of Sociol- 
ogy 36:387–406. 

Wakefield, Sara, and Christopher Wildeman. 2013. Chil- 
dren of the Prison Boom: Mass Incarceration and the 
Future of American Inequality. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

Waxman, Matthew C. 2009. “Police and National Secu- 
rity: American Local Law Enforcement and Counter- 
Terrorism after 9/11.” Journal of National Security 
Law and Policy 3:377–407. 

Weber, Max. 1978. Economy and Society: An Outline 
of Interpretive Sociology. Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 

Weisburd, David, Stephen D. Mastrofski, Ann Marie 
McNally, Rosann Greenspan, and James J. Willis. 
2003. “Reforming to Preserve: COMPSTAT and Stra- 
tegic Problem-Solving in American Policing.” Crimi- 
nology and Public Policy 2:421–56. 

Western, Bruce. 2006. Punishment and Inequality in 
America. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. 

Western, Bruce, and Becky Pettit. 2005. “Black-White 
Wage Inequality, Employment Rates, and Incarcer- 
ation.” American Journal of Sociology 111(2):553– 
78. 

White House Police Data Initiative. 2015. “Launching 
the Police Data Initiative” (https://obamawhitehouse 
.archives.gov/blog/2015/05/18/launching-police- 
data-initiative). 

Whren v. United States. 1996. 517 U.S. 806. 
Willis, James J., Stephen D. Mastrofski, and David 

Weisburd. 2007. “Making Sense of COMPSTAT: A 
Theory-Based Analysis of Organizational Change in 
Three Police Departments.” Law and Society Review 
41(1):147–88. 

Wilson, James Q. 1968. Varieties of Police Behavior: The 
Management of Law and Order in Eight Communi- 
ties. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Sarah Brayne be an Assistant Professor of Sociology and 
Faculty Research Associate in the Population Research 
Center at the University of Texas at Austin. Using quali- 
tative and quantitative methods, her research examines 
the use of “big data” within the criminal justice system a 
well a the consequence of surveillance for law and 
social inequality. 


