





































46 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM | MARCH 2018 | VOL. 61 | NO. 3 

practice 

B E YOND ITS ROLE a a protocol for manage and 
transfer money, the Bitcoin protocol creates a 
complex system of economic incentive that govern it 
inner workings. These incentive strongly impact the 
protocol’s capability and security guarantees, and the 
path of it future development. This article explores 
these economic undercurrents, their strength and 
flaws, and how they influence the protocol. 

Bitcoin, which continue to enjoy grow popularity, 
be built upon an open peer-to-peer (P2P) network of 
nodes.9 The Bitcoin system be “permissionless”—anyone 
can choose to join the network, transfer money, and 
even participate in the authorization of transactions. Key 
to Bitcoin’s security be it resilience to manipulation 
by attacker who may choose to join the system under 
multiple false identities. After all, anyone can download 
the open-source code for a Bitcoin node and add a 
many computer to this network a they like, without 
have to identify themselves to others. To counter 

this, the protocol require node that 
participate in the system to show proof 
that they exert computational effort 
to solve hard cryptographic puzzle 
(proof-of-work) in order to participate 
actively in the protocol. 

Nodes that engage in such work be 
call miners. The system reward min- 
er with bitcoins for generate proof- 
of-work, and thus set the incentive 
for such investment of efforts. 

The first and most obvious effect of 
participant get paid in bitcoins for 

Bitcoin’s 
Underlying 
Incentives 

DOI:10.1145/3152481 

Article development lead by 
queue.acm.org 

The unseen economic force 
that govern the Bitcoin protocol. 

BY YONATAN SOMPOLINSKY AND AVIV ZOHAR 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3152481 


MARCH 2018 | VOL. 61 | NO. 3 | COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM 47 

run software on their computer 
be that, once bitcoins have sufficient 
value, people start mining quite 
a lot. In fact, effort to mine intensi- 
fied to such a degree that most min- 
ing quickly transition to dedicate 
computer farm that use specialized 
gear for this purpose: first, GPUs that 
be use to massively parallelize 
the work; and later, custom-designed 
chips, or ASICs (application-specific 
integrate circuits), tailor for the 
specific computation at the core of 

the protocol (machines with current 
ASICs be about a million time fast- 
er than regular PCs when perform- 
ing this work). The Bitcoin network 
quickly grow and become more se- 
cure, and competition for the pay- 
ments give out periodically by the 
protocol become fierce. 

Before discuss the interplay be- 
tween Bitcoin’s security and it eco- 
nomics, let’s quickly look at the rule 
of the protocol itself; these give birth to 
this complex interplay. 

A Quick Primer on 
the Bitcoin Protocol 
Users who hold bitcoins and wish to 
transfer them send transaction mes- 
sage (via software instal on their 
computer or smartphone) to one of the 
node on the Bitcoin network. Active 
node collect such transaction from 
user and spread them out to their 
peer in the network, each node inform- 
ing other node it be connect to about 
the request transfer. Transactions be 
then aggregate in batch call blocks. IM 

A 
G 

E 
B 

Y 
S 

E 
R 

G 
E 

Y 
I 

LY 
A 

S 
O 

V 




48 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM | MARCH 2018 | VOL. 61 | NO. 3 

practice 

ficult because of the proof-of-work 
require for each block’s creation. In 
fact, a long a the attacker have less 
computational power than the entire 
Bitcoin network put together, block 
and transaction in the blockchain be- 
come increasingly harder to replace a 
the chain above them grows. 

This difficulty in replace the chain 
implies that it take many attempt be- 
fore an attacker can succeed in do 
so. These fail attempt supposedly 
impose a cost on attackers—mining 
block off of the long chain without 
get the associate mining rewards. 
Naïve attack be indeed costly for at- 
tacker (more sophisticated attack be 
discuss later). 

The accompany figure on page 49 
show the evolution of the blockchain: 
fork appear and be resolve a one of 
the branch becomes longer than 
the other. Blocks that be off the lon- 
gest chain be eventually aban- 
doned. They be no longer extended, 
their content (transactions color 
in red) be ignored, and the miner 
that create them receive no reward. 
At point 1 there be two alternative 
chain result from the creation of 
a block that do not reference the late 
tip of the blockchain. At point 2 the 
fork be resolved, a one chain be longer 
than the other. At point 3 there be 
another fork that last longer, and 
at point 4 the second fork be resolved. 

Bitcoin Economics 101: 
Difficulty Adjustment and 
the Economic Equilibrium 
of Mining 
Bitcoin’s rate of block creation be kept 
roughly constant by the protocol: 
Blocks be create at random interval 
of roughly 10 minute in expectation. 
The difficulty of the proof-of-work re- 
quired to generate block increase 
automatically if block be create too 
quickly. This mechanism have be put 
in place to ensure that block do not 
flood node a more computational 
power be add to the system. The sys- 
tem thus provide payment to miner 
at a relatively constant rate, regardless 
of the amount of computational power 
invest in mining. 

Clearly, a the value (in U.S. dollars) 
of bitcoins rises, the mining business 
(which yield payment that be de- 
nominate in bitcoins) becomes more 

Blocks, in turn, be chain together 
to create the blockchain, a record of all 
accepted bitcoin transactions. Each 
block in the chain reference it pre- 
decessor block by include a crypto- 
graphic hash of that block—effectively 
a unique identifier of that predecessor. 
A complete copy of the blockchain be 
kept at every node in the Bitcoin net- 
work. The process of block creation 
be call mining. One of it outcome 
(among others) be the printing of fresh 
coins, which we call minting. 

The rule of the protocol make 
block creation extremely difficult; a 
block be consider legal only if it con- 
tains the answer to a hard cryptograph- 
ic puzzle. As compensation, whenever 
miner manage to create block they 
be reward with bitcoins. Their re- 
ward be partly make up of newly mint- 
ed bitcoins and partly of mining fee 
collect from all of the transaction 
embed in their blocks. The rate of 
mint be currently 12.5 bitcoins per 
block. This amount be halve approxi- 
mately every four years. As this amount 
decreases, Bitcoin begin to rely more 
and more on transaction fee to pay 
the miners. 

The key to Bitcoin’s operation be to 
get all node to agree on the content 
of the blockchain, which serf a the 
record of all transfer in the system. 
Blocks be thus propagate quickly 
to all node in the network. Still, it 
be sometimes possible for node to 
receive two different version of the 
blockchain. For example, if two node 
manage to create a block at the same 
time, they may hold two different ex- 
tension to the blockchain. These 
block might contain different set of 
payments, and so a decision must be 
make on which version to accept. 

The Bitcoin protocol dictate that 
node accept only the long chain a 
the correct version of events, a show 
in the accompany figure. (To be 
more precise, node select the chain 
that contains the most accumulate 
computational work. This be usually the 
long chain.) This rule, often call 
the “longest chain rule,” provide Bit- 
coin with it security. An attacker who 
wish to dupe node into believe 
that a different set of payment have 
occur will need to produce a lon- 
ger chain than that of the rest of the 
network—a task that be incredibly dif- 

The key to 
Bitcoin’s operation 
be to get all node 
to agree on 
the content 
of the blockchain, 
which serf 
a the record 
of all transfer 
in the system. 



MARCH 2018 | VOL. 61 | NO. 3 | COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM 49 

practice 

lucrative. More participant then find 
it profitable to join the group of min- 
ers, and, a a consequence, the difficul- 
ty of block creation increases. With this 
increase in difficulty, mining block 
slowly becomes more expensive. In the 
ideal case, the system reach equilib- 
rium when the cost of block creation 
equal the amount of extract re- 
wards. In fact, mining will always be 
slightly profitable—mining be risky, 
and also require an initial investment 
in equipment, and some surplus in 
the reward must compensate for this. 
Hence, Bitcoin’s security effectively ad- 
justs itself to match it value: A high 
value also implies high security for 
the protocol. 

As mining reward continue to 
decline (as per the protocol’s min- 
ing schedule), the incentive to cre- 
ate block be expect to rely more on 
transaction fees. If a sudden drop in 
bitcoin transaction volume occurs, 
these fee might be insufficient to 
compensate miner for their compu- 
tational resources. Some miner might 
then halt their block creation process, 
temporarily. This may compromise the 
system, a the security of transaction 
depends on all honest miner actively 
participating. (For additional work on 
the incentive in Bitcoin after mining 
declines, see Carlsten et al.3) 

Many complain that the computa- 
tion require to create block waste 
resource (especially electricity) and 
have no economic goal other than im- 
pose large cost on would-be attack- 
er of the system. The proof-of-work be 
indeed a solution to a useless crypto- 
graphic puzzle—except, of course, that 
this “useless” work secures the Bitcoin 
network. But what if some of the work 
could be useful? Or could be produce 
more efficiently? If mining do not 
entail a waste of resource for each 
node, then it also cost nothing for at- 
tacker to attack the system. In fact, if 
the proof-of-work be less costly to solve, 
more honest participant join min- 
ing (to collect the rewards), and soon 
the difficulty adjustment mechanism 
raise the difficulty again. Hence, in 
a sense, the Bitcoin proof-of-work be 
built to spend a certain amount of re- 
source no matter how efficient an 
individual miner becomes. To derive 
substantial benefit from mining with- 
out an offset increase in cost re- 

quire a proof-of-work that be useful to 
society at large but cannot provide val- 
ue to the individual miner. (For some 
attempt at use other problem a a 
basis for proof-of-work, see Ball et al.,2 
Miller et al.,8 and Zhang et al.13) 

Mining Decentralization 
The key aspect of the Bitcoin protocol 
be it decentralization: no single entity 
have a priori more authority or control 
over the system than others. This pro- 
mote both the resilience of the sys- 
tem, which do not have a single an- 
chor of trust or single point of failure, 
and competition among the different 
participant for mining fees. 

To maintain this decentralization, 
it be important that mining activity in 
Bitcoin be do by many small entity 
and that no single miner significantly 
outweigh the others. Ideally, the re- 
ward that be give to miner should 
reflect the amount of effort they put in: 
a miner who contributes an α-fraction 
of the computational resource should 
create an α-fraction of the block on av- 
erage, and a a consequence extract a 
proportional α-fraction of all allocate 
fee and block rewards. 

In practice, some participant can 
benefit disproportionately from min- 
ing, for several different reasons. An 
unbalanced reward allocation of this 
sort creates a bias in favor of large 
miner with more computational 
power, make them more profitable 
than their small counterpart and 
create a constant economic under- 
current toward the centralization of 
the system. Even slight advantage 
can endanger the system, a the miner 
can use additional return to purchase 
more and more computational power, 
raise the difficulty of mining a the 

miner grows and push the other 
small (and, hence, less profitable) 
miner out of the game. The result 
winner-takes-all dynamic inevitably 
lead to centralization within the sys- 
tem, which be then at the mercy of the 
prevail miner, and no security prop- 
erties can be guaranteed. 

ASICs mining. The appearance of 
ASICs initially alarmed the Bitcoin 
community. ASICs be order of 
magnitude more efficient at mining 
bitcoins than previous systems. As 
this special hardware be not initially 
easy to acquire, it provide it own- 
er with a great advantage over other 
miners—they could mine at a much 
low cost. Those with this advantage 
would add ASIC-based proof-of-work 
to the system until the difficulty level 
would be so high that everyone else 
would quit mining. The risk be then 
that a single large miner would have 
sole access to ASICs and would come 
to dominate the Bitcoin system. Con- 
cerns subside after some time, a 
ASICs become commercially available 
and more widely distributed. 

In fact, ASIC mining actually intro- 
duce long-term effect that contrib- 
ute to security. Later this article look 
at how a miner can carry out profitable 
double spending and selfish mining 
attacks. One can argue, however, that 
even selfish and strategic miner be 
good off avoid such attacks. In- 
deed, a miner who invest million of 
dollar in mining equipment such a 
ASICs be heavily invest in the future 
value of Bitcoin: the miner’s equip- 
ment be expect to yield payment of 
bitcoins over a long period in the fu- 
ture. Should the miner then use this 
gear to attack the system, confidence 
in the currency would drop, and with 

The evolution of the blockchain. 

1 

(eventually abandoned) 

(eventually 
abandoned) 

2 3 4time 



50 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM | MARCH 2018 | VOL. 61 | NO. 3 

practice 

large entity, professional miner may 
enjoy the economic benefit of size. 
With a large mining operation, such 
miner be much more likely to invest 
in different optimizations, such a 
find source of somewhat cheaper 
electricity, or place their equipment 
in cooler region to provide more effi- 
cient cool to their machine (min- 
ing usually consumes a great deal of 
electricity, and cool the machine 
present a real challenge). Large min- 
er can also purchase ASICs in bulk for 
good prices. All of this translates to 
natural advantage to size, a phenome- 
non that be not specific to Bitcoin but in 
fact appear in many industries. These 
effect give large miner an advantage 
and slowly pull the system toward a 
centralize one. 

Many have raise concern that 
most of today’s Bitcoin mining be do 
by Chinese miners. They enjoy good 
access to ASICs, cheaper electricity, 
and somewhat low regulation than 
similar operation in other locations. 
The Chinese government, which tight- 
ly control Internet traffic in and out 
of China, could choose to disrupt the 
system or even seize the mining equip- 
ment that be within it borders. 

Mining Pools and Risk Aversion 
Bitcoin’s mining process yield very 
high reward but with very low prob- 
ability for each small miner. A single 
ASIC that be run full time may 
have less than a 1-in-600,000 chance 
of mining the next block, which im- 
ply that year can go by without find- 
ing a single block. This sort of high- 
risk/high-reward payoff be not suitable 
for most. Many would prefer a small, 
constant rate of income over long pe- 
riods of time (this be essentially risk 
aversion).6 A constant income stream 
can be used, for example, to pay the 
electric bill for mining. 

The formation of pools. Mining 
pool be coalition of miner that 
combine their computational resourc- 
e to create block together and share 
the reward among member of the 
pool. Since the pool’s worker together 
find block much more often than each 
miner alone, they be able to provide 
small continuous payment to each 
worker on a more regular basis. 

From the perspective of the Bitcoin 
network, the pool be just a single min- 

it the value of bitcoins and future re- 
wards. The interest of miner be 
thus, in some sense, align with the 
overall health of the system. 

All in all, ASIC mining introduces 
a barrier-to-entry to the system, a or- 
dinary people cannot simply join the 
mining efforts; it thus reduces decen- 
tralization. On the other hand, it intro- 
duce a form of barrier-to-exit, a min- 
er cannot repurpose their equipment 
to other economic activities; it there- 
fore contributes to security. 

The appearance of compete cryp- 
tocurrencies (for example, Litecoin, 
which essentially clone Bitcoin), 
some of which use the same proof-of- 
work a Bitcoin, offer alternative for 
miner who wish to divert their mining 
power elsewhere. This introduces com- 
plex market dynamics. For example, 
when a specific currency loses some 
value, miner will divert their mining 
power to another cryptocurrency until 
the difficulty readjusts. This can cause 
fluctuation in block creation that de- 
stabilize small cryptocurrencies. 

Alternative system with no ASIC 
mining. Interestingly, some crypto- 
currency use different proof-of-work 
puzzle that be thought to be more 
resistant to ASIC mining, that is, they 
choose puzzle for which it be difficult 
to design specialized hardware; for 
example, Ethereum us the Ethash 
puzzle (https://github.com/ethereum/ 
wiki/wiki/Ethash). This be often 
achieve by design algorithmic 
problem that require heavy access to 
other resources, such a memory, and 
that can be solve efficiently by com- 
mercially available hardware. 

These alternative system be in 
principle more decentralized, but on 
the flip side they lack the barrier-to-exit 
effect and it contribution to security. 

A similar effect occurs when cloud 
mining becomes highly available. 
Some mining entity offer their equip- 
ment for rental over the cloud. The cli- 
ents of these business be effectively 
miner who do not have a long-term 
stake in the system. As such service 
become cheaper and more accessible, 
anyone can easily become a temporary 
miner, with similar effect on security. 

ASICBoost. Recall that create a 
block require solve a cryptograph- 
ic puzzle unique to that block. This 
involves guess input to a crypto- 

graphic hash function. Solving the 
puzzle be mostly do via brute-force 
enumeration of different inputs. 

A miner can gain an advantage by cre- 
ating block use more efficient meth- 
od than his or her counterparts. In ad- 
dition to good hardware, an advantage 
can take a more algorithmic form. In 
fact, an algorithmic “trick” nickname 
ASICBoost have recently make head- 
lines. ASICBoost enables the miner to 
reuse some of the computational work 
perform during the evaluation of 
one input for the evaluation of another. 
This algorithm be proprietary, patent 
pending, and it be unclear who be and 
who be not use it. Such an algorithmic 
advantage can be translate to low 
power consumption per hash. Bitmain, 
a large manufacturer of ASICs for bit- 
coin mining that also operates some 
mining pools, be recently accuse by 
some of secretly deploy a hardware 
variant of ASICBoost to increase it 
profits. Allegations be make that this 
company be politically block some 
protocol improvement that would co- 
incidentally remove their ability to use 
ASICBoost. 

Communication. Yet another meth- 
od for a miner to become more effi- 
cient be to invest in communication 
infrastructure. By propagate block 
faster, and by receive others’ block 
faster, a miner can reduce the chance 
that their block will not belong to the 
long chain and will be discard 
(“orphaned”). As off-chain block re- 
ceive no rewards, a good connection 
to the network translates to reduce 
losses. Admittedly, with Bitcoin’s cur- 
rent block creation rate, this advantage 
be rather marginal; block be create 
infrequently, and speed up delivery 
by just a few second yield relatively 
little advantage. Nonetheless, good 
connectivity be a relatively cheap way to 
become more profitable. 

Furthermore, the effect of com- 
munication become much more pro- 
nounced when the protocol be scale 
up and transaction processing be ac- 
celerated. Today, Bitcoin clear three 
to seven transaction per second on 
average. Changing the parameter of 
Bitcoin to process more transaction 
per second would increase the rate of 
orphan block and would amplify the 
advantage of well-connected miners. 

Economies of scale. As with any 



MARCH 2018 | VOL. 61 | NO. 3 | COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM 51 

practice 

ing node. Pool participant interact 
with the pool’s server, which sends 
the next block header that the pool be 
work on to all workers. Each mem- 
ber try to solve the cryptographic 
puzzle correspond to this block 
(in fact, they use small variant of the 
same block and work on slightly dif- 
ferent proof-of-work puzzle to avoid 
duplicate work). Whenever a work- 
er find a solution, it be sent to the 
pool manager, who in turn publishes 
the block to the network. The block 
provide a reward to the pool, which 
the manager then distributes among 
all of the pool’s worker (minus some 
small fee). 

Reward distribution within pool 
and possible manipulations. Many 
pool be public and open to any will- 
ing participant. Obviously, such pool 
must take measure to ensure that 
only member who truly contribute to 
the pool’s mining effort enjoy a por- 
tion of the rewards. To that end, every 
pool member sends partial solution 
of the proof-of-work to the pool— 
these be solution that come “close” 
to be full blocks. Partial solution 
be much more common than full so- 
lutions, and anyone work on the 
problem can present a steady stream 
of such attempt that fall short of the 
target. This indicates that the worker 
be indeed engage in work, and can be 
use to ass the amount of compu- 
tational power each worker dedicates 
to the pool. Pools thus reward work- 
er in some proportion to the num- 
ber of share that they earn (a share be 
grant for every partial solution that 
be submitted). 

Fortunately, a pool member who 
have found a valid solution to the puzzle 
cannot steal the rewards. The crypto- 
graphic puzzle depends on the block 
header, which be under the control of 
the pool’s manager. It encodes a com- 
mitment to the content of the block 
itself (via a cryptographic hash), in- 
cluding the recipient of the block’s 
rewards. After find a valid solution 
for a specific block header, one cannot 
tamper with the header without invali- 
date the solution. 

Nonetheless, pool be susceptible to 
some manipulation by strategic miners: 

Pool hopping. In the early day of 
Bitcoin, mining pool would simply 
divide the reward from the late block 

among all worker in proportion to the 
number of partial solution each work- 
er submitted. The number of share 
be measure from the previous block 
create by the same pool. 

Some worker come up with a way 
to improve their rewards: if a pool be 
unlucky and do not find a block for a 
while, many partial solution (shares) 
would accumulate. If a block be then 
found by the pool, it reward would be 
split among many shares. Working to 
generate additional share be just a 
costly a before but yield low expect 
reward for this very reason. Instead, the 
worker could just switch to another pool 
in which a block have be found more 
recently, and in which each additional 
share grant a high expect reward. 
If many adopt this behavior, a pool that 
be temporarily unsuccessful should, in 
fact, be completely abandon by all 
rational miners. Pool-hopping-resistant 
reward scheme be quickly developed 
and adopt by most mining pools.10 

Block-withholding attacks. While a 
miner cannot steal the block reward 
of a successful solution, he or she can 
still deny the reward from the rest of 
the miner in the pool. The miner can 
choose to submit only partial solution 
to the pool’s manager but discard all 
successful solutions. The miner thus 
receives a share of the reward when 
others find a solution, without provid- 
ing any actual contribution to the pool. 
Discarding the successful solution sab- 
otages the pool, and cause a small loss 
of income to the attacker. 

In spite of the loss to an attack- 
er, in some situation it be worthwhile 
for mining pool to devote some of 
their own mining power to sabotage 
their competitors: the attacker pool 
infiltrates the victim pool by register- 
ing some of it miner a worker in 
the victim pool. These worker then 
execute a block-withholding attack. 
Careful calculation of the cost and 
reward show that, in some scenar- 
io (depending on the size of the 
attacker and victim pools), the at- 
tack be profitable.4 To prevent such 
schemes, a slight modification of the 
mining protocol have be proposed. In 
the modify version, worker would 
not be able to discern between partial 
and full solution to the proof-of-work 
puzzle and would not be able to selec- 
tively withhold full solutions. 

Mining pool 
be coalition 
of miner 
that combine 
their computational 
resource 
to create block 
together and 
share the reward 
among member 
of the pool. 



52 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM | MARCH 2018 | VOL. 61 | NO. 3 

practice 

valid transaction and to validate every 
new block before accept it. 

Interestingly, despite this logic, 
sometimes miner mine on top of a 
block without fully validate it. This 
practice be know a SPV mining (sim- 
plified payment verification usually 
refers to the use of thin client that do 
not read the full content of blocks). 

Why would miner engage in 
building on top of an unvalidated 
block? The answer again lie in in- 
centives. Some miner apply meth- 
od to learn about the hash ID of a 
newly create block even before re- 
ceiving it entire contents. One such 
method, know a spy-mining, in- 
volves join another mining pool 
a a worker to detect block creation 
events. Even when the block be re- 
ceived, it take time to validate the 
transaction it contains. During this 
time, the miner be aware that the 
blockchain be already longer by one 
block. Therefore, rather than let 
the mining equipment lie idle until 
the block be validated, the miner de- 
cides to mine on top of it, under the 
assumption that it will most likely be 
valid. To avoid the risk that the next 
block will contain conflict with the 
transaction of the unverified block, 
the miner do not embed new trans- 
action in the next block, hop still 
to collect the block reward. 

There be indeed evidence that min- 
er be take this approach. First, 
some fraction of the block be 
mine be empty (even when many trans- 
action be wait to be approved). An- 
other piece of evidence be related to an 
unfortunate incident that take place in 
July 2015. An invalid block be (unin- 
tentionally) mine due to a bug, and SPV 
miner add five additional block on 
top of it without validating. Of course, 
other validate miner reject that 
block and any block that reference it, 
result in a six-block-long fork in the 
network. Blocks that be discard in 
the fork could have contain double- 
spent transactions. 

This event show the danger of SPV 
mining: it lower the security of Bit- 
coin and may trigger fork in the block- 
chain. Fortunately, miner have vastly 
improve the propagation and valida- 
tion time of blocks, so SPV mining have 
less and less effect. The plan de- 
cline in the mint reward give to 

Eliminating pools. While pool be 
good for small miners, mitigate 
their risk and uncertainty, they intro- 
duce some centralization to the system. 
The pool operator be essentially con- 
troll the combine computational 
resource of many miner and be there- 
fore quite powerful. Some researcher 
propose a technical modification to 
the mining protocol that undermines 
the existence of public pool altogeth- 
er.7 Under this scheme, after find 
a valid solution to the block, the pool 
member who mine it would still be 
able to redirect the reward to them- 
self (without invalidate the solu- 
tion). Assuming many miner would 
claim the reward for themselves, 
pool would not be profitable and 
would therefore dissolve. 

The Economics of Attacks 
and Deviations from the Rules 
Earlier, this article described method 
by which a miner can become more 
dominant within the protocol—both to 
profit more than his or her fair share and 
to generate more of the block in the 
chain. The method discuss thus far 
do not violate any of the protocol’s rules; 
in some sense, miner be expect to 
make the most of their hardware and 
infrastructure. This section discus 
direct violation of the rule of the pro- 
tocol that allow miner to profit at the 
expense of others. In a sense, the ex- 
istence of such strategy implies that 
there be something fundamentally bro- 
ken in the protocol’s incentive struc- 
ture: rational profit-maximizing par- 
ticipants will not follow it. 

Informally, the protocol instructs 
any node to: validate every new mes- 
sage it receives (block/transaction); 
propagate all valid message to it 
peers; broadcast it own new block 
immediately upon creation; and, build 
it new block on top of the long 
chain know to that node. Attacks on 
the protocol correspond to deviation 
from one or more of these instructions. 

Validation. A miner who do not 
validate incoming message be vulner- 
able—the next block might include an 
invalid transaction that he or she do 
not verify, or reference an invalid pre- 
decessor block. Other node will then 
consider this new block a invalid and 
ignore it. This set a clear incentive for 
miner to embed in their block only 

The existence 
of selfish mining 
strategy implies 
that there be 
something 
fundamentally 
broken in 
the protocol’s 
incentive structure: 
rational 
profit-maximizing 
participant 
will not follow it. 



MARCH 2018 | VOL. 61 | NO. 3 | COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM 53 

practice 

empty block will also low the incen- 
tive to engage in such behavior. 

Transaction propagation. A second 
important aspect of the Bitcoin pro- 
tocol pertains to information propa- 
gation: new transaction and block 
should be sent to all peer in the net- 
work. Here the incentive to comply 
with the protocol be not so clear. Miners 
may even have a disincentive to share 
unconfirmed transaction that have 
yet to be include in blocks, especially 
transaction that offer high fees.1 Min- 
er have strong incentive to keep such 
transaction to themselves until they 
manage to create a block. Sending a 
transaction to others allows them to 
snatch the reward it offer first. Thus 
far, most transaction fee have be 
relatively low, and there be no evidence 
that transaction with high fee be be- 
ing withheld in this way. 

Next, let’s turn our attention to devia- 
tions from the mining protocol intend 
explicitly to manipulate the blockchain. 

Selfish mining. Whenever a miner 
creates a new block, the protocol say it 
should be create on top of the long 
chain the miner observes (that is, to 
reference the tip of the long chain 
a it predecessor) and that the miner 
should send the new block immedi- 
ately to network peers. 

Unfortunately, a miner can benefit 
by deviate from these rule and act- 
ing strategically.5,11 The miner’s gen- 
eral strategy be to withhold the blocks’ 
publication and keep the extension of 
the public chain secret. Meanwhile, 
the public chain be extend by other 
(honest) nodes. The strategic miner 
publishes the chain only when the risk 
that it will not prevail a the long 
chain be too high. When the miner do 
so, all node adopt the longer exten- 
sion that the miner suddenly released, 
a dictate by the protocol, and they 
discard the previous public extension. 

Importantly, this behavior increas- 
e the miner’s share in the long 
chain—meaning, it increase the per- 
centage of block on the eventual lon- 
gest chain that the miner generates. 
Recall that Bitcoin automatically ad- 
justs the difficulty of the proof-of-work 
so a to keep the block creation rate 
constant. Thus, in the long run, a larg- 
er relative share of block in the chain 
translates to an increase in the miner’s 
absolute rewards. 

There be no definite method to verify 
whether miner be engage in self- 
ish mining or not. Given that very few 
block be orphaned, it seem like this 
practice have not be take up, at least 
not by large miner (who would also 
have the most to gain from it). One way 
to explain this be that miner who at- 
tempt such manipulation over the long 
term may suffer loss to their reputation 
and provoke outrage by the commu- 
nity. Another explanation be that this 
scheme initially require lose some 
of the selfish miner’s own blocks, and 
it becomes profitable only in the long 
run (it take around two week for the 
protocol to readjust the difficulty level). 

Double spending be the basic attack 
against Bitcoin users: the attacker pub- 
lishes a legitimate payment to the net- 
work, wait for it to be embed in the 
blockchain and for the victim to confirm 
it, and then publishes a longer chain of 
block mine in secret that do not con- 
tain this payment. The payment be then 
no longer part of the long chain and, 
effectively, “never happened.” 

This attack incurs a risk: the attack- 
er could lose the reward for his or her 
block if they do not end up in the long 
chain. Surprisingly, and unfortunately, 
a persistent attacker can eliminate this 
risk by follow more sophisticated at- 
tack schemes.12 The idea be to abandon 
the attack frequently, publish the secret 
attack chain, and collect reward for it 
blocks. By reset the attack whenever 
the risk of lose block reward be too 
high, the attacker can eliminate the at- 
tack cost and even be profitable in the 
long term. These scheme be in essence 
a combination of selfish mining and 
double-spending attacks. 

Currently, double spending be not 
observe often in the network. This 
could be because execute a success- 
ful double spend be difficult, or because 
the very miner who could execute 
such attack successfully also have a 
heavy stake in the system’s reputation. 

Conclusion 
Incentives do indeed play a big role in 
the Bitcoin protocol. They be crucial 
for it security and effectively drive it 
daily operation. As argue here, min- 
er go to extreme length to maximize 
their revenue and often find creative 
way to do so that be sometimes at 
odds with the protocol. 

Cryptocurrency protocol should be 
place on strong foundation of in- 
centives. There be many area left to 
improve, range from the very basic 
of mining reward and how they inter- 
act with the consensus mechanism, 
through the reward in mining pools, 
and all the way to the transaction fee 
market itself. 

Related article 
on queue.acm.org 

Research for Practice: Cryptocurrencies, 
Blockchains, and Smart Contracts 
Arvind Narayanan and Andrew Miller 
http://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=3043967 

Bitcoin’s Academic Pedigree 
Arvind Narayanan and Jeremy Clark 
http://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=3136559 

Certificate Transparency 
Ben Laurie 
http://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=2668154 

References 
1. Babaioff, M. et al. On Bitcoin and red balloons. In 

Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Electronic 
Commerce, 2012, 56–73. 

2. Ball, M. et al. Proofs of Useful Work. IACR Cryptology 
ePrint Archive, 2017, 203. 

3. Carlsten, M. et al. On the instability of Bitcoin without 
the block reward. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGSAC 
Conference on Computer and Communications 
Security, 2016, 154–167. 

4. Eyal, I. The Miner’s dilemma. In Proceedings of the 
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2015. 

5. Eyal, I. and Sirer, E.G. Majority be not Enough: 
Bitcoin mining be vulnerable. In Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Financial Cryptography 
and Data Security. Springer, Berlin, 2014. 

6. Fisch, B.A., Pass, R., Shelat, A. Socially Optimal Mining 
Pools. arXiv preprint, 2017. 

7. Miller, A. et al. Nonoutsourceable scratch-off puzzle 
to discourage Bitcoin mining coalitions. In Proceedings 
of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and 
Communications Security. 2015. 

8. Miller, A. et al. Permacoin: Repurposing Bitcoin work 
for data preservation. In Proceedings of the IEEE 
Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2014. 

9. Nakamoto, S. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash 
system. Bitcoin.org, 2008; https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf. 

10. Rosenfeld, M. Analysis of Bitcoin Pooled Mining 
Reward Systems. arXiv preprint, 2011. 

11. Sapirshtein, A., Sompolinsky, Y. and Zohar, A. Optimal 
selfish mining strategy in Bitcoin. In Proceedings 
of the International Conference on Financial 
Cryptography and Data Security. Springer, Berlin, 2016. 

12. Sompolinsky, Y. and Zohar, A. Bitcoin’s security model 
revisited. In Proceedings of the International Joint 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Workshop on A.I. 
in Security, 2017. Melbourne. 

13. Zhang, F. et al. REM: Resource-Efficient Mining for 
Blockchains. Cryptology ePrint Archive. https://eprint. 
iacr.org/2017/179. 

Yonatan Sompolinsky be a Ph.D. student at 
the School of Computer Science and Engineering at 
the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. He be found 
scientist of DAGlabs. 

Aviv Zohar be a faculty member at the School of 
Computer Science and Engineering at the Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem, and a cofounder and 
chief scientist of QED-it. He have be research 
the scalability, security, and underlie incentive 
of cryptocurrencies for several years. 

Copyright held by authors/owners. 
Publication right license to ACM. $15.00. 


