






































â•ŸBlurred faceâ•Ž news anonymity get an artificial intelligence spin - SFU News - Simon Fraser University 


A research team from SFU’s School of Interactive Arts and Technology (SIAT) have come up with a way to replace the use of ‘blurring’ face in news report when anonymity be 

needed. The team's method us arti icial intelligence (AI) technique that aim to improve visuals while amplify emotion tie to the story. 

SIAT professor Steve DiPaola and Kate Hennessy, together with Taylor Owen from UBC’s journalism school, receive a Google/Knight Foundation grant to carry out the research. 

They present the work to international journalist at a Journalism 360 demo event honor grantee in New York on July 24, and the next day at a full conference held across the 

street from the New York Times headquarters. 

“Our goal be to create a work technique that would be much good at convey emotional and knowledge information than current anonymization techniques,” say DiPaola, a 

pioneer in AI/VR facial recognition processes. 

Based on it research, the team have create an update pixelating technique use an AI “painting” approach to anonymization. 

“When artist paint a portrait, they try to convey the subject’s outer and inner resemblance,” say DiPaola. “With our AI, which learns from more than 1,000 year of artistic 

technique, we have taught the system to low the outer resemblance and keep a high a possible the subject’s inner resemblance – in other words, what they be convey and 

how they be feeling. 

“Our system us ive level of AI processing to simulate a smart painter, use art abstraction to repaint the video a if an artist be painting every frame. The result be more 

engaging, especially since not everyone listens to story – so the art component becomes more relevant.” 

‘Blurred face’ news anonymity get an artificial intelligence spin - SFU... https://www.sfu.ca/sfunews/stories/2018/08/blurred-face-anonymity-gets... 

1 sur 2 09-08-18 à 18:45 



The system doesn’t change the pixel of the video frame a Adobe-like system can, but instead produce a painting-style result of every frame, DiPaola notes. “It’s actually an open 

and dynamic process that allows level of control throughout. We eventually want to the subject or producer to be able to customize the inal result base on their needs.” 

DiPaola say the tool’s effectiveness at anonymizing while retain a strong degree of emotional connection or resonance should result in good inal product for anonymized video, 

especially in 360 or VR. The team plan to put the technology to work in a variety of projects. 

While at the conference DiPaola's team garnish interest from several major medium company look to explore new medium approaches, include the New York Times, 

Washington Post and the BBC. 

For more on the research see AIpaint360.org. 

‘Blurred face’ news anonymity get an artificial intelligence spin - SFU... https://www.sfu.ca/sfunews/stories/2018/08/blurred-face-anonymity-gets... 

2 sur 2 09-08-18 à 18:45 


