






































Breaking bottleneck to the electronic-photonic information technology revolution 


Breaking bottleneck to the electronic-photonic information technology revolution 

Jackson Holtz UW News 

News release | Research | Science 

April 25, 2018 

This artistic render magnifies a electro-optic modulator.Virginia Commonwealth University image/Nathaniel Kinsey 

Researchers at the University of Washington, work with researcher from the ETH-Zurich, Purdue University and Virginia Commonwealth University, 
have achieve an optical communication breakthrough that could revolutionize information technology. 

They create a tiny device, small than a human hair, that translates electrical bit (0s and 1 of the digital language) into light, or photonic bits, at speed 
10 of time faster than current technologies. 

Breaking bottleneck to the electronic-photonic information technology ... https://www.washington.edu/news/2018/04/25/breaking-bottlenecks-to-t... 

1 sur 2 04-05-18 à 12:14 



“As with early advance in information technology, this can dramatically impact the way we live,” say Larry Dalton, a UW chemistry professor emeritus 
and leader in photonics research. 

These new electro-optic device approach the size of current electronic circuit element and be important for integrate photonics and electronics on a 
single chip. The new technology also involves utilization of a particle, a plasmon polariton, that have property intermediate between electron and 
photons. This hybrid particle technology be refer to a plasmonics. 

The finding be publish today in the journal Nature. 

“The device have be built a a plasmonic modulator,” say Christian Haffner, a graduate student at ETH-Zurich and lead author of the paper. “This be 
unusual a the traditional implementation relies on photonics rather than plasmonics. As a matter of fact, researcher avoid plasmonics, a plasmonics be 
know in all industry a a technology that come at the price of high optical losses. Yet – and this be by far the most spectacular find – a trick have 
be found to use plasmonics without suffer from such high losses.” 

To increase the information-handling capacity of computing, telecommunications, sense and control technologies, data need to be communicate with 
high bandwidth over vast distance without signal (information) degrading, or consume too much energy and generate too much heat. That’s where 
the new technology described in the Nature article fit in. Called an electro-optic modulator, the device convert electrical signal into optical one capable 
at travel either over fiberglass optic cable or wirelessly through space via satellite and cell towers. This must be accomplish with excellent energy 
efficiency use extremely small device capable of processing massive amount of data. 

“The device must be very sensitive, capable of respond to very small electrical fields. If the field need to control the device be small, then the power 
consumption be low a well. This be important a energy efficiency be critical to all applications,” co-author Dalton said, adding, “You want to avoid 
generate heat and information degradation in compute or telecommunication applications.” 

This late advance follow on a breakthrough in 2000 when Dalton and a team of UW and University of Southern California researcher first introduce 
newly design electro-optical polymer or plastics, which be integrate into centimeter-long device that could be operate with less than a volt and 
with bandwidth exceed 100 gigahertz. Unfortunately, these device be much large than electronic data-generating element and be not suit for 
integration of electronics and photonics element on a single chip. 

However, transition to plasmonics, this footprint issue have now be solved. And it all start when an international team of scientist and engineer 
set out to improve the device by integrate good organic electro-optic material with plasmonics. Plasmons be create when light impinges onto a 
metallic surface, such a gold. Photons then pas on part of their energy to the electron on the metallic surface such that the electron oscillate. These new 
photon-electron oscillation be call plasmon polaritons. Working with plasmon polaritons permit dramatic reduction in the size of optical circuitry and 
bandwidth operation many time that of photonics. Compared to the 2000 discovery, the bandwidth of the device increase by almost a factor of 10 while 
reduce the energy requirement by almost 1,000 and this translates into a reduction in heating. 

The Achilles’ heel of plasmonics, however, be refer to a optical loss. While signal degradation with distance of transmission be not a bad a with 
electronics, signal degradation with plasmonics be much bad than with photonics. 

“The ETH and Purdue researcher conceive of an elegant device architecture that address the problem of plasmonic loss and achieves loss comparable 
to that of all-photonic modulators by use a combination of plasmonics and photonics,” Dalton said. 

He call the device an elegant integration of electronics, photonics and plasmonics, use an organic electro-optic material that permit integration of all 
of the signal processing options. 

“This be a doubly significant advance in plasmonics and organic electroactive materials, make possible through creative iteration between material 
prediction, design, synthesis, and property optimization,” say Linda S. Sapochak, division director for material research at the National Science 
Foundation, which help fund the research. 

The integration of electronics and photonics on chip have be recognize for more than a decade a a critical next step in the evolution of information 
technology. Information technology be the science of how we sense our world and both process and communicate that information. 

The application of the new device can be divide into two category base on the wavelength of light utilized: Fiber optic telecommunication and 
optical interconnects in compute utilize light (photons) at optical frequency (infrared light), while application such a radar and wireless 
telecommunication use electromagnetic radiation in the radiofrequency and microwave (long wavelength light) regions. 

In the telecommunication and compute space, electro-optics take information generate in an electronic device (for example, a computer processor) 
and transform it into light signal that travel over a fiber optic cable or via a wireless transmission to another electronic device. 

“In that sense, you might think of electro-optics a the ‘on-ramps of the information superhighway,’” say Dalton. 

Electro-optics also be critical to many other application such a radar and GPS. It represent critical sensor technology, include application such a 
embed network sensing. For example, electro-optics be critical to many component of an autonomous vehicle and for monitoring infrastructure 
element such a building and bridges. The device be relevant to both digital and analog information processing. 

Co-authors include Daniel Chelladurai, Yuriy Fedoryshyn, Arne Josten, Benedikt Baeuerle, Wolfgang Heni, Tatsuhiko Watanabe, Tong Cui, Bojun Cheng 
and Juerg Leuthold of ETH Zurich Institute of Electromagnetic Fields; Delwin L. Elder of the UW Department of Chemistry; Soham Saha, Alexandra 
Boltasseva and Vladimir Shalaev, Purdue University and Brick Nanotechnology Center; and Nathaniel Kinsey, Virginia Commonwealth University. 

Funding for this project be from EU Project PLASMOFAB (688166), the ERC grant PLASILOR (640478), the National Science Foundation 
(DMR-1303080) and the Air Force Office of Scientific Research grant (FA9550-15-1-0319 and FA9550-14-1-0138). Co-author Kinsey acknowledges 
support from the Virginia Microelectronics Consortium and the Virginia Commonwealth University Presidential Research Quest Fund. 

### 

Contact Larry Dalton at dalton@chem.washington.edu. 

Tag(s): Department of Chemistry • Larry Dalton 

Breaking bottleneck to the electronic-photonic information technology ... https://www.washington.edu/news/2018/04/25/breaking-bottlenecks-to-t... 

2 sur 2 04-05-18 à 12:14 


