






































â•œBreakthroughâ•š algorithm exponentially faster than any previous one 


“Breakthrough” algorithm exponentially faster than any 
previous one 

Smarter, faster algorithm cut number of step to solve problem 

New algorithm us adaptive sample to exponentially speed up computation 

What if a large class of algorithm use today — from the algorithm that help u avoid traffic to the 
algorithm that identify new drug molecule — work exponentially faster? 

Computer scientist at the Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences (SEAS) have 
developed a completely new kind of algorithm, one that exponentially speed up computation by dramatically 
reduce the number of parallel step require to reach a solution. 

The theoretical research be present at the ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), June 25-29 
and the experimental research will be present at the International Conference on Machine Learning 
(ICML), July 10 -15. 

A lot of so-called optimization problems, problem that find the best solution from all possible solutions, such 
a mapping the fast route from point A to point B, rely on sequential algorithm that haven’t change since 
they be first described in the 1970s. These algorithm solve a problem by follow a sequential step-by- 
step process. The number of step be proportional to the size of the data. But this have lead to a computational 
bottleneck, result in line of question and area of research that be just too computationally expensive to 
explore. 

“These optimization problem have a diminish return property,” say Yaron Singer, Assistant Professor of 
Computer Science at SEAS and senior author of the research. “As an algorithm progresses, it relative gain 
from each step becomes small and smaller.” 

“Breakthrough” algorithm exponentially faster than any previous one https://www.seas.harvard.edu/content/breakthrough-algorithm-exponenti... 

1 sur 4 09-07-18 à 21:03 



Yaron Singer, Assistant Professor of Computer Science at SEAS, design a new type of algorithm. 
(Photo courtesy of Eliza Grinnell/Harvard SEAS) 

Singer and his colleague asked: what if, instead of take hundred or thousand of small step to reach a 
solution, an algorithm could take just a few leaps? 

“This algorithm and general approach allows u to dramatically speed up computation for an enormously 
large class of problem across many different fields, include computer vision, information retrieval, 
network analysis, computational biology, auction design, and many others,” say Singer. “We can now 
perform computation in just a few second that would have previously take week or months.” 

“This new algorithmic work, and the correspond analysis, open the door to new large-scale 
parallelization strategy that have much large speedup than what have ever be possible before,” say Jeff 
Bilmes, Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering at the University of Washington, who be not 
involve in the research. “These ability will, for example, enable real-world summarization process to be 
developed at unprecedented scale.” 

Traditionally, algorithm for optimization problem narrow down the search space for the best solution one 
step at a time. In contrast, this new algorithm sample a variety of direction in parallel. Based on that 
sample, the algorithm discard low-value direction from it search space and chooses the most valuable 
direction to progress towards a solution. 

Take this toy example: 

You’re in the mood to watch a movie similar to The Avengers. A traditional recommendation algorithm would 
sequentially add a single movie in every step which have similar attribute to those of The Avengers. In 
contrast, the new algorithm sample a group of movie at random, discard those that be too dissimilar to 
The Avengers. What’s left be a batch of movie that be diverse (after all, you don’t want ten Batman movies) 
but similar to The Avengers. The algorithm continue to add batch in every step until it have enough movie 
to recommend. 

This process of adaptive sample be key to the algorithm’s ability to make the right decision at each step. 

“Traditional algorithm for this class of problem greedily add data to the solution while consider the entire 
dataset at every step,” say Eric Balkanski, a graduate student at SEAS and co-author of the research. “The 
strength of our algorithm be that in addition to add data, it also selectively prune data that will be ignore 
in future steps.” 

“Breakthrough” algorithm exponentially faster than any previous one https://www.seas.harvard.edu/content/breakthrough-algorithm-exponenti... 

2 sur 4 09-07-18 à 21:03 



The black line show the number of step a traditional algorithm take to solve a problem while 
the red line demonstrates the number of step the new algorithm needs. 

In experiments, Singer and Balkanski demonstrate that their algorithm could sift through a data set which 
contain 1 million rating from 6,000 user on 4,000 movie and recommend a personalize and diverse 
collection of movie for an individual user 20 time faster than the state-of-the-art. 

The researcher also test the algorithm on a taxi dispatch problem, where there be a certain number of 
taxi and the goal be to pick the best location to cover the maximum number of potential customers. Using a 
dataset of two million taxi trip from the New York City taxi and limousine commission, the adaptive- 
sample algorithm found solution 6 time faster. 

“This gap would increase even more significantly on large scale applications, such a cluster biological 
data, sponsor search auctions, or social medium analytics,” say Balkanski. 

Of course, the algorithm’s potential extends far beyond movie recommendation and taxi dispatch 
optimizations. It could be apply to: 

design clinical trial for drug to treat Alzheimer’s, multiple sclerosis, obesity, diabetes, hepatitis C, 
HIV and more 
evolutionary biology to find good representative subset of different collection of gene from large 
datasets of gene from different specie 
design sensor array for medical image 
identify drug-drug interaction detection from online health forum 

This process of active learn be key to the algorithm’s ability to make the right decision at each step and 
solves the problem of diminish returns. 

“Breakthrough” algorithm exponentially faster than any previous one https://www.seas.harvard.edu/content/breakthrough-algorithm-exponenti... 

3 sur 4 09-07-18 à 21:03 



“This research be a real breakthrough for large-scale discrete optimization,” say Andreas Krause, professor of 
Computer Science at ETH Zurich, who be not involve in the research. “One of the big challenge in 
machine learn be find good, representative subset of data from large collection of image or video to 
train machine learn models. This research could identify those subset quickly and have substantial 
practical impact on these large-scale data summarization problems.” 

Singer-Balkanski model and variant of the algorithm developed in the paper could also be use to more 
quickly ass the accuracy of a machine learn model, say Vahab Mirrokni, a principal scientist at Google 
Research, who be not involve in the research. 

“In some cases, we have a black-box access to the model accuracy function which be time-consuming to 
compute,” say Mirrokni. “At the same time, compute model accuracy for many feature setting can be 
do in parallel. This adaptive optimization framework be a great model for these important setting and the 
insight from the algorithmic technique developed in this framework can have deep impact in this important 
area of machine learn research." 

Singer and Balkanski be continue to work with practitioner on implement the algorithm. 

“Breakthrough” algorithm exponentially faster than any previous one https://www.seas.harvard.edu/content/breakthrough-algorithm-exponenti... 

4 sur 4 09-07-18 à 21:03 


