






































BT build the UKâ•Žs first â•Ÿunhackableâ•Ž quantum-secured network 


Adastral Park in Martlesham, Ipswich, the epicentre of BT’s research, technology and IT operations. Image: VisMedia 

BT say it new network will be secure against threat from quantum computers. 

Today (12 June), BT announce the construction of a practical quantum-secured, high-speed fibre network between the BT Labs 
in Adastral Park in Ipswich and Cambridge. 

The project be lead by the Quantum Communications Hub, which be part of the UK National Quantum Technologies Programme. 

Constructed by researcher from BT, the University of York and the University of Cambridge over the past two years, the secure 
connection be built a part of a project co-funded by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council, and will connect 
to the Cambridge Metropolitan QKD (quantum key distribution) Network. 

First real-world deployment in the UK 

The quantum-secured link run across a standard fibre connection, which run through numerous BT exchange over a distance of 
120km. This, BT claims, make it the first high-speed, real-world deployment of quantum-based network security in the UK. 

The network link be capable of data transfer speed of 500Gbps and will explore and validate use case for QKD technologies. 

The link be say to be ‘unhackable’ due to it reliance on the use of single particle of light (photons) to transmit encryption key 
across the fibre. If this communication be intercepted, the sender will be able to detect that the link have be tamper with. 

The steal photon will then be unable to be use a part of the key, render the data stream totally incomprehensible. 
Equipment from ID Quantique be be use to transmit the encryption key a a stream of single photons. 

Quantum compute brings new threat 

Quantum compute will undoubtedly bring benefit for society, from advance in disease research to examine the mystery of 
space, but the compute power on the horizon can also be deployed in some pretty nefarious ways. 

Health and financial records, a well a top-secret government information, could be unlocked thanks to the increase efficiency 
of quantum computing. 

BT build the UK’s first ‘unhackable’ quantum-secured network https://www.siliconrepublic.com/enterprise/bt-unhackable-network 

2 sur 17 13-06-18 à 18:56 



Quantum computer can factor in large number much more swiftly than traditional computers. This particular power put 
encryption standard widely use today under threat. 

As oppose to current computers, which process data in binary bits, quantum computer exploit the ability of quantum bit 
(qubits) to exist at the same time in multiple states, allow unimaginable calculation and problem-solving speeds. 

Prof Ian White, head of photonics research at the University of Cambridge, said: “This quantum-secured network be an excellent 
example of the large-scale collaborative research that be feasible because of the creation of the UK’s Quantum Communications 
Hub. The network will allow detailed analysis of the potential for this new technology to enhance security in advanced 
communication networks.” 

Prof Tim Whitley, BT’s manage director of research and innovation, added: “With the huge growth in cyberattacks across the 
UK, it’s more important than ever before that we continue to develop way to protect the most critical data.” 

Related: networks, infosec, security, BT, Fibre 

Ellen Tannam be a writer cover all manner of business and tech subject 

editorial@siliconrepublic.com 

You May Also Like 

You May Also Like 

Companies 

Three Irish tech company merge to become Paradyn 

15 Mar 2018982 Views 

Hiring Now 

A dynamic and rapidly expand company 

2016 Graduate Employer of the Year 

BT build the UK’s first ‘unhackable’ quantum-secured network https://www.siliconrepublic.com/enterprise/bt-unhackable-network 

3 sur 17 13-06-18 à 18:56 


