






































Can We Quantify Machine Consciousness? - IEEE Spectrum 


Artificial intelligence might endow some computer with self-awareness. Here’s 
how we’d know 

Advertisement 

time in the not-too-distant 

future, you’ve bought a smartphone that come 

bundle with a personal digital assistant (PDA) living 

in the cloud. You assign a sexy female voice to the 

PDA and give it access to all of your emails, social 

medium accounts, calendar, photo album, contacts, and 

other bit and flotsam of your digital life. She—for 

that’s how you quickly think of her—knows you good 

than your mother, your soon-to-be ex-wife, your 

friends, or your therapist. Her command of English be 

flawless; you have endless conversation about daily 

events; she get your jokes. She be the last voice you 

hear before you drift off to sleep and the first upon 

awakening. You panic when she’s off-line. She 

becomes indispensable to your well-being and so, 

naturally, you fall in love. Occasionally, you wonder 

whether she truly reciprocates your feeling and 

whether she be even capable of experience anything 

at all. But the warm, husky tone of her voice and her 

ability to be that perfect foil to your narcissistic 

desire overcome these existential doubts. Alas, your 

infatuation eventually cool off after you realize she be 

carry on equally intimate conversation with 

thousand of other customers. 

Imagine that at some 

This, of course, be the plot of 

, a 2013 

movie in which an anodyne Theodore Twombly fall 

in love with the software PDA Samantha. 

Her 

(http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1798709/) 

Over the next few decade such a fictional scenario 

will become real and commonplace. 

, speech recognition, and 

related technology have dramatically progressed, 

lead to Amazon’s 

, Apple’s 

, Google’s , and 

Deep machine 

learn (https://en.wikipedia.org 

/wiki/Deep_learning) 

Alexa 

(https://developer.amazon.com/alexa) Siri 

(https://www.apple.com/ios/siri/) Now (http://www.androidcentral.com/google-now) 

Can We Quantify Machine Consciousness? - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/can-we-quantify-machine-consciousness 

1 sur 8 07/08/2017 19:46 



(/static/special- 

report-can-we- 

copy-the-brain) 

Illustration: Chad Hagen 

Microsoft’s 

. These 

virtual assistant will continue to improve until 

they become hard to distinguish from real people, 

except that they’ll be endow with perfect recall, 

poise, and patience—unlike any living being. 

Cortana (https://www.microsoft.com 

/en-us/mobile/experiences/cortana/) 

The availability of such digital simulacrum of many 

quality we consider uniquely human will raise 

profound scientific, psychological, philosophical, 

and ethical questions. These emulation will 

ultimately upend the way we think about 

ourselves, about human exceptionalism, and about 

our place in the great scheme of things. 

Here we will survey the intellectual lay of the land 

concern these come developments. Our view 

be that a long a such machine be base on 

present-day computer architectures, they may act 

just like people—and we may be tempt to treat 

them that way—but they will, in fact, feel nothing 

at all. If computer be built more like the brain is, 

though, they could well achieve true 

consciousness. 

be faith in the digital computer—programmed properly, it will give u all we wish. 

Cornucopia. Indeed, smart money in Silicon Valley hold that digital computer will be able to replicate 

and soon exceed anything and everything that human be capable of. 

The faith of our age 

But could sufficiently advanced computer ever become conscious? One answer come from those who 

subscribe to , the 

reign theory of mind in contemporary philosophy, psychology, and neuroscience. It avers that all 

mental states—such a your conscious experience of a god-awful toothache or the love you feel for your 

partner—are computational states. These be fully characterize by their functional relationship to 

relevant sensory inputs, behavioral outputs, and other computational state in between. That is, brain 

be elaborate input-output device that compute and process symbolic representation of the world. 

Brains be computers, with our mind be the software. 

computationalism (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computational_theory_of_mind) 

Adherents to computationalism apply these precept not only to brain and to the behavior they generate 

but also to the way it to be a brain in a particular state. After all, that’s what consciousness is: any 

subjective feeling, any experience—what we see, hear, feel, remember, think. 

feel 

Computationalism assumes that my painful experience of a toothache be but a state of my brain in which 

certain nerve cell be active in response to the infect tooth, lead to my propensity to moan, hold my 

jaw, not eat on that side of my mouth, inability to focus on other tasks, and so on. If all of these state be 

simulated in software on a digital computer, the think goes, the system a a whole will not only behave 

exactly like me but also exactly like me. That is, consciousness be computable. Explicitly or 

implicitly, this be one of the central tenet held by the digerati in academe, media, and industry. 

feel and think 

Can We Quantify Machine Consciousness? - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/can-we-quantify-machine-consciousness 

2 sur 8 07/08/2017 19:46 



In this view, there be nothing more to consciousness than the instantiation of the relevant computational 

states. Nothing else matters, include how the computation be implement physically, whether on 

the hardware of a digital computer or on the squishy stuff inside the skull. According to 

computationalism, a future Samantha—or even better, an embody example like Ava in the brilliant, 

dark movie —will have experience and feeling 

just a we do. She will experience sight and sounds, pleasure and pain, love and hate. 

Ex Machina (http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0470752/) 

Or perhaps she won’t. 

Computationalism be base on the assumption that if two system be indistinguishable, they 

will be indistinguishable. Because we experience the world, the argument goes, a digital 

computer that be functionally equivalent to u would necessarily also experience the world a we do—that 

is, it would also be conscious. But be this assumption warranted? To answer such a question, we need a 

principled, quantitative theory of what consciousness be and what it take for a physical system to have it. 

functionally 

mentally 

Illustration: Chad Hagen 

such a theory of consciousness 

wasn’t available. True, neuroscientist like u have 

be engage in the difficult search for the “ 

,” 

carry out increasingly elaborate experiment on 

people and related specie such a monkey and 

mice. These experiment have identify region in 

the 

, the outer surface of the brain 

just underneath the skull, that be critically 

involve in consciously see and hearing things. 

Yet have be directly involve in this empirical 

research program, we know that even if such a 

quest prof reasonably successful, identify 

some particular brain structure or mode of 

neural activity necessary for consciousness in 

people or closely related animal will not be 

sufficient to establish whether creature with very 

different nervous systems—such a an octopus or a 

bee— conscious, by how much, or of what. And 

any such discovery in neuroscience will be insufficient to establish whether or not machine can be 

conscious. 

Until recently, 

neural 

correlate of consciousness 

(https://en.wikipedia.org 

/wiki/Neural_correlates_of_consciousness) 

neocortex (https://en.wikipedia.org 

/wiki/Neocortex) 

be 

There is, however, a fundamental theory of consciousness that offer hope for a principled answer to the 

question of consciousness in entity vastly different from us, include machines. That theory do not 

start from behavior or from the brain. Instead, it begin from consciousness itself—from our own 

experience, the only one we be absolutely certain of. This be the bedrock of certainty that René Descartes, 

father of modern philosophy, science, and analytic geometry, refer to in the most famous deduction in 

Western thought: .I think, therefore I be 

This theory, call integrate information theory, or IIT, have be developed over the past two decades. 

Can We Quantify Machine Consciousness? - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/can-we-quantify-machine-consciousness 

3 sur 8 07/08/2017 19:46 



It attempt to define what consciousness is, what it take for a physical system to have it, and how one 

can measure, at least in principle, both it quantity and it quality, start from it physical substrate. 

IIT be too involve for u to explain here; we can only sketch it general outlines. The theory identifies five 

essential property that be true of every conceivable experience of consciousness: (1) Every experience 

exists intrinsically (for the subject of that experience, not for an external observer); (2) each experience be 

structure (it be compose of part and the relation among them); (3) it be integrate (it cannot be 

subdivide into independent components); (4) it be definite (it have borders, include some content and 

exclude others); and (5) it be specific (every experience be the way it is, and thereby different from 

trillion of possible others). 

“The theory can be use to 
ass the quantity and 
quality of consciousness 
for any physical system, 
whether it be the brain of 
a human, an octopus, or a 
bee—or the circuit board of 
a digital computer” 

IIT then translates these property into 

requirement that must be satisfied by any 

physical substrate for it to support consciousness. 

These requirement can be express 

mathematically and employ to ass the 

quantity and quality of consciousness for any 

physical system, whether it be the brain of a 

human, an octopus, or a bee—or the circuit board 

of a digital computer. 

Crucially, accord to IIT, the overall degree of 

consciousness do not depend on what the system 

does. Rather, it depends on how it be built—how 

it’s physically put together. And only certain kind 

of physical system have the right kind of internal 

architecture to support consciousness: those that 

have a maximum of intrinsic cause-effect power, the causal power to determine their own states. In 

essence, this mean that the system must be compose of many parts, each have specific causal power 

within the overall system (the “information” part of IIT), and yet the system a a whole must not be 

reducible to those part (the “integrated” part of IIT), make it far more powerful than the sum of it 

many parts. 

IIT do not use the word “information” in it contemporary sense, a in “messages that be be pass 

by a sender to a receiver.” Consciousness be not about information sent from one part of the brain to 

another. Instead, IIT refers to “information” in it original sense, with it root , meaning “to give 

form to.” The power of any one mechanism, such a a brain or a computer, to influence it own next state, 

it causal power, give rise to a form, a high-dimensional structure, that experience. 

inform 

be 

IIT can explain in a principled manner many puzzle feature of the neuroanatomy of consciousness— 

for instance, why the , the little brain underneath 

the much big and good know neocortex, do not contribute to consciousness despite it have 

four time a many neurons: Its internal architecture, parallel sheet of feed-forward chain of neuron 

without much recurrent excitation, be very different from the highly heterogeneous, rich, and dense 

connectivity of the neocortex, which support vast coalition of active neuron that quickly assemble and 

disassemble. It also explains why consciousness fade during certain stage of sleep even though 

neocortical neuron continue to fire: Parts of the neocortex lose the ability to influence one another 

effectively. 

cerebellum (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cerebellum) 

Can We Quantify Machine Consciousness? - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/can-we-quantify-machine-consciousness 

4 sur 8 07/08/2017 19:46 



IIT make a number of counterintuitive prediction amenable to empirical tests. One prediction be that a 

nearly silent neocortex, in which few neuron be actively firing, have conscious experiences. Also, IIT have 

allow Tononi and , now a 

professor at the University of Milan, to develop a device for assess consciousness in humans, a 

combination of a magnetic coil to stimulate the brain and a high-density net of EEG electrode to detect 

it response—a crude kind of 

. This device have already be use to ascertain whether brain-damaged or 

anesthetize patient unable to communicate be conscious or not. 

Marcello Massimini (https://www.cifar.ca/profiles/marcello-massimini/) 

consciousness meter (http://www.klab.caltech.edu/koch/CR/CR- 

Consciousness-Meter-13.pdf) 

Being a formal, mathematical theory, IIT can be apply to any physical system, be it the brain—a 

structure that evolve by natural selection—or an electronic circuit design by engineers. As ongoing 

research shows, the physical architecture of certain part of the neocortex—especially in the back, the way 

the neuron be connected—is ideal for maximize the brain’s intrinsic cause-effect power, it ability to 

be affected by it recent state and to determine it future state, which be why it support consciousness. 

By contrast, the physical architecture of a typical digital computer be absolutely inadequate, with very low 

connectivity at the gate level of it central processing unit and bottleneck that prevent even a modicum 

of the necessary integration. That is, a computer may implement computation and function judged to 

be intelligent from the perspective of a user look at it output, but, give it wiring, it intrinsic causal 

power a a whole be minute compare with those of any brain. And this be true even if we treat the 

computer at a coarser level than transistor and resistors. 

And here’s the rub: That intrinsic power, the physical power to make a difference to oneself, cannot be 

compute or simulated. It have to be built into the physic of the system. A perfectly executed, 

biophysically accurate computer simulation of the human brain, include every one of it 86 billion 

neuron and it matrix of trillion of synapses, wouldn’t be conscious. Even if this computer be hooked 

up to a speech synthesizer and told you about it suppose experiences, it would be nothing but behavior 

and function cleverly execute programming. The beating heart of consciousness would be absent. 

have sober implication for those who hope that 

may make people immortal. 

Their vision be that, within the next few decades, we will be able to accurately reconstruct the wiring 

scheme, the so-called connectome, of any one individual human brain and simulate it on appropriate 

digital hardware. This process would probably be destructive because there may be no way to access the 

brain’s ultrastructure except by cut it into wafer-thin slivers. Nevertheless, before you succumb to 

some deadly disease, you would upload a high-resolution version of your brain to the cloud. As long a 

the cloud infrastructure be up and running, your digital simulacrum will live on and on, interact with 

other digital avatars. Rapture for nerds! 

This consequence of IIT digital brain uploads 

(http://spectrum.ieee.org/biomedical/imaging/can-machines-be-conscious) 

“Although your digital 
simulacrum might speak 
and act a you would, it 
would be a complete 

Yet, per IIT, this belief be a illusory a the belief in 

the hereafter of precede prophet and religions. 

Although your digital simulacrum might speak and 

act a you would, it would be a complete zombie, 

experience nothing. Ironically, though, to your 

friend and love one back in the real world, you 

would have successfully transition to a sublime 

form of existence and would entice others to join 

you in an afterlife that, in fact, doesn’t exist. 

Can We Quantify Machine Consciousness? - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/can-we-quantify-machine-consciousness 

5 sur 8 07/08/2017 19:46 



zombie, experience 
nothing” 

Whether or not IIT be correct be not merely of 

academic interest. Barring some global 

catastrophe, our society will create, within 

decades, machine with human-level intelligence 

and behaviors, able to understand speech and talk 

in many different languages, remember the past 

and anticipate the future, imagine novel scenarios, write books, compose music, direct films, conceive 

new goals, a well a move, drive, fly, and, inevitably, fight. From there, thanks to the availability of big 

data, the power of , and the speed of 

computing, it will be a short step to overcome human limits. The birth of true artificial intelligence will 

profoundly affect mankind’s future, include whether it have one. 

deep learn (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deep_learning) 

Whether you be among those who believe that the arrival of human-level AI signal the dawn of paradise 

or the sunset of the age of humans, you will still have to answer a fundamental question: Are these AIs 

conscious? Does it like anything to be them? Or be they immensely more accomplish version of 

present-day garbage disposal units, wash machines, or cars—extraordinarily clever machines, yes, but 

without sentience or feelings? 

feel 

The answer to this question matter to the way we relate to future machines. If you take a hammer to 

your shiny , your friend might consider you crazy for destroy such a 

costly car; yet there be no question that you be free to do so. Try the same with your dog, though, and the 

police would rightfully arrest you. That’s because a car be just a mean to an end—a convenient way to get 

around town—while a dog be an end in itself, with some minimal rights, because it share with u the gift 

of consciousness. 

Tesla (https://www.tesla.com/) 

“We need a fundamental 
theory that specifies the 
exact condition under 
which a particular system 
be capable of conscious 
experience” 

Finding the correct answer, however, cannot be 

left to our intuition. That might work temporarily 

for Theodore Twombly fall in love with 

Samantha, but give the gravity of the situation, 

we need guidance. We need a fundamental theory 

that specifies the exact condition under which a 

particular system be capable of conscious 

experience. 

IIT predicts that conventional digital computer 

run software will experience nothing like the 

movie we see and hear inside our heads. Because 

smart digital assistant and lifelike future robot 

be incapable of experience, a IIT insists, their 

software can be safely copied, edited, sold, pirated, or deleted. And they can be turn off, modified, 

destroyed, and replace at will. 

But the same need not be true for unconventional architectures. Special-purpose machine built 

follow some of the same design principle a the brain, contain what’s call neuromorphic 

hardware [see “Neuromorphic Chips Are Destined for Deep Learning—or Obscurity,” in this issue], could 

in principle be capable of substantial conscious experience. The key be that the logic and memory gate 

be heavily interconnect with a high degree of partially overlap fan-in and fan-out between gates. 

(Compartmentalized component with highly specific function do not contribute to intrinsic causal 

Can We Quantify Machine Consciousness? - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/can-we-quantify-machine-consciousness 

6 sur 8 07/08/2017 19:46 



power.) The way the “brain” of the system be actually wire up, it (bio)physics, make all the difference, 

not it input-output behavior. 

Such a neuromorphic machine, if highly conscious, would then have intrinsic rights, in particular the 

right to it own life and well-being. In that case, society would have to learn to share the world with it 

own creations. 

be president and chief scientific officer of the Allen Institute for Brain Science, in Seattle. 

hold the David P. 

White Chair in Sleep Medicine, a well a a Distinguished Chair in Consciousness Science, at 

the University of Wisconsin. 

Christof Koch (https://alleninstitute.org/what-we-do/brain-science/about/team/staff-profiles/christof- 

koch/) Giulio 

Tononi (http://centerforsleepandconsciousness.med.wisc.edu/people/tononi.html) 

Advertisement 

SPECIAL REPORT: CAN WE COPY THE BRAIN? 
(/static/special-report-can-we-copy-the-brain) 

PREVIOUS 
Why Rat- 
Brained Robots 
Are So Good at 
Navigating 
Unfamiliar 
Terrain 

(/robotics/robotics-software/why- 

ratbrained-robots-are-so-good-at- 

navigating-unfamiliar-terrain) 

NEXT 
Human-Level 

AI Is Right 
Around the 
Corner—or 

Hundreds of 
Years Away 

(/computing/software/humanlevel-ai-is- 

right-around-the-corner-or-hundreds-of- 

years-away) 

Can We Quantify Machine Consciousness? - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/can-we-quantify-machine-consciousness 

7 sur 8 07/08/2017 19:46 



(/computing 

/software/music-to- 

your-ears-new- 

transducers-meet- 

electrostatic- 

headphones) 

(/aerospace/satellites 

/is-there-a-giant- 

planet-lurking- 

beyond-pluto) 

(/transportation/self- 

driving/the-big- 

problem-with- 

selfdriving-cars-is- 

people) 

(/energy/the- 

smarter-grid/the- 

transformers- 

superheroes-of- 

electrical-inventions) 

(/biomedical/devices 

/smart-contact- 

lenses-and-eye- 

implants-will-give- 

doctors-medical- 

insights) 

(/geek-life/hands- 

on/the-turtlebot3- 

teacher) 

Can We Quantify Machine Consciousness? - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/can-we-quantify-machine-consciousness 

8 sur 8 07/08/2017 19:46 


