






































Celebrity Twitter account display â•Ÿbot-likeâ•Ž behaviour | University of Cambridge 


A Twitter user can be a 
human and still be a 
spammer, and an 
account can be 
operate by a bot and 
still be benign. 

— Zafar Gilani 

The researchers, from the University of Cambridge, use data from Twitter to determine whether bot can be 
accurately detected, how bot behave, and how they impact Twitter activity. 

They divide account into category base on total number of followers, and found that account with more than 
10 million follower tend to retweet at similar rate to bots. In account with few follower however, bot tend to 
retweet far more than humans. These celebrity-level account also tweet at roughly the same pace a bot with 
similar follower numbers, whereas in small accounts, bot tweet far more than humans. Their result will be 
present at the IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM) 
in Sydney, Australia. 

Bots, like people, can be malicious or benign. The term ‘bot’ be often associate with spam, offensive content or 

1,102 

Celebrity Twitter account display ‘bot-like’ behaviour | University of Cambridge http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/celebrity-twitter-accounts-display-bot-like-behaviour 

1 sur 6 02/08/2017 19:14 



political infiltration, but many of the most reputable organisation in the world also rely on bot for their social medium channels. For example, major news 
organisations, such a CNN or the BBC, who produce hundred of piece of content daily, rely on automation to share the news in the most efficient way. These 
accounts, while classify a bots, be see by user a trustworthy source of information. 

“A Twitter user can be a human and still be a spammer, and an account can be operate by a bot and still be benign,” say Zafar Gilani, a PhD student at 
Cambridge’s Computer Laboratory, who lead the research. “We’re interested in see how effectively we can detect automate account and what effect they 
have.” 

Bots have be on Twitter for the majority of the social network’s existence – it’s be estimate that anywhere between 40 and 60% of all Twitter account be 
bots. Some bot have ten of million of followers, although the vast majority have less than a thousand – human account have a similar distribution. 

In order to reliably detect bots, the researcher first use the online tool BotOrNot (since rename BotOMeter), which be one of the only available online bot 
detection tools. However, their initial result show high level of inaccuracy. BotOrNot show low precision in detect bot that have bot-like characteristic in 
their account name, profile info, content tweet frequency and especially redirection to external sources. Gilani and his colleague then decide to take a 
manual approach to bot detection. 

Four undergraduate student be recruit to manually inspect account and determine whether they be bots. This be do use a tool that automatically 
present Twitter profiles, and allow the student to classify the profile and make notes. Each account be collectively review before a final decision be 
reached. 

In order to determine whether an account be a bot (or not), the student look at different characteristic of each account. These include the account 
creation date, average tweet frequency, content posted, account description, whether the user reply to tweets, like or favourite receive and the follower to 
friend ratio. A total of 3,535 account be analysed: 1,525 be classify a bot and 2010 a humans. 

The student show very high level of agreement on whether individual account be bots. However, they show significantly low level of agreement with 
the BotOrNot tool. 

The bot detection algorithm they subsequently developed achieve roughly 86% accuracy in detect bot on Twitter. The algorithm us a type of classifier 
know a Random Forests, which us 21 different feature to detect bots, and the classifier itself be train by the original dataset annotate by the human 
annotators. 

The researcher found that bot account differ from human in several key ways. Overall, bot account generate more tweet than human accounts. They also 
retweet far more often, and redirect user to external website far more frequently than human users. The only exception to this be in account with more than 
10 million followers, where bot and human show far more similarity in term of the volume of tweet and retweets. 

“We think this be probably because bot aren’t that good at create original Twitter content, so they rely a lot more on retweets and redirect follower to 
external websites,” say Gilani. “While bot be get more sophisticated all the time, they’re still pretty bad at one-on-one Twitter conversations, for instance – 
most of the time, a conversation with a bot will be mostly gibberish.” 

Despite the sheer volume of Tweets produce by bots, human still have good quality and more engage tweet – tweet by human account receive on 
average 19 time more like and 10 time more retweets than tweet by bot accounts. Bots also spend less time like other users’ tweets. 

“Many people tend to think that bot be nefarious or evil, but that’s not true,” say Gilani. “They can be anything, just like a person. Some of them aren’t exactly 
legal or moral, but many of them be completely harmless. What I’m do next be model the social cost of these bot – how be they change the nature and 
quality of conversation online? What be clear though, be that bot be here to stay.” 

Reference: 
Zafar Gilani, Ekaterina Kochmar, Jon Crowcroft. Classification of Twitter Accounts into Automated Agents and Human Users. Paper present at 9th IEEE/ACM 

Celebrity Twitter account display ‘bot-like’ behaviour | University of Cambridge http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/celebrity-twitter-accounts-display-bot-like-behaviour 

2 sur 6 02/08/2017 19:14 



International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (http://asonam.cpsc.ucalgary.ca/2017/asonam2017-AcceptedPper.pdf) 
(ASONAM'17). Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. 

(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) 

The text in this work be license under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) . For image use 
please see separate credit above. 

Celebrity Twitter account display ‘bot-like’ behaviour | University of Cambridge http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/celebrity-twitter-accounts-display-bot-like-behaviour 

3 sur 6 02/08/2017 19:14 


