






































China, Russia, and the US Are All Building Centers for Military AI 


China, Russia, and the US Are All Building Centers for 
Military AI 

By Patrick Tucker 

But their burgeon approach to state-sponsored research be divergent a the country themselves. 

Russia and the United States be move closer to opening their own center for military-related 
research into artificial intelligence, a China do in the spring of last year. But the three government have 
differ approaches. The U.S. Joint Artificial Intelligence Center aim to apply lesson from an Air Force 
pilot project to other military services, while the Chinese approach fuse civilian and military research and 
Russia’s effort be closely direct from the Kremlin. 

Russia 

“What’s interest be the extent to which the Russian government and especially the Ministry of Defense be 
marshal resource for the development of AI for it military,” say Sam Bendett, an associate research 
analyst at CNA and a fellow in Russia study at the American Foreign Policy Council. 

The new innovation technopolis, dubbed Era and slat to open in September with a bare-bones research 
staff, be plan to grow to a 50-acre city by 2020. “Already, there be dozen of soldier from military 
company get sent there, along with the initial private-sector staff,” Bendett said. “Era military staff be 
already involve in various scientific and technical activities, such a the recently launch de-mining 
robotics competition at the Alabino test ground near Moscow.” 

Subscribe 

Receive daily email updates: 

Subscribe to the Defense One daily. 

Be the first to receive updates. 

“No doubt that Pentagon’s announcement on establish JAIC will be met with a certain degree of 
apprehension by the Russians, who be concerned about significant financial resource pour into AI 
development by the American private sector. Currently, Russian AI funding be only a small fraction of what be 
spent in the U.S.— or China, for that matter.” 

Among the park’s first missions: explore application of blockchain for Russian cybersecurity. 

U.S. 

The U.S. Defense Department effort will be different. Rather than an open exploration of new technologies, 
the effort will seek to replicate the Department’s success with Project Maven, it fledgling AI program for 
object recognition. But it will look across different service and missions. If you’re a commander and you have 
a problem that AI could help solve — be it logistics, open-source data analysis, probability distribution — 
then someone from the center will want to pitch you on an AI fix for your problem. 

A June 27 memo from Deputy Defense Secretary Patrick Shanahan call for a set of National Mission 
Initiatives, or “large-scale effort to apply AI to a cluster of closely related, urgent, joint challenges” to “be 
developed in partnership with the Military Departments and Services, Joint Staff…and other DOD 
component and mission owners.” 

The memo also designates CIO Dana Deasy to head up the new JAIC. 

The announcement be very much in-line with what source told Defense One the JAIC would focus on back in 
April, just after the announcement of the new center. 

“There’s an element [of the Defense Department] that’s asking, ‘How do we make a Project Maven factory?’” 
one source say then. 

China 

Both the Russian and the U.S. effort to stand up an AI innovation center be behind China. 

The Chinese government have say it want to dominate a global innovation in AI by 2030. And China, too, have 
an AI institute of sort spread across multiple laboratories. The People’s Liberation Army regularly recruit 
top AI researchers; some officer be also researchers, such a Maj. Gen. Li Deyi, who lead the China 
Association for Artificial Intelligence. 

China, Russia, and the US Are All Building Centers for Military AI https://www.defenseone.com/technology/2018/07/china-russia-and-us-are... 

1 sur 2 20-07-18 à 20:24 



“The PLA Academy of Military Science have establish a new research center for artificial intelligence, and 
the PLA National National University of Defense Technology have create a new institute for intelligent 
sciences,” say Elsa Kania, an adjunct fellow with the Technology and National Security program at Center for 
New American Security. “Tsinghua University, China’s MIT, have establish a ‘high-end’ laboratory for 
military intelligence.” 

Kania note that the University’s mission be align with the Chinese government’s goal of fuse civilian and 
military technological development. 

“In China, lead company and universities, such a Baidu and Tsinghua, appear to be engage in military- 
relevant research and development. The PLA itself have also establish a number of new AI research center 
at some of it premier institutions, include at the Academy of Military Science and National University of 
Defense Technology.’” she said. 

The three distinct approach to the development of artificial intelligence reflect, in a way, the character of 
the society from which they emerge. That they be accelerate at the same be a sign of the sense of urgency, 
optimism and dread of be left behind that government be feel around artificial intelligence. 

China, Russia, and the US Are All Building Centers for Military AI https://www.defenseone.com/technology/2018/07/china-russia-and-us-are... 

2 sur 2 20-07-18 à 20:24 


