






































Chinaâ•Žs school be quietly use AI to mark studentsâ•Ž essay ... but do the robot make the grade? 


China’s school be quietly use AI to mark students’ essay ... but do the robot make the 
grade? 

China have make artificial intelligence-enabled education a national strategy. SCMP Graphics 

One in every four school in China be quietly test a powerful machine that us artificial intelligence to mark pupils’ work, accord to scientist involve in the government 
programme. 

The technology be design to understand the general logic and meaning of the text and make a reasonable, human-like judgment about the essay’s overall quality. 

It then grade the work, add recommend improvement in area such a write style, structure and theme. 

The technology, which be be use in around 60,000 schools, be suppose to “think” more deeply and do more than a standard spellchecker. 

For instance, if a paragraph start trail off topic, the computer would mark it down. 

The AI grade technology be suppose to help, rather than replace teachers. Photo: AFP 

Scientists insist the technology be design to assist, rather than replace, human teachers. 

It could help to reduce the amount of time teacher spend on grade essay and help them avoid inconsistency cause by human error such a lapse in attention or unconscious 
bias. 

It could also help more students, especially those in remote area with limited access to resources, improve their write skill more quickly. 

The machine be similar to the e-rater, an automate system use by the Education Testing Service in the US to grade prospective postgraduate students’ essays. 

But unlike the e-rater, it can read both Chinese and English. 

China look to school kid to win the global AI race 

Artificial intelligence be develop rapidly in China with strong support from the government and the technology be use in many area of everyday life. 

But the extensive test of the essay grade machine – built by some of the lead language processing team involve in the government and military’s internet surveillance 
programme – be carry out with unusual security measure in place. 

In most of the school take part in the programme, parent be not informed, access to the system terminal be limited to authorise staff, test result be strictly classified, 
and in some class even the pupil be unaware that their work have be read and score by a machine. 

China’s school be quietly use AI to mark students’ essay ... but do th... http://www.scmp.com/news/china/society/article/2147833/chinas-schools... 

1 sur 3 12-06-18 à 18:52 



Schools be use the software for internal tests, rather than important national exams. Photo: AFP 

Wang Jing, director of academic affair office in the High School Affiliated to Renmin University, one of the country’s most prestigious schools, said: “We be treat [the test] with 
extreme caution. 

“What happens on campus stay on campus. The test result will not be reveal to the public,” he added, in line with the school’s agreement with the project organisers. 

Most school interviewed by the South China Morning Post – include the Baita Middle School in Nanchang, Sichuan province; the Fifth High School in Fuyang, Anhui and the 
58th High School in Qingdao, Shandong – give a similar assessment. 

The school say the AI grade machine be far from perfect, with teacher cite many example where a brilliant piece of write be give low marks. 

The software be presently be use to mark only internal test and none of the school have plan to use the technology to grade essay in exam that would affect pupils’ official 
academic record. 

“It’s still in it infancy,” Wang said. 

How ‘China’s MIT’ drive the country’s technology ambition 

But the developer say the machine be already 10 year old and they be increasingly confident about it potential. 

A scientist involve in the project at the school of computer science and engineering at Beihang University in Beijing compare it to the AlphaGo, an AI Go player developed by 
Google which have defeat human world champion over the past couple of years. 

The essay grade machine, embed in a cluster of fast computer in Beijing, be improve it ability to understand human language by use deep learn algorithm to plough 
through essay write by Chinese student and “compare notes” with human teachers’ grade and comments. 

It be also able to collect and build it own “knowledge base” with little or no human intervention. 

“It have evolve continuously and become so complex, we no longer know for sure what it be think and how it make a judgment,” say the researcher, who request not to be 
name due to the sensitivity of the project. 

China’s school be quietly use AI to mark students’ essay ... but do th... http://www.scmp.com/news/china/society/article/2147833/chinas-schools... 

2 sur 3 12-06-18 à 18:52 



Chinese Go player Ke Jie in a contest against AlphaGo, which have beaten the world’s top players. Photo: Chinatopix via AP 

According to a government document see by the South China Morning Post, the test involve 60,000 school with more than 120 million people involved. 

The AI and human grader give the same score 92 per cent of the time, but the document do not specify the content and scale of the tests. 

The researcher confirm the figure but decline to reveal more details. 

“In the future it may be use to relieve the teacher’s burden but it will never replace teachers. The machine have no soul,” he added. 

Microsoft’s AI bot writes poetry, host a TV show and can converse like a human in Mandarin 

The essay grade machine project be lead by professor Zhou Jianshe, director of the research centre for language intelligence in China in Capital Normal University. 

Zhou and other senior member of the project have receive government and military award for their contribution to natural language processing and mining information from 
big data. 

Zhou could not be reach for comment. 

The machine can be access from various online portal but be only open to register users. 

One English portal, pigai.org, require a user to register either a a teacher or student and provide information, such a school name and class number, to verify their identity. 

This Chinese weapon lab be put missile technology into airport body scanner 

Users give a similarly mixed response to the machines. While some say they be useful and more accurate than similar essay grade system overseas, others described them a 
rubbish. 

Some user have argue the software cannot distinguish between academic essay and other form of writing. 

One user on Zhihu, the large question-and-answer website in China, post a screenshot show how the machine have assess an April 2015 Washington Post comment piece 
“Why be Obama stick it to stay-at-home moms?” a if it be answer an essay question. 

The piece get a score of 71.5 out of 100 and the machine say that while the vocabulary use be “rich and appropriate” it be “slightly short for academic language”. 

It concluded: “The flow can be improve on smoothness; and please improve the focus of the article; the paragraph and sentence should be related to the topic.” 

A Washington Post article be grade by a machine – that could not tell that it be a newspaper opinion piece rather than an academic essay. Photo: Zhihu.com 

Zhu Xiaoyan, head of the state key laboratory of intelligent technology and system at Tsinghua University, say human language AI technology have achieve significant progress in 
recent years. 

She say some machine have write article that go viral on social media, attract more than 10 million views, but do not provide further details. 

But Zhu say she have not heard of the essay-grading program add that she would not use a machine to grade her students’ papers, adding: “It’s a human job.” 

Yu Yafeng, professor at the institute of educational theory at Beijing Normal University, say computer could help grade candidate in subject such a mathematics and physic 
because the answer be objective. 

Chinese surveillance programme mine data from workers’ brain 

But essay can contain cultural, emotional or personal element that a machine would not be able to gauge. 

“There be no law forbid AI from grade student essays, but this practice should raise ethical questions,” she said. 

An eight-year-old primary school pupil in Chaoyang district, Beijing say he do not mind an AI machine check his essays, point out that his teacher already use readily 
available technology to check the answer to basic math questions. 

“Our teacher be already use mobile phone to grade our math homework,” he said. 

“Take a photo and the score be out. What’s the difference to an essay?” 

This article appear in the South China Morning Post print edition as: school quietly use A.I. to mark student essay 

China’s school be quietly use AI to mark students’ essay ... but do th... http://www.scmp.com/news/china/society/article/2147833/chinas-schools... 

3 sur 3 12-06-18 à 18:52 


