






































City model create from image alone | ETH Zurich 


City model create from image 
alone 

17.05.2017 

ETH scientist have combine million of image and video into a 
three-dimensional, living model of the city of Zurich. The new 
technology have many possible application – for example, it can 
analyse where and when pedestrian be on the move and parking 
space become free. 

Search 

Search news 
Search the news by: 

Further 
information 
VarCity project website 

Parquery website 

Spectando website 

Casalva website 

UniqFEED website 

Don't miss the 
late news 
Sign up for our newsletter 

The three-dimensional model of Zurich be create use image data alone. (Visualisa- 

tion: ETH Zurich) 

City model create from image alone | ETH Zurich https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/05/city-model-created-from-imag... 

1 sur 4 22/05/17 08:26 



Researchers at ETH Zurich have developed a technology platform with 
which they can create 3D city model use image data alone. The 
platform, know a "VarCity", be so versatile that it can use, evaluate, and 
automatically combine all possible kind of image sources: aerial 
photographs, 360-degree panoramic image take with special vehicles, 
and even standard photo such a those publish by tourist on social 
network and internet platforms. The technology also us video material 
from source like YouTube and public webcams. 

Thanks to machine learn algorithms, the technology can recognise 
image content such a buildings, window and doors, streets, body of 
water, people, and cars. Without human assistance, the 3D model 
"knows", for example, what pavement be and – by evaluate webcam 
data – which street be one-way only. 

"Bringing city model to life" 
"The whole thing go so far that we can perform a highly detailed analysis 
of traffic flow on the street and also measure pedestrian traffic, even in 
real time depend on the application," explains Hayko Riemenschneider, 
a postdoc and VarCity project manager in the group lead by Luc Van Gool, a 
Professor at ETH Zurich's Computer Vision Lab. This make counting 
traffic extremely easy: it can be do exclusively with camera and no 
longer require sensor to be instal on the road. 

Using machine learn algorithms, the 

model can differentiate between build- 

ings, streets, vegetation, and body of 

water. (Visualisation: ETH Zurich) 

The model also recognises façades 

and window (highlighted in yellow and 

red in the building to the front left of 

the picture). (Visualisation: ETH Zurich) 

City model create from image alone | ETH Zurich https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/05/city-model-created-from-imag... 

2 sur 4 22/05/17 08:26 



"Our technology be dynamic. It brings life, people and vehicle to 3D city 
models, which be one of it major advantage over well-known application 
such a Google Street View," say Riemenschneider. The technology be 
also devise in line with the principle of "privacy by design", with the 
algorithm generate anonymised information base on image data. 
Pedestrian flow and vehicle traffic can be show by avatars, make 
VarCity compatible with data privacy. 

Large volume of data evaluate 
The researcher developed the computer algorithm for the model over the 
past five year a part of a European Research Council (ERC) project (an 
ERC Advanced Grant receive by ETH Professor Van Gool). To showcase 
their work, they have create a 3D model of the city of Zurich, which they 
be now present in a video a they wrap up the project on schedule. 

The VarCity technology be base on the evaluation of huge volume of 
data. "The more image and video the platform can evaluate, the more 
precise the model becomes," say Kenneth Vanhoey, a postdoc in Van 
Gool's group. "The aim of our project be to develop the algorithm for 
such 3D city models, assume that the volume of available image and 
video will also increase dramatically in the year ahead." 

The scientist use triangulation to create a three-dimensional model from 
image data. This require several picture of an object from various 
angles; an analysis of the distance and angle in the various image then 
allows the corner point of the object to be precisely locate in the relevant 
space. 

Simple parking management technology 
The researcher be not offering the model themselves a an application, 
but the technology behind them have many possible applications, include 
in urban and transport planning. The project participant have found 
several startup to market these applications: Spectando offer virtual 
building inspection for the real estate market, while Casalva performs 
virtual damage analysis on building for insurance companies, for 
example after extreme weather event such a hailstorms. No special 

City model create from image alone | ETH Zurich https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/05/city-model-created-from-imag... 

3 sur 4 22/05/17 08:26 



Page URL: https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/05/city-model-created-from-images-alone.html 
22.05.2017 
© 2017 Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich 

device be require for these application – standard smartphone photo 
be sufficient. 

ETH spin-off Parquery, that have emerge from the VarCity project, also 
us this technology. The company developed a parking management 
system that work exclusively with camera instal near parking space 
and do not require parking space sensors. The computer evaluates the 
video data in real-time and recognises cars, so it know which parking 
space be free and also whether a car have be mistakenly park 
across two spaces. This system be first use in the Swiss city of Locarno, 
with further project in over 30 city in Switzerland and abroad. 

The ETH spin-off UniqFEED us the method to identify perimeter 
advertising and individual player during television broadcast of sport 
events, allow it to calculate how long they be visible during the 
broadcast and to personalise the perimeter ad for various user groups. 

Video: ETH Zurich 

City model create from image alone | ETH Zurich https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/05/city-model-created-from-imag... 

4 sur 4 22/05/17 08:26 


