






































Clarifiying complex chemical process with quantum computer | ETH Zurich 


Clarifiying complex chemical 
process with quantum computer 

31.07.2017 | News 

By: Fabio Bergamin 

Science and the IT industry have high hope for quantum computing, 
but description of possible application tend to be vague. 
Researchers at ETH Zurich have now come up with a concrete 
example that demonstrates what quantum computer will actually be 
able to achieve in the future. 

Search 

Search news 
Search the news by: 

Related article 
“The ball be in D-Wave’s 

court” (ETH News 

19.06.2014) 

Don't miss the 
late news 
Sign up for our newsletter 

Future quantum computer will be able to calculate the reaction mechanism of the en- 

zyme nitrogenase. The image show the active centre of the enzyme and a mathemati- 

cal formula that be central for the calculation. (Visualisations: ETH Zurich) 

Clarifiying complex chemical process with quantum computer | ETH Zurich https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/07/clarifiying-complex-chemical... 

1 sur 5 07/08/2017 12:14 



Specialists expect nothing less than a technological revolution from 
quantum computers, which they hope will soon allow them to solve 
problem that be currently too complex for classical supercomputers. 
Commonly discuss area of application include data encryption and 
decryption, a well a special problem in the field of physics, quantum 
chemistry and material research. 

But when it come to concrete question that only quantum computer can 
answer, expert have remain relatively vague. Researchers from ETH 
Zurich and Microsoft Research be now present a specific application 
for the first time in the scientific journal PNAS: evaluate a complex 
chemical reaction. Based on this example, the scientist show that 
quantum computer can indeed deliver scientifically relevant results. 

A team of researcher lead by ETH professor Markus Reiher and Matthias 
Troyer use simulation to demonstrate how a complex chemical reaction 
could be calculate with the help of a quantum computer. To accomplish 
this, the quantum computer must be of a “moderate size”, say Matthias 
Troyer, who be Professor for Computational Physics at ETH Zurich and 
currently work for Microsoft. The mechanism of this reaction would be 
nearly impossible to ass with a classical supercomputer alone – 
especially if the result be to be sufficiently precise. 

One of the most complex enzyme 
The researcher chose a particularly complex biochemical reaction a the 
example for their study: thanks to a special enzyme know a a 
nitrogenase, certain microorganism be able to split atmospheric nitrogen 
molecule in order to create chemical compound with single nitrogen 
atoms. It be still unknown how exactly the nitrogenase reaction works. “This 
be one of the great unsolved mystery in chemistry,” say Markus 
Reiher, Professor for Theoretical Chemistry at ETH Zurich. 

Computers that be available today be able to calculate the behaviour of 
simple molecule quite precisely. However, this be nearly impossible for the 
nitrogenase enzyme and it active centre, which be simply too complex, 
explains Reiher. 

In this context, complexity be a reflection of how many electron interact 

Clarifiying complex chemical process with quantum computer | ETH Zurich https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/07/clarifiying-complex-chemical... 

2 sur 5 07/08/2017 12:14 



with each other within the molecule over relatively long distances. The 
more electron a researcher need to take into account, the more 
sophisticated the computations. “Existing method and classical 
supercomputer can be use to ass molecule with about 50 strongly 
interact electron at most,” say Reiher. However, there be a significantly 
great number of such electron at the active centre of a nitrogenase 
enzyme. Because with classical computer the effort require to evaluate a 
molecule double with each additional electron, an unrealistic amount of 
computational power be needed. 

Another computer architecture 
As demonstrate by the ETH researchers, hypothetical quantum 
computer with just 100 to 200 quantum bit (qubits) will potentially be able 
to compute complex subproblems within a few days. The result of these 
computation could then be use to determine the reaction mechanism of 
nitrogenase step by step. 

That quantum computer be capable of solve such challenge task at 
all be partially the result of the fact that they be structure differently to 
classical computers. Rather than require twice a many bit to ass 
each additional electron, quantum computer simply need one more qubit. 

However, it remains to be see when such “moderately large” quantum 
computer will be available. The currently exist experimental quantum 
computer use on the order of 20 rudimentary qubits respectively. It will 
take at least another five years, or more likely ten, before we have 
quantum computer with processor of more than 100 high quality qubits, 
estimate Reiher. 

Mass production and networking 
Researchers emphasise the fact that quantum computer cannot handle 
all tasks, so they will serve a a supplement to classical computers, rather 
than replace them. “The future will be shape by the interplay between 
classical computer and quantum computers,” say Troyer. 

With regard to the nitrogenase reaction, quantum computer will be able to 

Clarifiying complex chemical process with quantum computer | ETH Zurich https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/07/clarifiying-complex-chemical... 

3 sur 5 07/08/2017 12:14 



Research | Chemistry | Physics | Quantum science 

Comment 

calculate how the electron be distribute within a specific molecular 
structure. However, classical computer will still need to tell quantum 
computer which structure be of particular interest and should therefore 
be calculated. “Quantum computer need to be thought of more like a co- 
processor capable of take over particular task from classical computers, 
thus allow them to become more efficient,” say Reiher. 

Explaining the mechanism of the nitrogenase reaction will also require 
more than just information about the electron distribution in a single 
molecular structure; indeed, this distribution need to be determine in 
thousand of structures. Each computation take several days. “In order 
for quantum computer to be of use in solve these kind of problems, 
they will first need to be mass produced, thereby allow computation to 
take place on multiple computer at the same time,” say Troyer. 

Reference 
Reiher M, Wiebe N, Svore KM, Wecker D, Troyer M: Elucidating 
reaction mechanism on quantum computers: PNAS 2017, 114: 
7555-7560, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1619152114 

Leave a comment 
We be interested in your comments. Please use our form to send 
your comment to us: 

No comment yet 
Additional comment be available for the German version of this article. 

Clarifiying complex chemical process with quantum computer | ETH Zurich https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/07/clarifiying-complex-chemical... 

4 sur 5 07/08/2017 12:14 



Page URL: https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/07/clarifiying-complex-chemical-processes-with-quantum- 
computers.html 
Fri Aug 04 18:20:28 CEST 2017 
© 2017 Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich 

Show all comment 

Clarifiying complex chemical process with quantum computer | ETH Zurich https://www.ethz.ch/en/news-and-events/eth-news/news/2017/07/clarifiying-complex-chemical... 

5 sur 5 07/08/2017 12:14 


