






































CMU researcher create self-folding origami, try for pasta that shape a it cook 


CMU researcher create self-folding origami, try for pasta 
that shape a it cook 

Aaron Aupperlee 

Researchers at Carnegie Mellon University have create origami that fold itself. 

But they aren't stop with flowers, rabbit or small boats. 

The researcher inside the Morphing Matter Lab , inside CMU's Human-Computer Interaction Institute, see a 
future where flat pasta take shape when it boils, flat satellite unfold in space and furniture, ship flat, self- 
assembles in your home or office. 

Goodbye Ikea direction and that little tool. 

This flower fold itself when place in hot water. Source: Carnegie Mellon University 

The lab create the self-folding shape use a common 3D printer and encounter a common problem with 
these printers, warpage. As the melted, thermoplastic use by the 3D printer cools, edge and surface warp. 

"People hate warpage," Lining Yao, director of the Morphing Matter Lab, say in a statement. "But we've take 
this disadvantage and turn it to our advantage." 

Yao's team include researcher and student study material science and engineering, mechanical 
engineering, computer science and costume design. 

Yao and her team control the printer's speed and combine the warp-prone material with rubber-like material 
that don't warp. The print object be flat, but when place in hot water, some of the material warp and some 
doesn't, give the once-flat object a 3D shape. 

The process be elegant. The result be beautiful. It take seconds. 

"It's hard to imagine this be do manually," Yao said. 

Thermorph from Morphing Matter Lab on Vimeo . 

Yao join the Human-Computer Interaction Institute in June. She be work with Barilla on create flat pasta 
that take it characteristic shape when boiled, accord to CMU . Yao start her work on pasta while finish 
her Ph.D. at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Media Lab. There, Yao and her team use gelatin a a 
base. Now, Barilla be shipping it semolina flour from Italy so Yao and the team can create flat pasta that actually 
taste like pasta. 

CMU researcher create self-folding origami, try for pasta that shape a i... http://triblive.com/business/technology/13572270-74/cmu-researchers-cr... 

1 sur 2 04-05-18 à 12:23 



Shipping flat pasta could save nearly 60 percent of the packaging cost compare to traditional pasta and cut 
back on packaging waste, Yao said. 

Her team be also work with UPMC to develop fabric that responds to sweat and temperature. It could lead to 
hospital gown that can more efficiently keep patient warm or cool or shirt sleeve that roll up automatically 
and jacket that puff up when the temperature changes. 

Yao present her group's research this week at the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems in 
Montreal. 

Aaron Aupperlee be a Tribune-Review staff writer. Reach him at aaupperlee@tribweb.com, 412-336-8448 or via 
Twitter @tinynotebook. 

CMU researcher create self-folding origami, try for pasta that shape a i... http://triblive.com/business/technology/13572270-74/cmu-researchers-cr... 

2 sur 2 04-05-18 à 12:23 


