






































Commercialize quantum technology in five year : Nature News & Comment 


Subject terms: Quantum physic Technology 

NATURE | COMMENT 

Commercialize quantum technology in five year 

03 March 2017 

Masoud Mohseni, Peter Read, Hartmut Neven and colleague at Google's Quantum AI Laboratory set out investment opportunity on the 

road to the ultimate quantum machines. 

Masoud Mohseni, Peter Read, Hartmut Neven, Sergio Boixo, Vasil Denchev, Ryan Babbush, Austin Fowler, Vadim Smelyanskiy 

& John Martinis 

Commercialize quantum technology in five year : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

1 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



Related story 

Physicists propose 

football-pitch-sized 

From aspect of quantum entanglement to chemical reaction with large molecules, many feature of the world cannot be described efficiently with 

conventional computer base on binary logic. The solution, a physicist Richard Feynman realize three decade ago1, be to use quantum 

processor that adopt a blend of classical state simultaneously, a matter does. Many technical hurdle must be overcome for such quantum 

machine to be practical, however. These include noise control and improve the fidelity of operation act on the quantum state that encode the 

information. 

The quantum-computing community be channel most of it effort towards building the ultimate machine: a 

digital quantum computer that tolerates noise and errors, and that in principle can be apply to any problem. In 

theory, such a machine — which will need large processor comprise many quantum bits, or qubits — should be 

Erik Lucero 

Google's cryostat reach temperature of 10 millikelvin to run it quantum processors. 

Commercialize quantum technology in five year : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

2 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



quantum computer 

Quantum computer 

ready to leap out of the 

lab in 2017 

Inside Microsoft’s quest 

for a topological quantum 

computer 

More related story 

able to calculate faster than a conventional computer. Such capability be at least a decade away2. Correcting for 

error require redundancy, and the number of qubits need quickly mounts. For example, factorize a 2,000-bit 

number in one day, a task believe to be intractable use classical computers3, would take 100 million qubits, even 

if individual quantum operation fail just once in every 10,000 operations. We have yet to assemble digital 

quantum processor with ten of qubits. 

This conservative view of quantum compute give the impression that investor will benefit only in the long term. 

We contend that short-term return be possible with the small device that will emerge within the next five years, 

even though these will lack full error correction. 

A lack of theoretical guarantee need not preclude success. Heuristic 'hybrid' method that blend quantum and classical approach could be the 

foundation for powerful future applications. The recent success of neural network in machine learn be a good example. In the 1990s, when the 

compute power require to train deep neural network be unavailable, it be fashionable in the field to focus on 'convex' method (based on 

function with a clear minimum solution) that have a strong theoretical basis. Today, these method be no match for deep learning. The underlie 

algorithm of neural network have hardly changed, yet impressive new performance milestone be be reached, thanks to 'Moore's law'. 

Similarly, although there be no proof today that imperfect quantum machine can compute fast enough to solve practical problems, that may change. 

The scale, fidelity and controllability of analog and digital quantum hardware be improve steadily. We anticipate that, within a few years, well- 

control quantum system may be able to perform certain task much faster than conventional computer base on CMOS (complementary metal 

oxide–semiconductor) technology. 

Here we highlight three commercially viable us for early quantum-computing devices: quantum simulation, quantum-assisted optimization and 

quantum sampling. Faster compute speed in these area would be commercially advantageous in sector from artificial intelligence to finance 

and health care. 

Capitalizing on imminent advance in quantum technology require that the discipline broadens it focus and that scientist work more closely with 

entrepreneurs. Hardware improvement be need to make device reliable and controllable enough to be commercialized. Heuristic quantum 

algorithm need to be developed that address practical problem within the current hardware limitations. As researcher work on quantum 

compute at Google, we plan to provide access to our quantum processor through cloud service to facilitate the development and benchmarking 

of quantum algorithm and application across industries, deliver real benefit to society. 

Commercialize quantum technology in five year : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

3 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



Three priority 

If certain feasible technological improvement be achieved, we believe that emerge quantum processor have a good chance of carry out the 

follow class of computational task and could become commercially valuable within a few years. 

Quantum simulation. Modelling chemical reaction and material be one of the most anticipate application of quantum computing. Instead of 

spending years, and hundred of million of dollars, make and characterize a handful of materials, researcher could study million of candidate 

in silico. Whether the aim be strong polymer for aeroplanes, more-effective catalytic converter for cars, more-efficient material for solar cells, 

good pharmaceutical or more-breathable fabrics, faster discovery pipeline will bring enormous value. 

Computational material discovery be already a large industry. Quantum computer promise a radical transition: from the qualitative and descriptive 

to the quantitative and predictive. Chemical-reaction rate be extremely sensitive to molecular energy and span a range wider than classical 

method can handle. If robust algorithm be developed, it might be possible to simulate important material without the overhead of full quantum 

error correction4. For example, algorithm be already know (such a the 'quantum variational eigensolver' approach) that seem to be immune to 

qubit control errors. 

A variety of business model could supply quantum simulators. Laboratories might pay a subscription for access. Computing company could act 

a consultants. Some business might exchange equity in return for quantum-assisted breakthrough that lead to innovative material 

developments. 

Quantum-assisted optimization. A central and difficult computational task in all quantitative discipline of physical and social sciences, and across 

industries, be optimization. Such problem be difficult to solve with conventional computer because algorithm can navigate only slowly through the 

mathematical landscape of possible solutions; good solution may be hidden behind high barrier that be hard to overcome. The most general 

classical algorithm use statistical method (such a thermal energy distributions) to 'jump' over these barriers. We believe that this type of classical 

sample could be enhance by occasionally invoke quantum phenomenon such a tunnel (whereby quantum information be transmit through 

barriers) to find rare but high-quality solutions. 

Commercialize quantum technology in five year : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

4 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



For example, online recommendation and bidding strategy for advertisement use optimization algorithm to respond in the most effective way to 

consumers' need and change markets. More-powerful protocols, base on a combination of quantum and classical solvers, could improve the 

quality of product and service in many industries. Logistics company need to optimize their scheduling, planning and product distribution daily. 

Quantum-enhanced algorithm could improve patient diagnostics for health care. The quality of search or product recommendation for large 

information-technology company such a ours, Microsoft, Amazon and Facebook could be enhanced. 

Quantum sampling. Sampling from probability distribution be widely use in statistic and machine learning. In theory, ideal quantum circuit can 

sample from a large set of probability distribution than classical circuit can in the same time. Our calculation show that, for relatively small 

circuit involve high-fidelity quantum gates, it will be possible to sample from probability distribution that be inaccessible classically, use a circuit 

of just 7 × 7 qubits in layer that be around 25 deep (ref. 5). 

In fact, sample from distribution with such a shallow quantum circuit be likely to constitute the first example of 'quantum supremacy'. This term be 

coin by theoretical physicist John Preskill6 to describe the ability of a quantum processor to perform, in a short time, a well-defined mathematical 

Erik Lucero 

The small of these chips, a 6-mm square, hold 6 qubits. 

Commercialize quantum technology in five year : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

5 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



task that even the large classical supercomputer (such a China's Sunway TaihuLight) would be unable to complete within any reasonable time 

frame. We predict that, in a few years, an experiment achieve quantum supremacy will be performed. 

Among promising application of quantum sample be inference and pattern recognition in machine learning. To facilitate experimentation across 

academia and industry, we plan to offer access to the quantum hardware through a cloud-computing interface. 

Technical hurdle 

Several technological challenge must be overcome for quantum compute to be commercialized. Quantum hardware need to be scale up to 

compete with classical hardware, which have be improve exponentially for decades. Qubits require quantum coherence, which lead to quantum 

entanglement, by analogy with how classical circuit require transistor with gain. Combining scale and coherence be the big challenge of quantum 

system engineering. It be fundamentally difficult because quantum information cannot be copy and subsystem be entangled, lead to design 

trade-off that be global in nature. 

We think that superconducting qubits be one of the most promising hardware platform for quantum computers. Based on standard integrated- 

circuit and superconducting technologies, they be relatively easy to construct and control. And there be many possible design that might suit 

different requirement for digital and analog quantum processors. High-fidelity system of around ten qubits have be demonstrated, show the 

feasibility of the engineering concepts. 

New technology be emerge that could aid scalability, such a superconducting bump bond — a two-layer architecture for information- 

processing unit and control circuits. Prototype 'quantum annealers' of about 1,000 qubits be already available commercially7, 8. (These be analog 

quantum processor that could find good-quality solution for certain optimization tasks.) 

Several improvement be require for today's imperfect quantum device to be practical. Shallow quantum circuit need high gate fidelity and 

more stability to limit decoherence. Quantum-annealing hardware need to be improve with respect to connectivity, control precision and coherence 

times, a well a have access to alternative anneal schedules9. 

Commercialize quantum technology in five year : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

6 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



Business opportunity 

A new technology can improve business in three ways: by increase revenue, reduce cost or lower investment in infrastructure. In the digital 

era, introduce a new technology have an exponential impact: even a 1% gain in product quality can help a company to achieve overwhelm 

growth in term of user number or revenue10. This be the 'superstar effect', which assumes close competition, transparency and an efficient market. 

If early quantum-computing device can offer even a modest increase in compute speed or power, early adopter will reap the rewards. Rival 

company would face high entry barrier to match the same quality of service and products, because few expert can write quantum algorithms, 

and business need time to tailor new algorithms. The market that be most open to such disruption be information-rich and digital, and involve 

business challenge that rely on many variables. Such market include financial services, health care, logistics and data analytics. 

Making a business case require company to examine demand and supply. Demand can be assess a follows. First, identify the 'minimal viable 

products' — early quantum innovation with just enough core feature to enter the market. Estimate whether the innovation solves an exist need 

(product–market fit), the time it would take to commercialize the product (speed to market) and the market's response (business traction). 

Greg Kendall-Ball/Nature 

Radio-frequency and microwave electronics be use at Google to make scalable control hardware. 

Commercialize quantum technology in five year : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

7 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



For example, encryption break — often portrayed in the medium a a 'killer application' for digital quantum computer — do not score highly in 

term of market fit. It will one day be supersede by cryptosystems that be immune to quantum attack. And most private enterprise be 

uninterested in break encryption systems. By contrast, portfolio optimization and risk management need immediate data feedback and could 

benefit from quantum-enhanced models11. More efficient quantum-chemistry calculation would revolutionize the development of pharmaceuticals, 

catalytic converters, solar cell and fertilizers. 

Quantum-assisted optimization and inference technique could empower new machine-learning and artificial-intelligence systems. These could 

improve the management of renewable power generators, and of remote-sensing and early-warning systems. The technique would also aid 

dynamic pricing for online good and services, a well a warehouse automation and self-driving cars. 

On the supply side, company will distinguish themselves through the quality of their technology and teams. Pioneering quantum academic and 

entrepreneur will have to work together. This will be challenge because academic incentive be often inconsistent with those of start-up culture 

and industry. 

Strategic partnership can help business to stand out. To attract venture capitalists, the win quantum product should have business model 

that require few assets, be low on manufacturing cost and clearly help customer to increase their revenues. Through the cloud, a company could 

benefit from use exist data centre when apply classical solver to simple problems, and invoke quantum processor when it matters. 

What now? 

The field of quantum compute will soon achieve a historic milestone — quantum supremacy. It be still unknown whether application-related 

algorithm will be able to deliver big increase in speed use the sort of processor that will soon be available. But when quantum hardware 

becomes sufficiently powerful, it will become possible to test this and develop new type of algorithms. 

Over the next decade, academia, industry and national lab should work together to develop quantum simulation and quantum machine-learning 

algorithms. We plan to support such research by offering access to Google's quantum processor through cloud service to others that lack the 

necessary capital, expertise or infrastructure. 

Nature 543, 171–174 (09 March 2017) doi:10.1038/543171a 

Commercialize quantum technology in five year : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

8 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



Article PubMed 

Article ChemPort 

Article ChemPort 

PubMed 

Article 

Article PubMed ChemPort 

Article PubMed 

Tweet Follow @NatureNews 

References 

Feynman, R. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 21, 467–488 (1982). 

Show context 

1. 

Touzalin, A. et al. Quantum Manifesto: A New Area of Technology (Quantum Information Processing and Communication in Europe, 2016); 

available at http://go.nature.com/2im6rjr 

Show context 

2. 

Fowler, A. G., Mariantoni, M., Martinis, J. M. & Cleland, A. N. Phys. Rev. A 86, 032324 (2012). 

Show context 

3. 

Wecker, D., Hastings, M. B. & Troyer, M. Phys. Rev. A 92, 042303 (2015). 

Show context 

4. 

Boixo, S. et al. Preprint at http://arxiv.org/abs/1608.00263 (2016). 

Show context 

5. 

Preskill, J. in The Theory of the Quantum World (eds Gross, D., Henneaux, M. & Sevrin, A.) 63–80 (World Scientific, 2011). 

Show context 

6. 

Denchev, V. S. et al. Phys. Rev. X 6, 031015 (2016). 

Show context 

7. 

Boixo, S. et al. Nature Commun. 7, 10327 (2016). 

Show context 

8. 

Rams, M. M., Mohseni, M. & Del Campo, A. New J. Phys. 18, 123034 (2016). 

Show context 

9. 

Commercialize quantum technology in five year : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

9 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



Article PubMed 

Brynjolfsson, E. & McAfee, A. The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies (Norton, 2014). 

Show context 

10. 

Rosenberg, G. et al. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Signal Process. 10, 1053–1060 (2016). 

Show context 

11. 

Related story and link 

From nature.com 

Physicists propose football-pitch-sized quantum computer 

01 February 2017 

Quantum computer ready to leap out of the lab in 2017 

03 January 2017 

Inside Microsoft’s quest for a topological quantum computer 

21 October 2016 

Google move closer to a universal quantum computer 

08 June 2016 

Physics: Unite to build a quantum Internet 

12 April 2016 

The chip be down for Moore’s law 

09 February 2016 

From elsewhere 

Quantum AI research at Google 

Author information 

Affiliations 

Masoud Mohseni be senior research scientist at Google Quantum Artificial Intelligence Laboratory in Venice, California. 

Peter Read be manage director at Vitruvian Partners in London. 

Commercialize quantum technology in five year : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

10 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



1 comment Subscribe to comment 

Hartmut Neven be director of engineering at Google Quantum Artificial Intelligence Laboratory in Venice, California. 

Sergio Boixo, Vasil Denchev, Ryan Babbush, Austin Fowler, Vadim Smelyanskiy and John Martinis be all part of Google's Quantum AI 

team. 

Competing financial interest 

Google plan to offer access to it emerge quantum processor via a cloud compute service. 

Corresponding author 

Correspondence to: Masoud Mohseni, Peter Read or Hartmut Neven 

For the best comment experience, please login or register a a user and agree to our Community Guidelines. You will be re-directed back to this 

page where you will see comment update in real-time and have the ability to recommend comment to other users. 

Comments for this thread be now closed. 

Pentcho Valev • 2017-03-07 06:00 PM 

It seem perpetual-motion machine of the second kind be enter a commercialization phase a well, but the scientific community never 

discus violation of the second law of thermodynamics, even when the report be publish in prestigious journals: 

http://www.azocleantech.com/article.aspx?ArticleID=610 "A graphene battery have be developed that have the potential to convert ambient 

heat into electric current. This invention increase the prospect of green, clean battery power by ambient heat, and represent a 

significant progress in the research of self-powered technology." http://arxiv.org/abs/1203.0161 Self-Charged Graphene Battery Harvests 

Electricity from Thermal Energy of the Environment, Zihan Xu et al: "Moreover, the thermal velocity of ion can be maintain by the external 

environment, which mean it be unlimited. However, little study have be report on convert the ionic thermal energy into electricity. Here 

we present a graphene device with asymmetric electrode configuration to capture such ionic thermal energy and convert it into electricity. 

[...] To exclude the possibility of chemical reaction, we perform control experiments... [...] In conclusion, we could not find any evidence 

that support the opinion that the induced voltage come from chemical reaction. The mechanism for electricity generation by graphene in 

Commercialize quantum technology in five year : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

11 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 



Nature ISSN 0028-0836 EISSN 1476-4687 

© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All Rights Reserved. 

partner of AGORA, HINARI, OARE, INASP, CrossRef and COUNTER 

solution be a pure physical process..." http://scitation.aip.org/content/aip/journal/apl/103/16/10.1063/1.4825269 Electricity generate from 

ambient heat across a silicon surface, Guoan Tai, Zihan Xu, and Jinsong Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 103, 163902 (2013): "We report generation of 

electricity from the limitless thermal motion of ion across a two-dimensional (2D) silicon (Si) surface at room temperature. [...] ...limitless 

ambient heat, which be universally present in the form of kinetic energy from molecular, particle, and ion sources, have not yet be report to 

generate electricity. [...] This study provide insight into the development of self-charging technology to harvest energy from ambient heat, 

and the power output be comparable to several environmental energy harvest technique such a ZnO nanogenerator, liquid and gas flow- 

induced electricity generation across carbon nanotube thin film and graphene, although this remains a challenge to the second law of 

thermodynamics..." https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RVUf7-tTLXo The Super Supercapacitor. Note the "real excite discovery" ("The 

world change at that point") demonstrate by UCLA scientist at 1:09. Pentcho Valev 

See other News & Comment article from Nature 

Commercialize quantum technology in five year : Nature News & Comment http://www.nature.com/news/commercialize-quantum-technologies-in-five-years-1.21583 

12 sur 12 07/08/2017 22:18 


