






































Computer algorithm link facial masculinity to autism | University News : The University of Western Australia 


Related area 

INTERNATIONAL 

RESEARCH SCIENCE 

Follow @uwanews 

Stories 

Autism researcher award 
prestigious Eureka Award 
Do pheromone exist in humans? 
UWA researcher a finalist for 
2017 Eureka Prize 
Pterygium a red flag for 
melanoma, major new study 
show 
2016/2017 Payment Summaries 
(Group Certificates) 

Friday, 25 August 2017 

A link between masculine facial feature and autism have be 
discover by researcher from The University of Western 
Australia, Telethon Kids Institute and Princess Margaret Hospital 
for Children. 

The first-of-its-kind study use 3D photogrammetry to examine 
whether pre-pubescent boy and girl with an Autism Spectrum 
Disorder (ASD) displayed more masculine feature compare to 
those without the condition. The research have be publish 
today in Scientific Reports by the Nature Publishing Group. 

Genetic factor be know to play a major role in ASD however 
there be grow evidence that hormonal factor also influence development of the condition. 

A computer algorithm design by UWA researcher be use to generate a gender score for a sample 
of 3D facial image to create a scale range from very masculine to very feminine. The gender score 
be base on an analysis for 11 facial feature such a breadth of a person's nose, distance between 
the outer corner of the eyes, upper lip height and width of the mouth and be compare between an 
autistic group and a control group. A total 113 girl and 102 boy who be not autistic and 20 girl and 
54 boy who be autistic be involve in the study. For each sex, increase facial masculinity be 
observe in the ASD group compare to the control group. 

Further analysis reveal that increase facial masculinity in the group with autism correlate with more 
social communication difficulty a measure on the Autism Diagnostic Observation Scale. 

UWA Research associate Syed Zulqarnain Gilani, from UWA’s School of Computer Science and 
Software Engineering say the extent of facial masculinity/femininity varied from one individual to 
another. 

“We have developed an algorithm to measure this variation use 3D image of people, which 
calculates a metric for each face, which we refer to a the gender score,” Mr Gilani said. 

“When we apply this algorithm to 3D face of child diagnose with an ASD, the result and trend 
be fascinating.” 

The study be the first to report that the face of boy and girl with ASD be more masculinise than the 
face of typically develop children, accord to research associate Diana Tan, from UWA’s School of 
Psychological Science. 

“In our previous research, we found that a more masculinise facial profile be associate with 
increase exposure to prenatal testosterone,” Ms Tan said. 

“The current finding highlight a possible connection between prenatal testosterone and ASD. 

“A facial characteristic that be unique to ASD provide potential biological marker for this condition. In 
the long run, we hope to further explore the possibility for 3D facial image to be use a a 
complementary diagnostic tool to aid in the early identification of ASD.” 

Media reference 

Jess Reid (UWA Media and PR Adviser) (+61 4) 13 105 200 
Syed Zulqarnain Gilani (UWA School of Computer Science and Software Engineering) (+61 8) 6488 
1200 

University News 

Computer algorithm link facial masculinity to 
autism 

Computer algorithm link facial masculinity to autism | University News ... http://www.news.uwa.edu.au/201708259876/international/computer-algo... 

1 sur 1 16-07-18 à 19:27 


