






































European Commission : CORDIS : News and Events : Computer security flaw reveal faster isnâ•Žt necessarily good 


Computer security flaw reveal faster isn’t necessarily good 

Researchers discover 20-year-old security bug in CPU chips, highlight the need for safer computers. 

In the drive for good perform computers, manufacturers’ traditional focus on speed have 

come at the expense of security. Highlighting just how vulnerable today’s computer really 

are, two fundamental security flaw be recently discover in computer processors. 

Called Meltdown and Spectre, the flaw could allow user unauthorised access to personal 

data store in the most protect part of your computer system. 

The two bug be independently found by four different research groups, one of which 

be a team of researcher from Graz University of Technology, Austria. Supported with 

EU-funding for the project SOPHIA, the Graz team played a key role in the discovery of 

Meltdown and Spectre. 

A Meltdown in the work 

Both bug allow access to unauthorised information, but they achieve this in different ways. Meltdown do this by overcome memory isolation, 

which allows malicious programme to read ordinarily non-accessible part of a computer’s memory. This be make possible by a performance 

feature call ‘out-of-order execution’. To speed up a process, “modern processor run operation out-of-order i.e., they look ahead and schedule 

subsequent operation to idle execution unit of the processor,” the Graz team and other researcher explain in a paper post on the Cornell 

University Library website. 

“The root cause of Meltdown,” the author report, “is the hardware. The attack be independent of the operating system, and it do not rely on any 

software vulnerabilities.” All Intel processor that implement out-of-order execution be affected. Fortunately, the researcher have developed 

software patch against Meltdown. 

The Spectre in the system 

Processors conduct an out-of-order execution may reach a branch where the future direction depends on instruction that have yet to be 

executed. To maximise performance, processor then predict the path a programme be likely to follow and prematurely execute the instruction in 

them. It’s the vulnerability inherent in this process that make Spectre attack possible. Spectre allows data to be steal from the memory of other 

application run on a machine by break the isolation between them. 

In a separate study to which the Graz researcher also contributed, the author describe how this class of attack works: “At a high level, Spectre 

attack trick the processor into speculatively execute instruction sequence that should not have execute during correct program execution.” 

These speculative operation result in confidential information be leaked. 

Spectre pose a more serious problem for the industry, since it’s harder to fix and affect not only Intel, but AMD and ARM processors, too. 

Although only recently discovered, the flaw have exist since the mid-1990s. A worry thought, since these vulnerability may potentially 

have be exploit for decade by some without anyone knowing. Stefan Mangard, lead researcher for SOPHIA, highlight the need for more 

secure computer in an interview post on the European Research Council website: “In today's environment of increase attack on computer 

system […], we need to accept security a a major design criterion. I hope the discovery of the Meltdown and Spectre flaw will trigger a new 

way of think about computer design.” 

SOPHIA (Securing Software against Physical Attacks) be continue it research into way to execute software securely and efficiently in the 

presence of physical attack on all kind of compute devices. 

For more information, please see: 

CORDIS project webpage 

Source: Based on project information and medium report 

© Production Perig, Shutterstock 

European Commission : CORDIS : News and Events : Computer security... https://www.cordis.europa.eu/news/rcn/129337_en.html 

1 sur 2 07-05-18 à 19:18 



Related information 

Projects 

Programmes 

Countries 

Subjects 

Information Processing and Information Systems 

Last update on 2018-05-04 

SOPHIA - Securing Software against Physical Attacks 

H2020-EU.1.1. 

Austria 

European Commission : CORDIS : News and Events : Computer security... https://www.cordis.europa.eu/news/rcn/129337_en.html 

2 sur 2 07-05-18 à 19:18 


