






































Cooler compute through statistical physics? 


Cooler compute through statistical 
physics? 

In the space inside a computer chip, where electricity becomes 
information, there’s a scientific frontier. The same frontier can be 
found inside a cell, where information instead take the form of 
chemical concentrations. Recent breakthrough in the field of 
nonequilibrium statistical physic have reveal vast area of research 
lie hidden within the “thermodynamics of computation.” Advances in 
this field, which involves element of statistical physics, computer 
science, cellular biology, and possibly even neurobiology, could have 
far-reaching consequence for how we understand, and engineer, our 
computers. To kick-start this line research, Santa Fe Institute scientist 
and their collaborator have launch an online wiki for collaboration. 
This week they also publish a paper that neatly summarizes recent 
advance and open question that pertain to thermodynamics and 
computation. 

“The thermodynamic restriction on all system that perform 
computation provide major challenge to the modern design of 
computers,” the researcher write in the opening paragraph of the wiki, 
design to “serve a a hub and a gathering place for all who be 
interested.” They go on to outline the magnitude of energy consume 
by computer and the engineering challenge that result when a portion 
of that energy be lose a waste heat. The wiki also compare natural 
computations, perform by cell or human brains, to artificial 
computations, which be markedly less efficient. 

The research pick up on work by Rolf Landauer, who in 1961 
postulate that in order to erase a single bit of information — a 1 or a 0 
— a certain amount of energy must be lose a heat. Landauer’s insight be 
well know to computer scientist and have lead to an informal maxim to 
avoid bit erasure whenever possible. 

Going beyond Landauer’s cost, the new paper try to convey that 
“there’s more to the thermodynamics of computation than just bit 
erasure,” say co-author Joshua Grochow of the University of Colorado 
Boulder. The paper, publish in the computer science newsletter 
SIGACT News, present additional factor that could affect how energy 
flow in and out of atom during a computation. 

To reach other scientist who might be interested in pursue a 
thermodynamics of computation, Grochow and co-author David 
Wolpert of the Santa Fe Institute catalog some of the new tool from 
statistical physic that apply to nonequilibrium system — like 
computers. 

Cooler compute through statistical physics? https://santafe.edu/news-center/news/cooler-computing-through-statistica... 

1 sur 2 27-06-18 à 13:57 



“Part of what we be try to do with this paper be package up the 
lesson from nonequilibrium statistical [physics] over the past 20 year 
in a way that make clear what the new computational question are,” 
Grochow explains. He hope that by present what be now know 
about the relationship between thermodynamics and the microscopic 
process that occur during computation, the paper will “entice 
computer scientist to work on a new generation of questions.” 

One of these question involves how to thermodynamically “tune” 
computer to the input they be most likely to encounter. Grochow 
give the example of a calculator that be thermodynamically optimize 
for random 32-bit string input (equivalent to a decimal value of 10 
digits). The majority of human user don’t enter input that require any 
of the high bits. If the calculator be re-engineered to “expect” few 
than 32 bits, would it waste less energy in the form of heat? 

Beyond the accuracy of a computation, Grochow say the amount of 
memory a computation require and how long the computation take 
be other aspect that could affect it thermodynamic efficiency. 

Wolpert hope their research will expand to incorporate other recent 
breakthrough from statistical physics, like the Jarzynski equation. 
This equation provide a probabilistic bridge between the macro-scale 
world, where entropy can only increase, and the micro-scale world, 
where it do not. Some computer transistor be tiny enough to exist 
between these macro and micro scales. 

“We’re extend computer science theory, which be originally 
motivate by real-world systems, to other aspect of those system that 
it never even knew to think about before,” say Wolpert. 

The theory could lead to engineering advance that would enable 
cooler, more powerful machines, like exascale computer and even tiny 
swarm robots. It could also impact the sustainability of compute 
technology. 

“Computers now use a non-trivial fraction of energy in first world 
countries,” say Grochow. “Given that compute be go to continue 
to grow, reduce the energy they consume be hugely important to 
reduce our overall energy footprint.” 

Read “Beyond number of bit erasures: New complexity 
question raise by recently discover thermodynamic cost 
of computation” in SIGACT News. (June 21, 2018) 

Visit the Thermodynamics of Computation Wiki for reference 
materials, upcoming events, job openings, and discussion 
forum. 

Cooler compute through statistical physics? https://santafe.edu/news-center/news/cooler-computing-through-statistica... 

2 sur 2 27-06-18 à 13:57 


