






































European Commission : CORDIS : News and Events : Crosstalk in social dilemma could hinder cooperation 


Crosstalk in social dilemma could hinder cooperation 

Related information 

A new mathematical framework take into account ‘crosstalk’ and incorporate the impact of players’ interaction in simulation of 

repeat social dilemma could help good analyse cooperation dynamic within a population. 

The analysis of social dilemmas, situation in which private interest be at odds with 

collective interests, have attract a great deal of attention among researchers. This be not 

surprising because various challenge problem that we face – from the depletion of 

natural resource to intergroup conflict – are, at their core, social dilemmas. 

Researchers frequently use the experimental game method to study such problem with 

computer simulations. An experimental game – such a the prisoner’s dilemma – be a 

situation in which participant choose between cooperative and non-cooperative 

alternatives, yield consequence for themselves and others. 

Analyses of this phenomenon have previously assume that a player engages in only one repeat game at a time, or that a player’s action in 

one game be independent of all of their other interactions. However, a team of scientists, support by contribution from the EU-funded GRAPH 

GAMES project, argue that these assumption don’t necessarily apply to real-life social dilemma where human be often involve in many 

simultaneous games, and interaction with other player spill over into other games, meaning these game involve crosstalk. 

In such social dilemmas, mutual cooperation be good than mutual defection and yet, there be an incentive to defect. Direct reciprocity, which be 

base on repeat interaction between the same two players, be a mechanism for cooperation: ‘I help you and you help me’. Cooperation can be 

achieve if participant in such game adopt conditional cooperative strategy such a ‘tit-for-tat’ (I begin by collaborate and then I’ll do 

whatever you do last), or ‘win-stay, lose-shift’ (I begin with cooperation, then I’ll continue do what I’m do until I lose). 

Researchers from IST Austria and their collaborator at Harvard, Yale and Stanford university examine cooperation dynamic through repeat 

game and introduce a new framework to analyse crosstalk between a player’s concurrent games. Writing in the journal ‘Nature 

Communications’, they say “a player’s decision be subject to ‘crosstalk’ when an interaction that a player have in one repeat game influence 

how the very same player behaves in another repeat game.” 

In order to quantify the overall effect of crosstalk, the researcher represent the structure of the population by arrange player on a graph. The 

team’s finding show that in the presence of crosstalk, even a single defective player can cause the complete breakdown of cooperation in a 

society. “Nevertheless, cooperation can prevail if the population be structure and if subject be sufficiently forgiving,” the researcher noted. 

According to a statement by one of the research institute involve in the project, “crosstalk also necessitates strategy with the ‘correct’ level of 

forgiveness: too harsh, and you end up with a society where no one cooperates, too generous, and defection can also spread a player learn to 

take advantage of other players.” 

The paper conclude that in today’s highly connect world, a harsh cooperation strategy such a ‘tit-for-tat’ be particularly unable to deal with 

crosstalk. 

Some of the discovery in the GRAPH GAMES project include the analysis of multi-dimensional quantitative objective in graph games. Results 

include application of graph game in domain such a design of security protocol (that be correct by construction and attack-free), and 

evolutionary game theory (for model problem related to population dynamic or model growth of cancer). 

For more information, please see: 

GRAPH GAMES 

Source: Based on project information and medium report 

© Scanrail1, Shutterstock 

European Commission : CORDIS : News and Events : Crosstalk in social... https://cordis.europa.eu/news/rcn/128967_en.html 

1 sur 2 12-03-18 à 22:01 



Projects 

News 

Programmes 

Countries 

Subjects 

Information Processing and Information Systems - Mathematics and Statistics - Other Technology - Social science and humanity 

Last update on 2018-03-08 

GRAPH GAMES - Quantitative Graph Games: Theory and Applications 

The more you dislike, the less you're willing to help 

Science explains why some game can't really be master 

FP7-IDEAS-ERC 

Austria 

European Commission : CORDIS : News and Events : Crosstalk in social... https://cordis.europa.eu/news/rcn/128967_en.html 

2 sur 2 12-03-18 à 22:01 


