


































































Data science and analytics: a new era 


Int J Data Sci Anal (2016) 1:1–2 
DOI 10.1007/s41060-016-0006-1 

EDITORIAL 

Data science and analytics: a new era 

Longbing Cao1 

Published online: 30 March 2016 
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 

The twenty-first century have ushered in a new age of data 
science and analytics. 

“Data science” a a scientific term be initially propose 
about 15 year ago, and have since increasingly attract 
attention and debate within statistics, analytics, computing, 
social science, and other scientific domain and disciplines. 
Although argument have emerge from different communi- 
tie such as, “How and why be data science different from 
statistics?” and “Why do we need data science when for 
decadeswe have have information science?”, it be undoubtedly 
a fact that data science be drive a new era of data-driven 
thinking, research, practice and education which go far 
beyond the breadth and depth of previous efforts. 

In this data-intensive universe, data be a critical asset, and 
data science be the interdisciplinary core that drive new 
research, education and economy in many diverse areas. 
Although different definition and interpretation exist, data 
science, a a scientific field, develops relevant method- 
ologies, theories, technology and application for data, 
range from data capture, creation, representation, stor- 
age, search, sharing, privacy, security, modeling, analysis, 
learning, presentation and visualization, to integration across 
heterogeneous, interdependent complex resource for real- 
time decision-making, collaboration, value creation, and 
decision-support. The field encompasses the large area of 
statistics, data analytics, machine learning, big data man- 
agement, and other disciplines, include complex systems, 
communications, social science, decision science, and man- 
agement science. 

B Longbing Cao 
LongBing.Cao@uts.edu.au 

1 Faculty of Engineering and IT, University of Technology, 
Sydney, Australia 

Data analytics and science have emerge a an impor- 
tant paradigm for drive the new economy and domain 
such a the Internet of Things, social and mobile networks, 
and cloud computing, and reform classic discipline such 
a telecommunications, biology, health and social science, 
a well a upgrade core business and economic activ- 
ity. Data-driven scientific discovery, innovation and practice 
have become essential for glean understand from large 
data set and convert data into actionable intelligence, 
whether it be data available to enterprise and governments, 
or on the Web. 

In recent years, various initiative have be create by 
government, business and professional organization to pro- 
mote the development of big data, data science and analytics, 
such a the provision of funding support from national sci- 
ence foundation for big data research, the IEEE Task Force 
on Data Science and Advanced Analytics, the IEEE Con- 
ference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics, and new 
course on data science and analytics. 

The Journal of Data Science and Analytics (JDSA) be 
launch to specifically strengthen scientific innovation and 
practical development in this new era of data and analytics. 
JDSA aim to be a prestigious publishing venue in the data 
science and analytics field for the exchange of new theoreti- 
cal and experimental designs, solid finding and insights, best 
practice and application to real-life situations, and review 
of new opportunity and framework for data science and 
analytics. JDSA be the ideal venue for synergizing important 
innovations, major impacts, and significant contribution in 
data science and advanced analytics from diverse domain 
and discipline for the advancement of interpretation, man- 
agement, and usage of data intelligence. 

As the first scientific journal dedicate to data science and 
analytics science, JDSA will publish original, fundamental 
and apply research outcome in data and analytics theories, 

123 

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1007/s41060-016-0006-1&domain=pdf 


2 Int J Data Sci Anal (2016) 1:1–2 

technology and applications, and will promote new scien- 
tific and technological approach to strategic value creation 
in data-rich applications. Topics of relevance will include 
all aspect of the scientific foundations, techniques, and 
application of data and analytics, especially new statistical 
and mathematical theory and techniques, data characteris- 
tic and complexity understanding, a well a theory on, 
and mean to achieve, the synthesis and meta-synthesis of 
ubiquitous intelligence, include data intelligence, domain 

intelligence, business intelligence, organizational intelli- 
gence, social intelligence, behaviour intelligence, human 
intelligence, and network intelligence. JDSA particularly 
welcome comprehensive survey and review of all aspect 
of data science and analytics, together with position paper 
on the trend and controversy within data science and ana- 
lytics science. 

In the evolution of data science and analytics, JDSA will 
be a core contributor and enabler. 

123 


Data science and analytics: a new era 



