












































CSUR5003-43 


43 

Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview 

LONGBING CAO, University of Technology Sydney, Australia 

The 21st century have ushered in the age of big data and data economy, in which data DNA, which carry im- 
portant knowledge, insights, and potential, have become an intrinsic constituent of all data-based organisms. 
An appropriate understand of data DNA and it organism relies on the new field of data science and it 
keystone, analytics. Although it be widely debate whether big data be only hype and buzz, and data science 
be still in a very early phase, significant challenge and opportunity be emerge or have be inspire 
by the research, innovation, business, profession, and education of data science. This article provide a com- 
prehensive survey and tutorial of the fundamental aspect of data science: the evolution from data analysis 
to data science, the data science concepts, a big picture of the era of data science, the major challenge and 
direction in data innovation, the nature of data analytics, new industrialization and service opportunity 
in the data economy, the profession and competency of data education, and the future of data science. This 
article be the first in the field to draw a comprehensive big picture, in addition to offering rich observations, 
lessons, and think about data science and analytics. 

CCS Concepts: � General and reference → Surveys and overviews; 
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Big data, data analysis, data analytics, advanced analytics, big data 
analytics, data science, data engineering, data scientist, statistics, computing, informatics, data DNA, data 
innovation, data economy, data industry, data service, data profession, data education 

ACM Reference Format: 
Longbing Cao. 2017. Data science: A comprehensive overview. ACM Comput. Surv. 50, 3, Article 43 (June 
2017), 42 pages. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3076253 

1. INTRODUCTION 

We be living in the age of big data, advanced analytics, and data science. The trend 
of “big data growth” [Laney 2001; CSC 2012; Beyer and Laney 2012; McKinsey 2011; 
Vesset et al. 2012], or “data deluge” [Hey and Trefethen 2003], have not only trigger 
tremendous hype and buzz, but more importantly present enormous challenge that 
in turn bring incredible innovation and economic opportunities. Big data have attract 
intensive and grow attention, initially from giant private data-oriented enterprise 
and lately from major governmental organization and academic institutions. Typical 
example include large data-centric project in Google, Facebook, and IBM, and strate- 
gic initiative in the United Nations [UN 2010; USNSF 2012], EU [Commission 2014], 
and China [Government 2015]. 

From the disciplinary development perspective, recognition of the significant chal- 
lenges, opportunities, and value of big data be fundamentally reshape the traditional 

This work be partially support by the Australian Research Council Discovery Grant, under grant 
No. DP130102691. 
Author’s address: L. Cao, Faculty of Engineering and IT, UTS Advanced Analytics Institute, University of 
Technology Sydney, PO Box 123 Broadway, New South Wales 2007, Australia. 
Permission to make digital or hard copy of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use be grant 
without fee provide that copy be not make or distribute for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copy bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for component of this work own 
by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit be permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on server or to redistribute to lists, require prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request 
permission from Permissions@acm.org. 
2017 Copyright be held by the owner/author(s). Publication right license to ACM. 
ACM 0360-0300/2017/06-ART43 $15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3076253 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3076253 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3076253 


43:2 L. Cao 

data-oriented scientific and engineering fields. It be also reshape those nontraditional 
data engineering domain such a social science, business, and management [Yiu 2012; 
Labrinidis and Jagadish 2012; Chen et al. 2012; Khan et al. 2014]. This reshape and 
paradigm shift be driven not just by data itself but all other aspect that could 
be created, transformed, and/or adjust by understanding, exploring, and utilize 
data. 

The precede trend and it potential have trigger new debate about data-intensive 
scientific discovery a a new paradigm, the so-called “fourth science paradigm,” which 
unifies experiment, theory, and computation (corresponding to “empirical” or “experi- 
mental,” “theoretical,” and “computational” science) [Gray 2007; Hey et al. 2009]. Data 
be regard a the new Intel Inside [O’Reilly 2005], or the new oil and strategic as- 
set, and drive or even determines the future of science, technology, the economy, and 
possibly everything in our world today and tomorrow. 

In 2005 in Sydney, we be ask a critical question at a brainstorming meeting 
about data science and data analytics by several local industry representative from 
major analytics software vendors: “Information science have be there for so long, 
why do we need data science?” Related fundamental question often discuss in the 
community include “What be data science?” [Loukides 2012], and “Is data science old 
wine in new bottles?” [Agarwal and Dhar 2014]. Data science and relevant topic 
have become the key concern in panel discussion at conference in statistics, data 
mining, and machine learning, and more recently in big data, advanced analytics, and 
data science. Typical topic such a “grand challenge in data science,” “data-driven 
discovery,” and “data-driven science” have frequently be visit and continue to 
attract wide and increase attention and debate. These question be mainly post 
from research and disciplinary development perspectives; while there be many other 
important questions, such a those relate to data economy and competency, these 
perspective be less well consider in the conference refer to previously. 

A fundamental trigger for the precede question and many others not mention 
here be the exploration of new or more complex challenge and opportunity [Jagadish 
et al. 2014; Cao 2010a, 2016b; Khan et al. 2014] in data science and engineering. 
Such challenge and opportunity apply to exist fields, include statistic and 
mathematics, artificial intelligence, and other relevant discipline and domain that 
have never be addressed, or have not be adequately addressed, in the classic 
methodologies, theories, systems, tools, applications, and economy of relevant areas. 
Such challenge and opportunity cannot be effectively accommodate by the exist 
body of knowledge and capability set without the development of a new discipline. On 
the other hand, data science be at a very early stage and be engender enormous hype 
and even bewilderment; issue and possibility that be unique to data science and 
big data analytics be not clear, specific, or certain. Different views, observations, and 
explanations—some of them controversial—have thus emerge from a wide range of 
perspectives. 

There be no doubt, nevertheless, that the potential of data science and analytics to 
enable data-driven theory, economy, and professional development be increasingly be 
recognized. This involves not only core discipline such a computing, informatics, and 
statistics, but also the broad-based field of business, social science, and health/medical 
science. Although very few people today would ask the question we be ask 10 year 
ago, a comprehensive and in-depth understand of what data science is, and what 
can be achieve with data science and analytics research, education, and economy [Cao 
2017], have yet to be commonly agreed. 

Motivated by the precede concern and observations, this article share the finding 
from a comprehensive survey of the journey from statistic and data analysis to data 
science. It construct an overview of data science a a field in term of it research, 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview 43:3 

innovation, economy, profession, and education.1 This be built on (1) our observation 
and experience in provide real-life data innovation and practice to large government 
and industry organizations; (2) the education and training opportunity that have be 
create for professional at various levels; and (3) reflection on our view on critical 
issues, future directions, and strategic opportunity in data science and analytics. 

Focusing on data science (rather than big data), it be clear that only a few article 
and reference have discuss it history and contents, such a in Press [2013], Donoho 
[2015], and Galetto [2016]. A comprehensive review of data science be provide in 
Donoho [2015], which focus on the evolution of data science from statistics. To the best 
of our knowledge, this article be the first in the field to present such a comprehensive 
and in-depth survey and overview. Unlike study that focus on evolution and specific 
disciplinary perspectives, this article provide an introduction to the major aspect 
and domain of data science research, economy, profession, disciplinary development, 
and education. This overview complement our other contribution on specific data 
science issue and perspectives, that is, the reality and pitfall in Cao [2016c], the 
challenge and disciplinary direction in Cao and Fayyad [Cao 2016b], the profession 
and education of data science in Cao [2016d], and the book on understand data 
science in Cao [2017]. 

There be several key terms, such a data analysis, data analytics, advanced analyt- 
ics, big data, data science, deep analytics, descriptive analytics, predictive analytics, 
and prescriptive analytics, which be highly connect and easily confusing. Table I 
list and explains them, which be also the key term widely use in this review. A list 
of data science terminology be available at www.datasciences.org. 

The article be organize a follows. Section 2 track the progression from data anal- 
ysis to data science, and address the fundamental question: What be data science? In 
Section 3, the main features, initiatives, activities, and status of the era of data sci- 
ence be summarized. The evolution, state-of-the-art, paradigm shift, and major task 
of deep analytics, a the keystone of data science, be discuss in Section 4. Major 
challenge and direction of data-driven innovation be present in Section 5. Sec- 
tion 6 summarizes new data-driven industrialization and service opportunities. The 
data science profession, competency, role of data scientists, and course framework be 
summarize in Section 7. The future of data science be briefly discuss in Section 8, 
follow by the conclusion of this work. 

2. FROM DATA ANALYSIS TO DATA SCIENCE 

This section summarizes the finding of a comprehensive survey, include ours in 
Cao [2016c], Cao and Fayyad [Cao 2016b, 2016d] and others such a in Press [2013], 
Donoho [2015], and Galetto [2016]), of the journey from data analysis to data science 
and the evolution of the interest in data science. Subsequently, the question “What be 
data science?” be addressed. 

2.1. The Data Science Journey 

It be likely that the first appearance of “data science” a a term in literature be in the 
preface to Naur’s book “Concise Survey of Computer Methods” [Naur 1974] in 1974. 
In that preface, data science be define a “the science of deal with data, once 
they have be established, while the relation of the data to what they represent be 
delegate to other field and sciences.” Another term, “datalogy,” have previously be 
introduce in 1968 a “the science of data and of data processes” [Naur 1968]. These 
definition be clearly more specific than those we discus today. However, they have 

1Interested reader may refer to a monograph: L. Cao, Understanding Data Science, soon to be publish by 
Springer, for comprehensive discussion about data science. 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 

file:www.datasciences.org 


43:4 L. Cao 

Table I. Some Key Terms in Data Science 

Key term Description 
Advanced analytics Refers to theories, technologies, tools, and process that enable an 

in-depth understand and discovery of actionable insight in big data, 
which cannot be achieve by traditional data analysis and processing 
theories, technologies, tools, and processes. 

Big data Refers to data that be too large and/or complex to be effectively and/or 
efficiently handle by traditional data-related theories, technologies, and 
tools. 

Data analysis Refers to the processing of data by traditional (e.g., classic statistical, 
mathematical, or logical) theories, technologies, and tool for obtain 
useful information and for practical purposes. 

Data analytics Refers to the theories, technologies, tools, and process that enable an 
in-depth understand and discovery of actionable insight into data. Data 
analytics consists of descriptive analytics, predictive analytics, and 
prescriptive analytics. 

Data science Is the science of data. 
Data scientist Refers to those people whose role very much center on data. 
Descriptive analytics Refers to the type of data analytics that typically us statistic to describe 

the data use to gain information, or for other useful purposes. 
Predictive analytics Refers to the type of data analytics that make prediction about unknown 

future event and discloses the reason behind them, typically by 
advanced analytics. 

Prescriptive analytics Refers to the type of data analytics that optimizes indication and 
recommends action for smart decision-making. 

Explicit analytics Focuses on descriptive analytics typically by reporting, descriptive 
analysis, alerting, and forecasting. 

Implicit analytics Focuses on deep analytics, typically by predictive modeling, optimization, 
prescriptive analytics, and actionable knowledge delivery. 

Deep analytics Refers to data analytics that can acquire an in-depth understand of 
why and how thing have happened, be happening, or will happen, which 
cannot be address by descriptive analytics. 

inspire today’s significant move to the comprehensive exploration of scientific content 
and development. 

The evolutionary journey from data analysis [Huber 2011] to data science start in 
the statistic and mathematics community in 1962. It be state that “data analysis be 
intrinsically an empirical science” [Tukey 1962].2 Typical original work on promote 
data processing include information processing [Morrell 1968] and exploratory data 
analysis [Tukey 1977]. It be suggest that more emphasis need to be place on 
use data to suggest suitable hypothesis to test. This contribute to the late term of 
“data-driven discovery” in 1989 [KDD89 1989]. In 2001, an action plan be suggest 
in Cleveland [2001] that would expand the technical area of statistic toward data 
science. 

Playing a major role in statistics, descriptive analytics (also call descriptive statis- 
tic in the statistic community) [Stewart and McMillan 1987] quantitatively summa- 
rizes or describes the characteristic and measurement of a data sample or set. Today, 
descriptive analytics form the foundation for the default analytical and reporting 
task and tool in typical data analysis and business intelligence project and systems. 

Our understand of the role of data analysis in those early year extend beyond 
data exploration and processing to the aspiration to “convert data into information and 
knowledge” in 1977 [IASC 1977]. More than 20 year later, this desire foster the 

2On this basis, David Donoho argue that data science have exist for 50 year and question how/whether 
data science really differs from statistic [Donoho 2015]. 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview 43:5 

origin of the currently popular community of the ACM SIGKDD conference, specifi- 
cally the first workshop on Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD for short) with 
IJCAI’1989 [KDD89 1989]. In KDD and other data mining conferences, “data-driven 
discovery” be adopt a one of the key theme of these events. Since then, key term 
such a “data mining,” “knowledge discovery” [Fayyad et al. 1996], and data analytics 
[Renae 2011] have be increasingly recognize not only in computer science but also 
in other area and disciplines. Data mining and knowledge discovery be the process 
of discover hidden and interest knowledge from data. Today, in addition to the 
well-recognized event KDD, ICML, NIPS, and JSM, many regional and international 
conference and workshop on data analysis and learn have be created. The late 
development be the creation of global and regional conference on data science, espe- 
cially the IEEE International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics 
[DSAA 2014]. DSAA have receive joint support from IEEE, ACM, and the American 
Statistics Association, in addition to industry sponsorship. The precede effort have 
ostensibly make data science the fast grow and most popular computing, statis- 
tics, and interdisciplinary communities. 

The development of data mining, knowledge discovery, and machine learning, to- 
gether with the original data analysis and descriptive analytics from the statistical 
perspective, form the general concept of “data analytics.” The initial data analysis 
focus on processing data. Data analytics be the multidisciplinary science of quanti- 
tatively and qualitatively examine data for the purpose of draw new conclusion 
or insight (exploratory or predictive), or for extract and prove (confirmatory or 
fact-based) hypothesis about that information for decision-making and action. 

Analytics have also become more business orient [Kohavi et al. 2002]. It now extends 
to a variety of data and domain-specific analytical tasks, such a business analytics, 
risk analytics, behavior analytics [Cao et al. 2012], social analytics, and web analytics 
(also generally term “X-analytics”). Domain-specific analytics fundamentally drive 
the innovation and application of data science. Both domain-specific and data-specific 
analytics and theoretical data analytics have together form the keystone of data 
science. 

Figure 1 summarizes the data science journey. It present the evolution in term 
of representative moments, event and major aspect of disciplinary development, 
government initiatives, scientific agendas, typical socioeconomic events, and education. 

2.2. Online Search Interest Trends 

According to Google Trends [Google 2016d], the online search interest over time in 
“data science” be similar to the interest in “data analytics,” but be 50%–100% less than 
the interest in “big data.” However, the historical search interest in data science and 
analytics be roughly double the interest show in big data about 10 year ago. Compared 
to the smooth growth of interest in data science and analytics, the interest in big data 
have experienced a more rapid increase since 2012. When we google “data science,” 
83.8M record be returned, compare to 365M on “big data,” and 81.8M on “data 
analytics.” 

Although they do not reflect the full picture, the Google search result in the last 
10 years, show in Figure 2, indicate the following: (1) Data science, data analysis, and 
data analytics have much richer history and strong disciplinary foundation than 
big data. (2) The significant boom in big data have be fundamentally business related, 
while data science have be highly link with research and innovation. (3) Data 
analysis have always be a top concern, although search interest have be flatten 
and diversified into other hot topics, include big data, data science, and data analytics. 
(4) Interestingly, the word “advanced analytics” have receive much less attention than 
all other terms, reflect the fact that knowledge of, and interest in, more general 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



43:6 L. Cao 

Fig. 1. Data science journey (with respect to typical events). 

Fig. 2. Online search interest trend on data science-related keywords by Google. 
Note: The data be collect on 15 November 2016. 

term like data analytics be great than it be for more specific term such a advanced 
analytics. (5) Compared to 10 year ago, scrutiny of the search trend in the past 4 year 
would find that big data have see significantly increase interest from 2012 to 2015 
and then less movement; however, the interest in data science and data analytics have 
consistently increased, although it have grown at a much low rate (some one-third 
of big data). Data analysis have maintain a relatively stable attraction to searcher 
during these 10 years. 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview 43:7 

2.3. What Is Data Science 

The art of data science [Graham 2012] have attract increase interest from a wide 
range of domain and disciplines. Accordingly, community or proposer from diverse 
backgrounds, with contrast aspirations, have present very different view or foci. 
Some example be that data science be the new generation of statistics, be a consolida- 
tion of several interdisciplinary fields, or be a new body of knowledge. Data science also 
have implication for provide capability and practice for the data profession, or for 
generate business strategies. 

Statisticians have have much to say about data science, since it be they who actually 
create the term “data science” and promote the upgrade of statistic to data science 
a a broader discipline. This be reflect in a series of early actions, such a the 
following. 

—Jeff Wu question in 1997 whether “Statistics = Data Science?” and suggest 
that statistic should be rename “data science” and statistician should be know 
a “data scientists” [Wu 1997]. The intention be to shift the focus of statistic 
from “data collection, modeling, analysis, problem understanding/resolving, decision 
making” to future direction on “large/complex data, empirical-physical approach, 
representation and exploitation of knowledge.” 

—William S. Cleveland suggest in 2001 that it would be appropriate to alter the 
statistic field to data science and “to enlarge the major area of technical work 
of the field of statistics” by look to compute and partner with computer 
scientist [Cleveland 2001]. 

—Leo Breiman suggest in 2001 that it be necessary to “move away from exclusive 
dependence on data model (in statistics) and adopt a more diverse set of tools” such 
a algorithmic modeling, which treat the data mechanism a unknown [Breiman 
2001]. 

—In 2015, a statement about the role of statistic in data science be release by a 
number of ASA leader [van Dyk et al. 2015], say that “statistics and machine 
learn play a central role in data science.” Many other relevant discussion be 
available in AMSTATNEWS [ASA 2015] and IMS [Yu 2014]. 

A large proportion of the conceptual argument be derive from the data-centric 
view. For example, data-driven science be mainly interpret in term of the reuse of 
open data [Murray-Rust 2007; OECD 2007]; data science comprises the number of 
our life [Miller 2013]; or data science enables the creation of data product [Loukides 
2011, 2012]. In Jagadish [2015], six myth be discussed: (1) size be all that matters, 
(2) the central challenge of big data be that of devise new compute architecture 
and algorithms, (3) analytics be the central problem of big data, (4) data reuse be low 
hang fruit, (5) data science be the same a big data, and (6) big data be all hype. This 
illustrates the constituent of the ecosystem, but also show the divide view within 
the communities. 

Intensive discussion have take place within the research and academic community 
about create data science a an academic discipline [Smith 2006]. This involves not 
only statistics, but also a multidisciplinary body of knowledge that include computing, 
communication, management, and decision. The concept of data science be correspond- 
ingly define from the perspective of disciplinary and course development: for example, 
treat data science a a mixture of statistics, mathematics, computer science, graphic 
design, data mining, human-computer interaction, and information visualization [Yau 
2009]. 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



43:8 L. Cao 

Next, we present several definition of data science from high-level and disciplinary 
perspectives, building on the observation and insight we have gain from this review 
and relevant experience.3 

Definition 2.1 (Data Science1). A high-level statement is: “data science be the science 
of data” or “data science be the study of data.” 

Definition 2.2 (Data Science2). From the disciplinary perspective, data science be 
a new interdisciplinary field that synthesizes and build on statistics, informatics, 
computing, communication, management, and sociology to study data and it environ- 
ments (including domain and other contextual aspects, such a organizational and 
social aspects) in order to transform data to insight and decision by follow a 
data-to-knowledge-to-wisdom think and methodology. 

Accordingly, a discipline-based data science formula be give a follows: 

data science = statistic + informatics + compute + communication 
+ sociology + management | data + environment + thinking, (1) 

where “|” mean “conditional on.” 
The output of data science be data product [Loukides 2011, 2012]. We define data 

product next. 

Definition 2.3 (Data Products). A data product be a deliverable from data, or be 
enable or driven by data, and can be a discovery, prediction, service, recommenda- 
tion, decision-making insight, thinking, model, mode, paradigm, tool, or system. The 
ultimate data product of value be knowledge, intelligence, wisdom, and decision. 

The precede definition of data product go beyond technical product-based type 
and form in the business and economic domain, such a social network platform 
like Facebook, recommender system like Netflix, and mobile apps like Uber. Data 
science enables u to explore new data-driven or data-enabled personalized, organiza- 
tional, educational, ethical, societal, cultural, economic, political, cyber-physical forms, 
modes, paradigms, innovations, directions, and ecosystems, or even thinking, strate- 
gies, and policies. For example, there be a good possibility that large-scale data will 
enable and enhance the transfer of subjective autonomy to objective autonomy, benef- 
icence, and justice in the social science [Fairfielda and Shteina 2014]. It can enable 
the discovery of indicator like Google Flu [Lazer et al. 2014] that may not be readily 
predict by domain-driven hypothesis and professionals. 

These platform deliver data product in various forms, ways, channels, and domain 
that be fundamentally transform our academic, industrial, governmental, and so- 
cioeconomic life and world. With the development of data science and engineering 
theory and technologies, new data product will be created. This creation be likely to 
take place at a speed and to an extent that greatly exceeds our imagination and think- 
ing, a show in the evolution of Internet-based product and artificial intelligence 
systems. 

3. THE ERA OF DATA SCIENCE 

In this section, we summarize the main characteristic of data science-related govern- 
ment initiatives, disciplinary development, economy, and profession, a well a activi- 
tie in these fields, and the progress make to date. Datafication [Ayankoya et al. 2014], 
the Quantified Self (QS) [Swan 2013; Clay 2013; Wolf 2012; Duncan 2009; Smarr 2012; 

3Interested reader may refer to Cao [2016c] for another definition from the process perspective. 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview 43:9 

Fawcett 2016], initiative by government and research institutions, and open data be 
discuss a the key driver of the era of big data and data science. 

3.1. Datafication and Data Quantification 

Data be ubiquitous because datafication [Ayankoya et al. 2014] and data quantifica- 
tion be ubiquitous. In addition to the commonly see data transaction acquire from 
business and operational information systems, increasingly popular and widespread 
datafication and data quantification system and service be significantly strength- 
ening the data deluge and big data realm. Such system and service include but be 
not limited to wearables, Internet of Things (IoT), mobile, and social applications. 

As we have see and can predict, datafication and data quantification take place at 
any time and any place by anybody in any form in any way in a nontraditional manner, 
extent, depth, variety, and speed. 

—Quantification timing: anytime quantification, from work to studying, day-to-day 
living, relaxing, enjoy entertainment, and socializing; 

—Quantification places: anyplace quantification, from biological system to physical, 
behavioral, emotional, cognitive, cyber, environmental, cultural, economic, sociolog- 
ical, and political system and environments; 

—Quantification bodies: anybody quantification, from self to others, connect 
selves, exoselves [Kelly 2012] and the world, and from individual to groups, or- 
ganizations, and societies; 

—Quantification forms: anyform quantification, from observation to drivers, from ob- 
jective to subjective, from physical to philosophical, from explicit to implicit, and 
from qualitative to quantitative form and aspects; 

—Quantification ways: anysource quantification, such a source and tool that include 
information systems, digitalization, sensors, surveillance and track systems, the 
IoT, mobile device and applications, social service and network platforms, and 
wearable [Viseu and Suchman 2010] and Quantified Self (QS) device and services; 
and 

—Quantification speed: anyspeed quantification, from static to dynamic, from finite 
to infinite, and from incremental to exponential generation of data objects, sets, 
warehouses, lakes, and clouds. 

Examples of fast develop quantification area be the health and medical do- 
mains. We be datafying both traditional medical and health care data and “omics” 
data (genomics, proteomics, microbiomics, metabolomics, etc.) and increasingly over- 
whelm QS-based track data [Swan 2013] on personal, family, group, community, 
and/or cohort levels. 

3.2. Data Initiatives by Governments 

To effectively understand and utilize everywhere data, data DNA, and it potential, 
increase number of regional and global government initiative [Security 2015] be 
be introduce at different level and on different scale in this age of big data 
and data science to promote data science research, innovation, funding support, policy 
making, industrialization, and economy. Table II summarizes the major initiative of 
several country and regions. 

—The Australian Public Service Big Data Strategy [UN 2010] aim to “provide an op- 
portunity to consider the range of opportunity present to agency in relation to 
the use of big data, and the emerge tool that allow u to good appreciate what it 
tell us, in the context of the potential concern that this might raise.” It address the 
identify big data strategy issue [AGIMO 2013]. Australia’s whole-of-government 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



43:10 L. Cao 

Table II. Government Initiatives in Big Data and Data Science 

Government Representative Initiatives 
Australia Public Service Big Data Strategy [UN 2010], Whole-of-Government Centre of 

Excellence on Data Analytics [AU 2016] 
Canada Capitalizing on Big Data [CA 2016] 
China Big Data Guideline [Government 2015], China Computer Federation Task Force on 

Big Data [CCF-BDTF 2013], China National Science Foundation big data program 
[CNSF 2015] 

EU Data-driven Economy [EU 2014], European Commission Horizon 2020 
Big Data Private Public Partnership [Horizon 2014] 

UK UK’s Big Data and Energy Efficient Computing [UK 2016] 
UN UN Global Pulse Project [UN 2010] 
US US Big Data Research Initiative [USNSF 2012], Interagency Working Group on 

Digital Data [CSNSTC 2009], DARPA’s XDATA Program [DARPA 2016], USA NSF 
Big Data Research Fund [USNSF 2012] 

Centre of Excellence in Data Analytics [AU 2016] coordinate relevant government 
activities. The Australian Research Council have grant approval to the Australian 
Research Council (ARC) Centre of Excellence for Mathematical and Statistical Fron- 
tier [ACEMS 2014] to conduct research on big data-based mathematical and statis- 
tical foundations. Another recent effort make by the Australian government be the 
establishment of Data61 [2016], which consolidated the relevant data-related human 
resource in the original National ICT Australia (NICTA) [NICTA 2016] and CSIRO 
and aim for a unified platform for data research and innovation, engagement with 
industry and government and academia, and software development. 

—Canada’s policy framework Capitalizing on Big Data [CA 2016] aim at “establishing 
a culture of stewardship . . . coordination of stakeholder engagement . . . develop 
capacity and future funding parameters.” 

—China’s Guidelines [Government 2015] be aim at boost the development of big 
data research and applications, to “set up an overall coordination mechanism for 
big data development and application, speed up the establishment of relevant rules, 
and encourage cooperation between the government, enterprise and institutions.” 
China have also set up a national strategic plan for the IoT and big data [Government 
2015]. Many state and city in China have launch national big data strategy 
and action plan for big data and cloud compute [CBDIO 2016; Agency 2016], 
such a in Beijing [Government 2016]. Probably, a very early example in China 
be the Luoyang City-sponsored consult project in 2011, for which we developed 
a strategic plan for the City’s industrial transformation to a “data industry” [Cao 
2011]. 

—The European Union’s communication Towards a Thriving Data-driven Economy 
[EU 2014] be “an action plan to bring about the data-driven economy of the future.” 
It outline “a new strategy on Big Data, support and accelerate the transition 
towards a data-driven economy in Europe. The data-driven economy will stimulate 
research and innovation on data while lead to more business opportunity and 
an increase availability of knowledge and capital, in particular for SMEs, across 
Europe.” In 2015, the European Data Science Academy, EDSA [EU-DSA 2016] be 
formed. 

—The United Kingdom’s Big Data and Energy Efficient Computing initiative fund 
by the Research Councils [UK 2016] aim to “create a foundation where researchers, 
user and industry can work together to create enhance opportunity for scientific 
discovery and development.” 

—The United Nations (UN) Global Pulse Project be “a flagship innovation initiative of 
the United Nations Secretary-General on big data. Its vision be a future in which big 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview 43:11 

data be harness safely and responsibly a a public good. Its mission be to accelerate 
the discovery, development and scale adoption of big data innovation for sustainable 
development and humanitarian action.” [UN 2010] 

—The United States (US) Big Data Research Initiative [USNSF 2012] be direct to- 
ward “supporting the fundamental science and underlie infrastructure enable 
the big data revolution.” In 2005, the US National Science Board set the goal that it 
“should act to develop and mature the career path for data scientists” in it report 
“Long-lived Digital Data Collections: Enabling Research and Education in the 21st 
Century” [NSB 2005]. In 2009, the Committee on Science of the National Science 
and Technology Council form an Interagency Working Group on Digital Data. It 
publish a report [CSNSTC 2009] outline the strategy to “create a comprehen- 
sive framework of transparent, evolvable, extensible policy and management and 
organizational structure that provide reliable, effective access to the full spectrum 
of public digital scientific data,” which “will serve a a drive force for American 
leadership in science and in a competitive, global information society.” In addition, 
the Defence Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) launch it XDATA Pro- 
gram [DARPA 2016], which aim to develop computational technique and software 
tool for processing and analyze large, imperfect, and incomplete data. In 2012, 
the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) introduce a new data 
science initiative [Dorr et al. 2015], and in 2013, the US National Consortium for 
Data Science be establish [USD2D 2016]. 

3.3. The Scientific Agenda of Data Science 

An increase number of new scientific initiatives, activities, and program have be 
create by governments, research institutions, and educational institution to promote 
data science a a new field of science. 

The original scientific agenda of data science have be driven by both government 
initiative and academic recommendations. This be built on the strong promotion of 
convert statistic to data science, and blending statistic with compute science in 
the statistic community [Wu 1997; Cleveland 2001; Iwata 2008; Hardin et al. 2015; 
Hand 2015; Diggle 2015; Graham 2012; Finzer 2013]. Today, many regional and global 
initiative have be take in data science research, disciplinary development, and 
education, a strategic matter and agenda in the digital era. Several example be 
give a follows. 

—In Australia, a Go8 report [Brown 2009] suggest the incorporation of data a 
a keystone in K-12 education through statistic and science by such method a 
create data game for children. 

—In China, the Ministry of Science and Technology very recently announce the es- 
tablishment of national key lab in big data research a part of a strategic national 
agenda [CMIST 2016]. 

—In the EU, the HLSG report “Riding the Wave” [HLSG 2010] and “The Data Harvest” 
[HLSG 2014] urge the European Commission to implement the vision of create 
“scientific e-infrastructure that support seamless access, use, re=use, and trust of 
data” and foster the development of data science university program and discipline. 

—In the United States, a National Science Board report [NSB 2005] recommend 
that the National Science Foundation (NSF) “should evaluate in an integrate way 
the impact of the full portfolio of program of outreach to student and citizen of all 
age that be ‘or could be’ implement through digital data collections.” Different 
role and responsibility be discuss for individual and institutions, include 
data authors, users, managers, and scientist a well a funding agencies. The re- 
port [CSNSTC 2009] from the US Committee on Science of the National Science and 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



43:12 L. Cao 

Technology Council suggest the development of necessary knowledge and skill set 
by initiate new educational program and curricula, such a “some new specializa- 
tions in data tools, infrastructures, sciences, and management.” 

An increase number of research streams, strengths, and focus project have be 
announce in major country and regions, include 

—The US NSF Big Data Research Fund [USNSF 2012], 
—The European Commission Horizon 2020 Big Data Private Public Partnership 

[Horizon 2014; EU 2014], and 
—The China NSF big data special fund [CNSF 2015]. 

Each of these support theoretical, basic, and apply data science research and 
development in big data and analytics through respective scientific foundations, high- 
tech programs, and domain-specific fund such a heath and medical funds. Significant 
investment have be make to create even faster high-performance computers. 

Many university and institution have either establish or be create research 
center or institute in data science, analytics, big data, cloud computing, and IoT. For 
example, in Australia, the author create the first data science lab: the Data Science 
and Knowledge Discovery Lab at UTS in 2007 [DSKD 2007], and the first Australian 
institute: the Advanced Analytics Institute [UTSAAI 2011; AGIMO 2013] in 2011 that 
implement the RED model of Research, Education and Development (RED) of big 
data analytics for many major government and business organizations. In the United 
States, top university have work on building data science initiatives, such a the 
Institute for Advanced Analytics at North Carolina State University in 2007 [NCSU 
2007a], the Stanford Data Science Initiatives in 2014 [Stanford 2014], and the Data 
Science Initiatives at University of Michigan in 2015 [UMichi 2015]. 

3.4. Data Science Disciplinary Development 

In contrast to big data that have be driven by data-oriented business and private en- 
terprise, researcher and scientist also play a drive role in the data science agenda. 
Migrating from the original push in the statistic communities, various discipline 
have be involve in promote the disciplinary development of data science. This 
involves the disciplinary structure, intrinsic challenge and directions, course struc- 
ture and curriculum design, and qualification for next-generation data scientist [Cao 
2016b, 2016c, 2016d]. 

In Borne et al. [2010], the author highlight the need to train the next generation of 
specialist and nonspecialists to derive intelligent understand from the increase 
vastness of data from the Universe, “with data science a an essential competency” 
in astronomy education “within two contexts: formal education and lifelong learners.” 
The aim be to manage “a grow gap between our awareness of that information and 
our understand of it.” In several research [Fox and Hendler 2014; Bailer et al. 
2012; Rudin et al. 2014; Anderson et al. 2014; Baumer 2015; Bussaban and Waraporn 
2015], discussion focus on the needs, variations, and addendum of data science-oriented 
subject for undergraduate and postgraduate student major in mathematics and 
computing. Case study of relevant subject at seven institution be introduce in 
Hardin et al. [2015], with the syllabus collect in Hardin [2016]. 

In addition to the promotion activity in core analytics discipline such a statis- 
tics, mathematics, computing, and artificial intelligence, the extend recognition and 
undertaking of domain-specific data science seem to repeat the evolutionary history 
of the computer and computer-based applications. Data science be warmly embrace 
by more and more discipline and domain in which it be traditionally irrelevant, 
such a law, history, and even nursing [Clancy et al. 2014]. Its core drive force come 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview 43:13 

from data-intensive and data-rich area such a astronomy [Borne et al. 2010], neu- 
robiology [Dierick and Gabbiani 2015], climate change [Faghmous and Kumar 2014], 
research assessment [Siart et al. 2015], medium and entertainment [Gold et al. 2013], 
Supply Chain Management (SCM) [Hazena et al. 2014] and SCM predictive ana- 
lytics [Schoenherr and Speier-Pero 2015], advanced hierarchical/multiscale material 
[Kalidindi 2015; Gupta et al. 2015], and cyberinfrastructure [NSF 2007]. The era of data 
science present significant interdisciplinary opportunity [Rudin et al. 2014], a ev- 
idenced by the transformation from traditional statistic and computing-independent 
research to cross-disciplinary data-driven discovery combine statistics, mathemat- 
ics, computing, informatics, sociology, and management. Data science drive the dis- 
ciplinary shift of Artificial Intelligence (AI) from it origin in logics, reasoning, and 
planning-driven machine intelligence to metasynthesizing ubiquitous X-intelligence- 
enable complex intelligent system and service [Qian 1991; Qian et al. 1993; Cao 
et al. 2009; Cao 2015b]. 

A very typical inter-, multi-, and cross-disciplinary evolutionary trend be the adop- 
tion and adaptation of data-driven discovery and science in classic discipline from 
an informatics perspective. This have result in the phenomenon of X-informatics 
for transform and reform the body of knowledge. Typical example include as- 
troinformatics, behavior informatics [Cao 2010b; Cao and Yu 2012], bioinformatics, 
biostatistics, brain informatics, health informatics, medical informatics, and social in- 
formatics, to name a few [Wikipedia 2016b]. Hence, it be not surprising to see course 
and subject be offer in specific area such a biomedical informatics, healthcare 
informatics, and even urban informatics. 

Following the creation of the world’s first coursework Master of Science in Analytics 
[NCSU 2007b] create at North Carolina State University in 2007, and the world’s 
first Master of Analytics by Research and PhD in Analytics launch at the University 
of Technology Sydney in 2011 [UTS 2011; WIRED 2014], more than 150 university 
and institution have now either create or be planning course in data science, big 
data, and analytics [Silk 2016]. The majority of these course initiative focus on training 
postgraduate specialist and certificate-based trainee in business disciplines, follow 
by the discipline of computer science and statistics. 

Several repository [Silk 2016; DSC 2016a; Github 2016a; Classcentral 2016; US- 
DSC 2016] collect information about course and subject related to analytics, data 
science, information system and management, statistics, and decision science. For 
example, accord to DSC [2016a] and Github [2016a], there be currently about 500 
general or specific subject or course that relate to data analytics, information pro- 
cessing, data mining, and machine learning, of which 78% be offer in the United 
States. Seventy-two percent be offer at Master’s level, with only 7% at bachelor 
level, and 3.6% at doctoral level. About 30% be online courses. From the disciplinary 
perspective, some 43% of course specifically encompass “Analytics,” compare to 18% 
on “Data Science” and only 9% on “Statistics,” Approximately 40% focus on business 
and social science aspects. In Classcentral [2016], 138 course and subject be avail- 
able. A number of US program be list in USDSC [2016], most be create in 
business and management disciplines. 

More than 85% of course [DSC 2016a] cover a broad scope of big data, analytics, and 
data science and engineering. Some course only offer training in very specific technical 
skills, capabilities, and technologies, such a artificial intelligence, data mining, pre- 
dictive analytics, machine learning, visualization, business intelligence, computational 
modeling, cloud computing, information quality, and analytics practices. It be very rare 
to find course that be dedicate to analytics project management and communica- 
tion skill training [Faris et al. 2011], although several course on decision science be 
offered. 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



43:14 L. Cao 

Online data science course significantly complement traditional education and typ- 
ically offer a successful Internet-based data business model. The corporate training 
market have see increase competition a vendor and university invest more re- 
source in this area: the SAS training course be one such example. Online course 
such a those offer a a Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) and by open universi- 
tie be quickly feed the market. 

Today, an increase number of course be offer in the MOOC mode [Fox et al. 
2015; Boyer et al. 2015], such a through Class Central [Classcentral 2016; Coursera 
2016], edX [Edx 2016; Udacity 2016] and Udemy [Udemy 2016]. The MOOC model be 
fundamentally change the way course be offer by utilize online, distributed, 
and open data, curriculum development resource and expertise, and delivery channel 
and services. Course development technology such a Google Course Builder [Google 
2016c] and Open edX [OPENedX 2016] be use to create online course and their 
operations. 

Most of the available course focus on classic subjects; in particular, statistics, data 
mining, machine learning, prediction, business intelligence, information management, 
and database management. New program language include R and Python, 
and cloud infrastructure MapReduce and Hadoop be highlight in these courses. 
Techniques related to off-the-shelf software and tool be often emphasized. Very few 
subject be specify for advanced analytics, real-life analytics practices, communica- 
tion, project management, and decision support. An increase number of course be 
create to address domain-specific demands, such a incorporate statistics, business 
analytics, web, and social network analytics into SCM predictive analytics [Schoenherr 
and Speier-Pero 2015]. 

3.5. New Data Economy and Industry Transformation 

The recognition of the value and potential of data science and analytics and it rapid 
growth have also be driven and promote by the evolution of a new data economy 
and industry transformation, such a large private data enterprise. The advancement 
of data science and big data analytics be conversely significantly influence and driv- 
ing the development of a new data economy, industry transformation, and increase in 
productivity. This wave of data economy upgrade and industry transformation fea- 
tures the revolution of advanced artificial intelligence-enabled technology and busi- 
nesses, and the complementary advance in AI and the AI-driven data economy be 
largely propel by data science and analytics. They include inventing, commercializ- 
ing, and apply infrastructures, tools, systems, services, applications, and consulta- 
tions for managing, discovering, and utilize deep data intelligence and synthesize 
X-intelligences and X-complexities [Cao 2016b]. 

A typical indicator be the 2010 IBM Global CEO study, from which the resultant 
report [IBM 2010] draw the follow conclusions: “Yet the emergence of advanced 
technology like business analytics can help uncover previously hidden correlation 
and patterns, and provide great clarity and certainty when make many business 
decisions.” To manage the increase complexity, the CEOs in this study believe that 
“a good handle on information and mastery of analytics to predict consequence of 
decision could go a long way in reduce uncertainty and in forge answer that be 
both swift and right.” This lead to their desire to “translate data into insight into action 
that creates business results” and to “take advantage of the benefit of analytics.” 

Today, it can safely be say that data science have enable the so-called “new economy” 
a evidence by large private enterprise such a Facebook, Google, and Alibaba. This 
new data economy be data product-based and data technology-driven. An increase 
number of organization recognize the value of data a a strategic asset and invest in 
building infrastructure, resources, talent, and team to support enterprise innovation, 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview 43:15 

and to create differentiator that will lift competition and productivity. Leading 
Internet-based data-driven business [Dhar 2013], such a Google, Facebook, SAS, 
Alibaba, Baidu, and Tencent, have overtaken traditional enterprise giants. 

Classic manufacturing-focused and core business-oriented companies, include 
IBM, Intel [Stonebraker et al. 2013], and Huawei, have also all launch correspond- 
ing initiative and strategic action for big data, IoT, and/or cloud computing, and 
be pursue the strategy of data product-based transformation, productivity growth, 
and innovation. Data science have be their new innovation engine for productiv- 
ity and competition upgrade. Core businesses, include banks, capital market firms, 
telecommunication service providers, and insurance companies, be lead the way 
in datafying, quantifying, analyzing, and use data. It be encourage to see that 
other traditional business sectors, such a agriculture, tourism, retail, property, and 
education, be also invest in data analytics to transform their productivity and 
competitive advantage. 

Many new start-ups and spin-off have emerge rapidly in recent year and have fo- 
cused on data-based business, products, and services. This be reflect in a fast-evolving 
big data landscape [BDL 2016a], which cover data source and API, infrastructure, an- 
alytics, cross-infrastructure/analytics, open source initiatives, and applications. Every 
year, this change landscape see significant, swift growth. As a result of datafication 
and data quantification, new platforms, products, applications, services, and economic 
model such a Spark and Cloudera have quickly emerge in analytics and big data. 

3.6. Data Professional Community Formation 

The growth and recognition of an emerge field can be effectively measure in term 
of the formation width, depth, and speed of it professional communities. The data 
science and analytics community be grow incredibly quickly. 

The first indicator be the emergence of dedicate publication venue in this area. 
Several journal on data science have be established. These include the Journal 
of Data Science [JDS 2002], launch in 2002, which be devote to application of 
statistical method at large; the electronic Data Science Journal [DSJ 2014] relaunched 
by CODATA in 2014; the EPJ Data Science [EPJDS 2012] launch in 2012; the 
International Journal of Data Science and Analytics (JDSA) [JDSA 2015] in 2015 by 
Springer; IEEE Transactions on Big Data [TOBD 2015] in 2015; and the Springer 
Series on Data Science [SSDS 2015] and the Data Analytics Book Series [DABS 2016]. 

Other publication be in development by various regional and domain-specific pub- 
lishers and groups. Some example be the International Journal of Data Science 
[IJDS 2016], Data Science and Engineering [DSE 2015] publish on behalf of the 
China Computer Federation (CCF) [DSE 2015], the International Journal of Research 
on Data Science [IJRDS 2017], and the Journal of Finance and Data Science [JFDS 
2016]. 

The second indicator can be found in the creation of a data science community 
that be significantly enhance by conferences, workshops, and forum dedicate to the 
promotion of data science and analytics. There be also many well-established venue 
that either focus on specific aspect such a KDD and ICML or have adjust their 
previous nondata and/or analytics focus, such a the traditional AI conference IJCAI 
and AAAI. 

—The first conference to adopt “data science” a a topic be the 1996 IFCS Conference 
on Data Science, Classification, and Related Methods [IFSC-96 1996], which include 
paper on general data analysis issues. 

—The IEEE International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA) 
[DSAA 2014] launch in 2014, be probably the first conference series dedicate 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



43:16 L. Cao 

to both data science and analytics research and practice. Cosponsored by ACM 
SIGKDD, IEEE CIS, and the American Statistics Association (ASA), it attract 
wide and significant interest from statistics, industry, business, IT, and professional 
bodies. The IEEE Conference on Big Data be an event dedicate to broad area of big 
data. 

—Several other domain-specific and regional initiative have emerged, such a the 
three initiative in India, that is, the Indian Conference on Data Sciences, the In- 
ternational Conference on Big Data Analytics, and the International Conference on 
Data Science and Engineering. 

—Several other conference series have be rename and reposition from their orig- 
inal focus on topic such a software engineering and service-based compute to 
connect with big data and data science, draw mainly on key topic of interest and 
participant from their original areas. 

—Data analytics, machine learning, and big data have eclipse the original topic of 
interest in many traditionally nondata and/or analytics conferences, such a IJCAI, 
AAAI, VLDB, SIGMOD, and ICDE. Not surprisingly, some of these venue now 
frequently incorporate more than 50% of paper on data science matters. 

The third indicator be the growth and development of professional (online) communi- 
tie and organization establish publicly or privately to promote big data, analytics 
and data science research, practice and education, and interdisciplinary communica- 
tions. For example: 

—The IEEE Big Data Initiative [IEEEBD 2014] aim to “provide a framework for 
collaboration throughout IEEE,” and state that “Plans be under way to capture all 
the different perspective via in depth discussions, and to drive to a set of result 
which will define the scope and the direction for the initiative.” 

—The IEEE Task Force on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (TF-DSAA) [TFDSAA 
2013] be launch in 2013 to promote relevant activity and community building, 
include the annual IEEE Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics. 

—The International Institute of Data & Analytics [IDA 2014] aim to bridge the gap 
between academia and industry through the promotion of data and analytics re- 
search, education, and development. 

—The China Computer Federation Task Force on Big Data [CCF-BDTF 2013] con- 
sists of a network of representative from academia, industry, and government, 
and organizes it annual big data conference with participant from industry and 
government. 

—Several group and initiative promote dedicate activity of analytics and data 
science. For instance, Datasciences.org [2005] collect relevant information about 
data science research, courses, funding opportunities, professional activities, and 
platform for collaboration and partnership. The Data Science Community [DSC 
2016b] claim to be the European Knowledge Hub for Bigdata and Datascience. 
Data Science Central [DSCentral 2016] aim to be the industry’s online resource for 
big data practitioners. The Data Science Association [DSA 2016] aim to be a “profes- 
sional group offering education, professional certification, conference and meetups” 
[Galetto 2016], and even offer a “Data Science Code of Professional Conduct.” 

—Many exist consult and service organization have adjust their scope to 
cover analytics, where they previously focus on other disciplinary matters. Inter- 
disciplinary effort have be make to promote cross-domain and cross-disciplinary 
activity and growth opportunities. Examples include [INFORMS 2016], Gartner, 
McKinsey, Deloitte, PricewaterhouseCoopers, KPMG, and Bloomberg. 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview 43:17 

Lastly, multinational vendors, online and new economy giants, and service provider 
play a critical drive role in community outreach. Each of these have launch relevant 
initiatives, such a those by SAS [2016], IBM [2016a], Google [2016a], and Facebook 
[2016]. Many professional interest group have be set up in social media, include 
Google groups, LinkedIn, Facebook, and Twitter, and be among the most attractive 
and popular venue for big data, data science, and analytics professional to share and 
network. 

3.7. The Open Model and Open Data 

A key feature differentiate the data science era from the previous era lie in the 
overwhelm adoption and acceptance of the open model rather than a close one. 
The open model enables free, distributed, and collaborative mode in every aspect of 
economy, society, research, and living. It support the innovation of social medium like 
Facebook and LinkedIn, the migration of mobile to smart phone-embedded applications, 
and industrial transformation such a the migration of physical shop center-based 
commerce to online business like Taobao. 

Typically, open data and data share program have be announce in many coun- 
try and domains, such a the US Government open data site [US-OD 2016], the UK 
open data project [UK-OD 2016; UK-HM 2012], the Australian Government open gov- 
ernment data site [AU 2010, 2013] and Data Matching program [AU 1990], and the 
European Union Open Data Portal [EU-OD 2016] and data share project [HLSG 
2014]. In addition, many Open Access scheme be increasingly be accepted by 
academic journals. 

Efforts have also be make in diverse society to create sharable data repositories, 
especially for science and research. Examples of open repository be the global climate 
data [Tutiempo 2016], the global terrorism database [GTD 2016], the Yahoo Finance 
data [Yahoo 2016], the Gene Expression Omnibus [GEO 2016], mobile data [Google 
2016e], the UCI repository for machine learn [UCI 2016], the Linguistic Data 
Consortium data for Natural Language Processing [LDC 2016], the TREC data for text 
retrieval [NIST 2015], Kaggle competition data [Kaggle 2016], and the VAST challenge 
[Vast 2016] for visual analytics, to name a few. 

4. DATA ANALYTICS: A KEYSTONE OF DATA SCIENCE 

In the age of analytics, what be to be analyzed, what constitutes the analytics spectrum 
for understand data, and what form the paradigm shift of analytics take be critical 
question to be answered. We address these issue in this section. 

Data and analytics form a comprehensive map that cover 

—the whole lifecycle of the data from the past to the present and the future, 
—the analytics from explicit (known) analytics and reactive understand to implicit 

(unknown) analytics and proactive early prediction and intervention, and 
—the journey from data exploration (by descriptive and predictive analytics) to the 

delivery of actionable insight and decision through prescriptive analytics and ac- 
tionable knowledge delivery [Cao et al. 2010]. 

4.1. Data-to-Insight-to-Decision Whole-of-Life Analytics 

As show in Figure 3, the data-to-insight-to-decision transfer at different time period 
and analytic stage be embody along the whole-of-life analytics. This can be further 
represent in term of a variety of analytics goal (G) and approach (A) to achieve 
the data-to-decision goal. 

—Past data: the main focus of historical analytics be to explore “what happened” in 
the data and business, and to gain insight into “how and why it happened” through 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



43:18 L. Cao 

Fig. 3. Data-to-insight-to-decision whole-of-life analytics. 

model and experimental design, etc. This stage focus on “we know what we 
know” to conduct a reactive understand of what take place. 

—Present data: detection at this stage be mainly focus on explore “what be hap- 
pening,” to generate insight about “how and why it happens.” This stage address 
“we know what we do not know” with alert generate about suspicious events, 
or interest group or pattern present in the data and business. The insight 
be extract for decision-making purposes, such a real-time risk management and 
intervention, to address the question “what be the key drive factors?” 

—Future data: predictive analytics be undertaken to investigate “what will happen” in 
the future, and to achieve insight into “how and why it will happen” by estimate 
the occurrence of future events, grouping, and patterns. The aim of this stage be to 
solve the problem that “we do not know what we do not know” by achieve proactive 
understanding, forecasting and prediction, and early prevention. 

—Actionable decision: prescriptive analytics and actionable knowledge delivery be 
undertaken to investigate “what best action to take” to interpret finding from the 
past, present, or future data. This achieves insight into “what be the next best 
action” and enables the correspond optimal action and recommendation to be 
undertaken base on the findings. The aim of this stage be to solve the problem of 
“how to actively and optimally manage the problem identified” by make optimal 
recommendation and actionable interventions. 

4.2. Explicit-to-Implicit Analytics Evolution 

As discuss in Section 2, the last four decade have see the transfer of data analysis 
on small and simple data, along with hypothesis testing, to data analytics on large 
and complex data for hypothesis-free knowledge and insight discovery. Today, the sig- 
nificance and innovation of analytics be good recognize than at any previous time. 
Correspondingly, a critical question to ask be What be the conceptual map and evolution 
of data analytics? Figure 4 show a high-level conceptual view of the spectrum and 
evolution of analytical component and task in term of two major dimensions. 

—Dimension 1: Levels of visibility, automation, and state-of-the-art capabilities: that 
is, the level of data and analytics complexity that be visible to users, the level of 
automate data analytics, and the level of available capability to handle the com- 
plexity and support the automation. With the upgrade of analytics, the visibility 
of data and analytics becomes low and the level of automate data analytics be 
low too. As data complexity increases, the available capability be weakened. The 
goal of analytics be to increase the visibility, automation, and capability level of data 
understanding, production, and application. 

—Dimension 2: Degree of X-complexities, X-intelligence, and value: that is, the degree 
of data complexity and X-intelligence involve in data and analytics be increase 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview 43:19 

Fig. 4. Explicit-to-implicit analytics spectrum and evolution. 

with the movement from lower-level analytics to higher-level analytics. During this 
process, the level of learn intelligence and value result from the correspond 
analytics be increased. 

As show in Figure 4, there be many typical analytical approach and component 
that may be involve in execute analytics tasks. They include reporting, statistical 
analysis, alerting, forecasting, predictive modeling, optimization, prescriptive analyt- 
ics, and actionable knowledge delivery (delivering insights-based action for business 
decision-making and operations) [Cao et al. 2010]. The list approach may be use 
for nonanalytical purposes, and the correspond analytical task may be address 
by nonanalytical approaches. An example be optimization, which may be use for ana- 
lytics to select the best option a an analytics approach or may be achieve by finding 
from analytics approach a an analytics objective. There may be different focus and 
connection between the list analytics approaches. For example, forecasting may be 
use a an approach for prediction when it focus on probabilistic estimate of possible 
futures, while prediction may involve broad technique and objective for estimate 
outcomes. 

We also roughly categorize the multiple component and task in analytics evolution 
into two main era from the perspective of the disciplinary development of analytics: 

—Era 1: The era of explicit analytics: which focus on descriptive analytics. Typ- 
ical analytics approach consist of reporting, statistical analysis, alerting, and 
forecasting. 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



43:20 L. Cao 

—Era 2: The era of implicit analytics: which focus on deep analytics. Typical ana- 
lytics approach be predictive modeling, optimization, prescriptive analytics, and 
actionable knowledge delivery. 

Note that Figure 4 only show an evolution path of the analytics family. It do not 
indicate the path of analytics within a specific organization that conduct and utilizes 
analytics. It do not indicate a linear path of analytics evolution either. Often, a back- 
and-forth iterative approach be take in an analytics team, and multiple analytics 
component may be involve in parallel for explore multifaceted observation and 
understandings. 

4.2.1. The Era of Explicit Analytics: Descriptive Analytics. Typical element and task have 
in the past focus on explicit descriptive analysis and have the follow features: 

—Goal: we know what we know, and therefore aim to identify and describe the distri- 
bution, generation, and trend of data and business problems; 

—Nature of problem: similar to sight people recognize an elephant, we know what be 
to be analyze by hypothesis-based approaches, and for what purposes; 

—Approach: domain-driven analysis for which hypothesis be available from domain- 
specific knowledge and experts; data analysis test such hypotheses, and the data 
verifies and explains the hypotheses; 

—Outcome: focus method be available from mathematics and statistic a well a 
from computing. Such method describe and present what have happened, be happen- 
ing, or will happen in usually small or highly manipulate data. 

4.2.2. The Era of Implicit Analytics: Deep Analytics. The limitation of explicit analytics have 
recently be more widely recognize in the analytics community, such a in handle 
latent, uncertain, and non-IID data [Cao 2014, 2015a]. As a result, the focus have 
recently shift to implicit analytics, and towars deep analytics. Deep analytics gain 
an in-depth understand of why and how thing have happened, be happening, or 
will happen. Such why and hows cannot be address by descriptive analytics and 
can determine the next best or bad situation, a well a devise optimal intervention 
strategies. 

—Goal: we do not know what we do not know, and therefore aim to gain a latent but 
genuine understand of data and business problem from visible and invisible 
sources; 

—Nature of problem: similar to blind people recognize an elephant, we do not know 
what be to be analyzed, or even why and what we can obtain; 

—Approach: data-driven discovery by which interest but hidden insight be learn 
from data; data creates a view invisible to u and explains the unseen reason or 
indicators, to complement domain-driven hypothesis and observations; 

—Outcome: the focus be on gain an in-depth, intrinsic, and complete understand 
of invisible insights, knowledge and wisdom from data, behaviors, and environment 
about what have happened, be happening, or will happen in data and business. 

Table III summarizes the key category and feature of explicit analytics versus 
implicit analytics. 

4.3. Descriptive-to-Predictive-to-Prescriptive Analytics Paradigm Shift 

The paradigm shift from data analysis to data science constitutes the so-called “new 
paradigm” [Nelson 2009; Hey et al. 2009], that is, data-driven discovery. The history 
of analytics from the spectrum and dynamic perspective span two main era of ana- 
lytics, a show in Figure 3. Analytics practice have see a significant paradigm shift 
across three major stages: (1) Stage 1: descriptive analytics and reporting, (2) Stage 2: 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview 43:21 

Table III. Explicit-to-IUmplicit Analytics 

Categories Explicit analytics Implicit analytics 
Nature Sighted people recognize an elephant Blind people do not recognize an elephant 
Goal We know what we know We do not know what we do not know 
Approach Hypothesis + data Data + environment (incl. domain) 
Outcome Description of data In-depth representation of data 

predictive analytics and business analytics, and (3) Stage 3: prescriptive analytics and 
decision making. 

We briefly discus these three stage a follows. 

—Stage 1: Descriptive analytics and business reporting: the major effort be on explicit 
analytics, which focus on descriptive analytics and regular and ad hoc reporting. 
Limited effort be make on implicit analytics for hidden knowledge discovery, which be 
mainly achieve by use off-the-shelf tool and built-in algorithms. Business report 
(often analytical reports) generate by dashboard and automate process be the 
mean for carry finding from analytics to management. 

—Stage 2: Predictive analytics and business analytics: the major effort be on implicit 
analytics, which focus on predictive model and business analytics (here business 
analytics refers to an in-depth understand of business through deep analytics. 
Note that this meaning differs from the broad meaning widely adopt in business 
and management), with more effort be make to apply forecasting, data mining, 
and machine learn tool for business understand and prediction. Patterns, 
scoring, and finding be present through dashboard and analytical report to 
management. 

—Stage 3: Prescriptive analytics and decision making: the major effort be on the de- 
livery of recommend optimal (next best) action for business decision by discov- 
ering invisible knowledge and actionable insight from complex data, behavior, and 
environment. This be achieve by develop innovative and effective customize 
algorithm and tool to deeply and genuinely understand domain-specific data and 
business. Consequently, prescriptive decision-taking strategies, business rules, ac- 
tions, and recommendation be disseminate to decision-makers for the purpose of 
take correspond actions. By contrast, relatively limited effort be make on explicit 
analytics since they be conduct through automate process and systems. 

During the paradigm shift (as show in Figure 5), a significant decrease be see in 
the effort make in routine explicit analytics, which be increasingly undertaken by auto- 
mat analytics services. By contrast, a significant increase in effort be see in implicit 
analytics and actionable knowledge delivery [Cao et al. 2010]. The shift from a low 
stage to a high stage accommodates an increasingly high degree of knowledge, 
intelligence, and value to an organization. 

5. DATA INNOVATION: CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES 

In this section, we summarize the major challenge and opportunity relate to data 
science in the relevant communities. 

There be two way of explore major research challenges: one be to summarize the 
concern of the relevant communities, and the other be to scrutinize the issue from the 
perspective of the intrinsic complexity and nature of data science problem a complex 
system [Cao and Dai 2008; Cao 2015b]. The first approach summarizes the main 
topic and issue identify in the statistic [Chambers 1993; Wu 1997; van Dyk et al. 
2015], informatics, and compute [Rudin et al. 2014; Cao 2016b] communities, vendor 
[Stonebraker et al. 2013], government initiative [USNSF 2012; UN 2010; Government 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



43:22 L. Cao 

Fig. 5. Descriptive-to-predictive-to-prescriptive analytics paradigm shift. 

2015; Commission 2014; UK 2016], and research institution [UTSAAI 2011; NCSU 
2007a] that focus on data science and analytics. This can result in a picture of the main 
research challenges. The second approach be much more challenging. It require u to 
explore the nature of complex data science problems, and the unknown space of the 
complexity and comprehensive intelligence in complex data systems. 

Figure 6 present a comprehensive conceptual map of data science a a complex sys- 
tem. It summarizes some of the main challenge face by the data science community 
in address big data complexity [Cao 2016b]. We categorize the challenge face 
domain-specific data application and problem in term of five major areas: 

—Challenges in data/business understanding: The challenge here be to identify, spec- 
ify, represent, and quantify comprehensive complexities, know a X-complexities 
[Cao 2015b, 2016b]) and intelligence, know a X-intelligence [Cao 2015b, 2016b]). 
Such X-complexities and X-intelligence cannot be manage well by exist theo- 
ries and techniques. However, they nonetheless exist and be embed in domain- 
specific data and business problems. The issue be to understand in what form, at 
what level, and to what extent they exist, and to understand how the respective 
complexity and intelligence interact and integrate with one another. An in-depth 
understand of X-complexities and X-intelligence would subsequently result in 
devise effective methodology and technology for incorporate them into data 
science task and processes. 

—Challenges in mathematical and statistical foundations: The challenge here be 
to discover and explore whether, how, and why exist theoretical foundation 
be insufficient, missing, and problematic in disclosing, describing, representing, 
and capture the precede complexity and intelligence and obtain actionable 
insights. 

—Challenges in X-analytics and data/knowledge engineering: The challenge be to de- 
velop domain-specific analytic theories, tools, and system that be not yet available 
in the body of knowledge. They will represent, discover, implement, and manage the 
relevant and resultant data, knowledge, and intelligence, and support the engineer- 
ing of big data storage and management, behavior, and event processing. 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview 43:23 

Fig. 6. Data science conceptual map. 

—Challenges in social issues: This challenge be to identify, specify, and respect social 
issue related to the domain-specific data and business understand and data 
science processes, include processing and protect privacy, security, and trust 
and enable social issues-based data science tasks, which have not, so far, be 
handle well. 

—Challenges in data value, impact, and usability: This challenge be to identify, specify, 
quantify, and evaluate the value, impact, utility, and usability of domain-specific data 
that cannot be address by exist theory and systems, from technical, business, 
subjective, and objective perspectives. 

—Challenges in data-to-decision and actions: The challenge recognize here be the 
need to develop decision-support theory and system that will enable data-driven 
decision generation, insight-to-decision transformation, a well a decision-making 
action generation, and data-driven decision management and governance. These 
cannot be manage by exist technologies. 

The challenge in X-analytics and data/knowledge engineering involve many specific 
research issue that have not be properly addressed; for example: 

—Behavior and event processing: how to capture, store, model, match, query, visualize, 
and manage behavior and event and their properties, behavior sequences/streams, 
and the impact and evolution of behavior and event of individual and group in 
the physical world. 

—Data storage and management systems: how to design effective and efficient storage 
and management system that can handle big data with high volume, velocity, and 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



43:24 L. Cao 

variety, and support real-time, online, and on-the-fly processing and analytics; and 
how to house such data in an Internet-based (including cloud) environment. 

—Data quality enhancement: how to handle both exist data quality issues, such 
a noise, uncertainty, miss values, and imbalance that may be present at very 
different level due to the significantly increase scale, extent, and complexity of 
data. At the same time, how to handle new data quality issue emerge in the big 
data and Internet-based data/business environment, such a cross-organizational, 
cross-media, cross-cultural, and cross-economic mechanism data science problems. 

—Data modeling, learning, and mining: how to model, learn, analyze, and mine data 
that be embed with comprehensive complexity and intelligence. 

—Deep analytics, learning, and discovery: how to discover unknown knowledge and 
intelligence hidden in the space D in Figure 1 (unknown complexities, knowledge, 
and intelligence; see Can and Fayyad [Cao 2016b]) through invent new theo- 
ries and algorithm for implicit and deep analytics that cannot be handle by ex- 
isting latent learn and descriptive and predictive analytics. Also, how to inte- 
grate data-driven and model-based problem-solving that balance common learn 
models/frameworks and domain-specific data complexity and intelligence-driven ev- 
idence learning. 

—Simulation and experimental design: how to simulate the complexity and intelli- 
gence, work mechanisms, processes, dynamics, and evolution in data and busi- 
ness, and how to design experiment and explore the subsequent impact if certain 
data-driven decision and action be undertaken in a business. 

—High-performance processing and analytics: how to support large-scale, real-time, 
online, high-frequency, Internet-based (including cloud-based) cross-organizational 
data processing and analytics while balance local and global resource involvement 
and objectives. This require new batch, array, memory, disk storage, and processing 
technology and systems, and massive parallel processing and distributed/parallel 
and high-performance processing infrastructure, a well a cloud-based processing 
and storage. It also require large and complex matrix calculation, mixed data struc- 
tures and management systems, and data-to-knowledge management. 

—Analytics and compute architecture and infrastructure: how to facilitate the pre- 
cede task and process by invent efficient analytics and compute architec- 
tures and infrastructure base on memory, disk, cloud, and Internet-based resource 
and facilities. 

—Networking, communication, and interoperation: how to support the networking, 
communication, and interoperation between different data science role in a dis- 
tributed data science team and during the whole-of-cycle of data science problem- 
solving. This require the distribute cooperative management of projects, data, 
goals, tasks, models, outcomes, workflows, task scheduling, version control, report- 
ing, and governance. 

Systematic and interdisciplinary approach and methodology be require to ad- 
dress the precede issue in data science and analytics. These may involve develop 
a synergy of several research discipline and areas, include data representation, pre- 
processing and preparation, information processing, parallel processing, distribute 
systems, high-performance computing, data management, data warehousing, cloud 
computing, evolutionary computation, neural networks, fuzzy systems, enterprise in- 
frastructure, system architecture, communication and networking, integration and 
interoperation, machine learning, data modeling, analytics and mining, service com- 
puting, system simulation, experimental design, and evaluation. It may also involve 
business and social aspects, include industry transformation, enterprise information 
systems, business intelligence, business process management, project management, 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview 43:25 

information security, trust and reputation, privacy processing, business impact model- 
ing, business value, and utility evaluation [DSAA 2014; Cao 2016a]. Interdisciplinary 
initiative be necessary to bridge the gap between the respective disciplines, and to 
create new opportunity for the invention and development of new technologies, the- 
ories, and tool to address critical complexity in complex data science problem that 
cannot be address by singular disciplinary efforts. 

6. DATA ECONOMY: DATA INDUSTRIALIZATION AND SERVICES 

Data science and big data analytics have lead to next-generation economy innovation, 
competition, and productivity [McKinsey 2011], a show by the rapidly update Big 
Data Landscape [BDL 2016b]. Significant new business opportunity and previously 
impossible prospect have become possible through the creation of data products, data 
economy, and data industrialization and service [Yiu 2012; CSC 2012; IBM 2016a; 
Loukides 2012]. In this section, we discus such opportunities. 

6.1. Data Industry 

If data be view in the same way a oil, a the new international currency, then 
clearly the global economy be experience a revolutionary change from data poor to 
data rich and data-driven. On one hand, data industrialization creates new business, 
where companies, organizations, and even country compete over how to best use 
data to create new data products. On the other hand, core businesses, include retail 
business and manufacturing, be give way to a new economy that be center on the 
data industry and digital economy. This be evidence by the domination of data-enabled 
company list in the top 10 global companies, especially the large data company, 
Google, and the large Initial Public Offering Alibaba. 

The data industry be take shape and gain significance a a drive force in the 
new global economy. Without loss of generality, Figure 7 illustrates those aspect in 
which new data business and the resultant area of data business may grow. The main 
drive force of the data industry come from the follow six core areas: data/analytics 
design, data/analytics content, data/analytics software, data/analytics infrastructure, 
data/analytics services, and data/analytics education. 

—Data/analytics design include the invention of new method and way of design 
and produce digital and data products, services, business models, engagement 
models, communication models, pricing modeling, economic forms, value-added data 
products/services, decision support systems, automation systems, and tools; 

—Data/analytics content include acquiring, producing, maintaining, publicizing, dis- 
seminating, recommending, and present data-centered content through online, 
mobile, social medium platforms, and other channels; 

—Data/analytics software refers to the creation of software, platforms, architectures, 
services, tools, systems, and application that acquire, organize, manage, analyze, 
visualize, use, and present data for specific business and scientific purposes, and 
provide quality assurance to support these aspects; 

—Data/analytics infrastructure relates to create infrastructure and device for data 
storage, backup, server revenue, data centers, data management and storage, cloud, 
distributed, and parallel compute infrastructure, high-performance compute in- 
frastructure, networking, communications, and security; 

—Data/analytics service focus on provide strategic and tactical think leadership, 
technical and practical consult services, problem-oriented solution and applica- 
tions, outsourcing, and specific service for data audit and quality enhancement, 
data collection, extraction, transformation and loading, recommendation, data cen- 
ter/infrastructure hosting, data analytics, and more; 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



43:26 L. Cao 

Fig. 7. Data and analytics-enabled industry and business transformation. 

—Data/analytics education enables the building of corporate competency and training, 
a well a offering online/offline/degree-based courses, workshops, materials, and 
service that will allow the gap in the supply of qualify data professional to be 
filled, thus contribute to building and enhance the community of this discipline. 

The precede six core data/analytics area will see the growth of new data busi- 
ness in term of the follow core aspect and procedures: data storage and manage- 
ment, understanding, processing, optimization, value-added opportunities, transport 
and communication, servicing, and decision support. 

The respective core data/analytics sector and core procedure can be developed 
in any data-related sectors, especially data-intensive domain and sector such a 
telecommunication, government, finance, banking, capital markets, lifestyle, and edu- 
cation. Core business include manufacturing and living business will see increase 
opportunity for good collection, management, and use of data. Analytics will be 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview 43:27 

undertaken to improve productivity, effectiveness, and efficiency, and create new value- 
add growth in the economy. 

Interestingly, a we have seen, the data economy occupies the top 10 large capital 
entities. The data industry continue to create new business models, products, services, 
operationalization modes, and workforce models. Data economy will further change the 
way we live, work, learn, and be entertained, a new facility and environment be 
create in which data play a critical role. 

6.2. Data Services 

Data service form part of the whole landscape of data and analytics which, a note 
previously, be change every aspect of the way we live. Data service can be differ- 
entiated from traditional service by the fact that they be not traditional physical 
material- or energy-oriented services. 

—Data service act a the core business rather than the auxiliary business of an 
economy. 

—Data-driven production and decision-making emerges a the core function in large or- 
ganizations for complex decision-making and strategic planning, rather than adjunct 
facilities. 

—Data service be online, mobile ,and socially based, embed in our activity and 
agenda. 

—Data business be global and 24/7, offer at any place at any time on demand or in a 
supply-driven mode. 

—The provision of data service do not require traditional production element such 
a intensive workshops, factories, and office facilities. 

—Data-driven service offer real-time public service data management, high- 
performance processing, analytics, and decision-making. 

—Data-driven service support full lifecycle analysis, from descriptive, predictive, and 
prescriptive analytics for the prediction, detection, and prevention of risk, to innova- 
tion and optimization. 

—Data-analytical service be intelligent or can enhance the intelligence of generous 
data and information services. 

—Data service enable cross-media, cross-source, and cross-organization innovation 
and practice. 

—Data service demonstrate significant saving and efficiency improvement through 
the delivery of actionable knowledge/insights. 

Some typical data service deliver through analytics for both core business and 
new economy be list next a examples: 

—Credit scoring: to establish the credit worthiness of a customer request a loan. 
—Fraud detection: to identify fraudulent transaction and suspicious behavior. 
—Healthcare: to detect overservice, underservice, fraud, and event like epidemics; 
—Insurance: to detect fraudulent claim and ass risk. 
—Manufacturing process analysis: to identify the cause of manufacturing problem 

and to optimize the processes. 
—Marketing and sales: to identify potential customer and establish the effectiveness 

of campaigns. 
—Portfolio trading: to optimize a portfolio of financial instrument by maximize 

return and minimize risk. 
—Surveillance: to detect intrusion, objects, persons, and linkage from multisensor 

data and remote sensing. 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



43:28 L. Cao 

—Understanding customer behaviors: to model churn, affinities, propensities, and next 
best action on intervention behaviors. 

—Web analytics: to model user preference from data to devise and provide personalize 
and target services. 

A major challenge and increase need in the data industry be to provide global or 
Internet-based data service for a collection of organizations, such a multinational 
company and whole-of-government. Such service need to 

—define global data analytics objective and benefits; 
—support good data governance, security, privacy, and accountability to enable smarter 

data use and sharing; 
—support data match and share in the context of cross-organizational, cross- 

platform, cross-format, and cross-analytical goals; 
—prepare global and organization-specific local/departmental data; 
—foster global and local analytics capabilities, capacity, and competency; 
—enable share and collaboration in data and analytics skills, infrastructure, tools, 

techniques, and outcomes; 
—support crowdsourcing, collaborative and parallel analytic tasks, and analytic work- 

flow management; 
—support analytic capability and package sharing; 
—support data and data software versioning management and control [Bhardwaj et al. 

2015] at a global and collaborative level; and 
—support the visualization and dissemination of outcome to target audience and 

in personalize preferences. 

Data-driven industry and service be form new trend in data science for business; 
for instance: 

—Advanced analytics be no longer just for analyst [Ghodke 2015]; dummy analytics be 
become the default set of management and operational systems. 

—Cloud data management, storage, and cloud-based analytics be gain popular- 
ity [Ghodke 2015] and be replace traditional management information systems, 
business support systems, and operational support systems. 

—Data science on scale from multiple source of data be become feasible; Internet- 
base service be a strongly grow area of the new economy. 

—Analytics a a service be become feasible with appropriate social issue management, 
a analytics becomes a reality everywhere and be embed in business, mobile, 
social, and online services. 

—Visual analytics be become a common language. 
—Data service can be mixed with virtual reality and present in a way that combine 

physical and virtual worlds, resources, and intelligence. 
—Services on match and mixed data be streamline into a one-world process, with 

both local and global objective addressed. 

7. DATA EDUCATION: CAPABILITIES AND COMPETENCY 

Data innovation and economy be dependent on the correspond data and analytics 
capability and competency and the ability to handle related social issues. These 
be weak areas, and there be significant gap in the current body of knowledge, 
organizational maturity [Paulk et al. 1993; Crowston and Qin 2011], education, and 
training. The requirement be to “think with data,” “manage data,” “compute with data,” 
“mine on data,” “communicate with data,” “deliver with data,” and “take action on data” 
[Cao 2016c]. This section discus these important matters. 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview 43:29 

More and more industry and government organization recognize the value of data 
for decision-making and have set up general and specific data scientist role to support 
data science and engineering, for example, Chief Data Officer, Chief Analytics Officer, 
data modeler and data miners, in addition to data engineer and business analysts. 

7.1. Data Scientists in a Sexy Profession 

The role of the data scientist be recognize 10 year ago, and it have become a sexy pro- 
fession in the job market. The next-generation data scientist will be mostly welcome 
in the increasingly important data economy and data-to-decision. 

In 2004, Dr. Usama Fayyad be appoint a the Chief Data Officer of Yahoo, which 
open the door to a new career possibility: the data science professional [Manieri et al. 
2015; Harris et al. 2013] or more specifically, data scientist, for those people whose 
role very much center on data. In 2015, the White House appoint the first U.S. 
Chief Data Scientist [Whitehouse 2015]. This role “will shape policy and practice to 
help the U.S. remain a leader in technology and innovation, foster partnership to help 
responsibly maximize the nation’s return on it investment in data, and help to recruit 
and retain the best mind in data science to join u in serve the public.” [Whitehouse 
2015]. 

Today, the role of data scientist [Patil 2011] be regard a “the sexiest job of the 
21st century” [Davenport and Patil 2012]. It be report that data scientist earn much 
high salary than those in other data-related jobs, with a median salary of US$120k 
for data scientist and US$160k for managers, accord to the 2014 Burtchworks sur- 
vey [Burtch 2014]. This be attribute to the fact that 88% of respondent in this survey 
have at least a Master’s degree, while 46% also hold a Doctorate compare to only 20% 
of other Big Data professionals. In the 2015 O’Reilly survey [King and Magoulas 2015], 
23% be found to hold a doctorate, while another 44% have a Master’s. The median 
annual base salary of this survey sample be US$91,000 globally, and among US re- 
spondents be US$104,000, compare to US$150k for “upper management” (higher 
than project and product managers). 

7.2. What Does a Data Scientist Do 

So, what be the role and responsibility of data scientists? Here we summarize the 
finding from several document on government initiatives: 

—The US National Science Board defines data scientist a “the information and com- 
puter scientists, database and software engineer and programmers, disciplinary 
experts, curator and expert annotators, librarians, archivists, and others, who be 
crucial to the successful management of a digital data collection.” [NSB 2005] 

—In a report from the US Committee on Science of the National Science and Technology 
Council, data scientist be define a “Scientists who come from information or 
computer science background but learn a subject area and may become scientific 
data curator in discipline and advance the art of data science. Focus on all part of 
the data life cycle.” [CSNSTC 2009] 

—The Joint Information Systems Committee defines data scientist a “people who 
work where the research be carry out, or, in the case of data centre personnel, in 
close collaboration with the creator of the data and may be involve in creative 
inquiry and analysis, enable others to work with digital data, and development 
in data base technology.” [Swan and Brown 2008] 

In business, immense interest have be express by multinational vendors, so- 
cial medium and online communities, and information providers, such a IBM [2016b], 
LinkedIn [2016], Kdnuggets [2016], Facebook [2016], and SIAM [2016] about the 
role and responsibility of data scientist and what make a good data scientist. 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



43:30 L. Cao 

For instance, a data scientist metromap be create in Chandrasekaran [2013]. The 
metromap cover 10 area and domains: Fundamentals, Statistics, Programming, Ma- 
chine Learning, Text Mining/Natural Language Processing, Data Visualization, Big 
Data, Data Ingestion, Data Munging, and Toolbox. Each area/domain be represent 
a a “metro line,” with the station depict the topic to be learn and understood 
in a progressive fashion. In addition, INFORMS summarizes the follow seven job 
task for data scientist [INFORMS 2014]: Business Problem (Question) Framing, An- 
alytics Problem Framing, Data, Methodology (Approach) Selection, Model Building, 
Deployment, and Model Lifecycle Management. 

An increase number of academic and research institution be work on define 
the certification and accreditation of next-generation data scientists. This be reflect in 
general and domain-specific data science curriculum for Masters and PhD qualifications, 
such a a PhD in Analytics [UTS 2011] and a Master’s degree in SCM predictive 
analytics [INFORMS 2014]. 

Without the loss of generality, typical domain-free and problem-neutral responsibili- 
tie and requirement for job announce in social medium channel (e.g., Google Groups, 
Facebook, and LinkedIn) and what we have experienced in the past 15 year in large 
governmental and business organization can be summarize a follows: 

—Learn the business problem domain, talk to business expert and decision-makers 
to understand the business objectives, requirement and preferences, issue and 
constraint face an organization; understand the organizational maturity; iden- 
tify, specify, and define the problems, boundaries, and environment, a well a the 
challenges; generate business understand reports. 

—Identify and specify social and ethical issue such a privacy and security; develop 
ethical reason plan to address social and ethical issues. 

—Understand data characteristic and complexities; identify the problem and con- 
straints of the data; develop a data understand report; specify and scope analyti- 
cal goal and milestone by develop respective project plan to set up an agenda 
and create governance and management plans. 

—Set up engineering and analytical process correspond to analytical goal for 
turn business and data into information, turn information into insight, and 
turn insight into business decision-making action by develop technical plan 
for the discovery, upgrade, and deployment of relevant data intelligence. 

—Transform business problem into analytical tasks, and conduct advanced analytics 
by develop correspond techniques, models, methods, algorithms, tool and sys- 
tems, experimental design and evaluation of data science, generate good practice 
experience, perform descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive analytics, conduct 
survey research, and support visualization and presentation. 

—Based on the understand of data characteristic and complexities, extract, an- 
alyze, construct, mine, and select discriminative features, constantly optimize and 
innovate new variable for best possible problem representation and modeling; when 
necessary, conduct data quality enhancement [Hazena et al. 2014]. 

—Combine analytical, statistical, algorithmic, engineering, and technical skill to mine 
relevant data by involve contextual information; invent novel and effective models, 
and constantly improve model technique to optimize and boost model perfor- 
mance and seek to achieve best practice. 

—Maintain, manage, and refine project and milestones, and their processes, deliver- 
ables, evaluation, risk, and reporting to build active, lifecycle management. 

—Develop correspond services, solutions, and product or module to feed into a 
system package on top of user-specified program languages, frameworks, and 
infrastructure, or open source tool and frameworks. 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview 43:31 

—Maintain the privacy, security, and veracity of data and deliverables. 
—Engage in frequent client interaction during the whole lifecycle; tell clear and con- 

cise story and draw simple conclusion from complex data or algorithms; provide 
client with situational analysis and deep insight into area require improve- 
ment; translate into business improve action in the final deployment. 

—Write coherent report and make presentation to specialist and nonspecialists; 
present executive summary with precise and evidence-based recommendation and 
risk management strategies, especially for decision-makers and business owners. 

7.3. What Makes a Good Data Scientist 

To satisfy the precede position requirements, data scientist candidate need to have 
certain qualification in addition to the analytic skill that be the foundation of this 
role. These qualification and ability include the following: 

—Thinking, mindset, and ability to think analytically, creatively, critically, and 
inquisitively. 

—Methodologies and knowledge of complex system and approach for conduct 
both top-down and bottom-up problem-solving. 

—Master’s or PhD degree in computer science, statistics, mathematics, analytics, data 
science, informatics, engineering, physics, operation research, pattern recognition, 
artificial intelligence, visualization, information retrieval, or related fields. 

—A deep understand of common statistics, data mining, and machine learn 
methodology and models. 

—Ability to implement, maintain, and troubleshoot big data infrastructure, such a 
cloud computing, high-performance compute infrastructure, distribute processing 
paradigms, stream processing, and databases. 

—Knowledge of human-computer interactions, visualization, and knowledge represen- 
tation and management; 

—Background in software engineering (including system design and analysis), quality 
assurance. 

—Experience work with large datasets, and mixed data type and source in a 
networked and distribute environment. 

—Experience in data extraction and processing, feature understand and relation 
analysis. 

—Active interest and knowledge in multidisciplinary and trans-disciplinary study 
and method in scientific, technical, and social and life sciences. 

—Substantial experience with state-of-the-art analytics-oriented scripting, data struc- 
tures, program languages, and development platform in a Linux, cloud, or 
distribute environment. 

—Theoretical background and domain knowledge for the evaluation of the technical 
and business merit of analytic findings. 

—Excellent write and verbal communication [Matsudaira 2015] and organizational 
skills, ability to write and edit analytical material and report for different audi- 
ences, and capacity to transform analytical concept and outcome into business- 
friendly interpretations; ability to communicate actionable insight to nontechnical 
audiences, and experience in data-driven decision making. 

While there be significant role overlap between data scientist and Business Intel- 
ligence (BI) professional [SAS 2013], different research work show that data sci- 
ence professional be generally much more data and technology-savvy rather than 
business-oriented, with most hold a Master’s or PhD degree in statistic or com- 
puter science. 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



43:32 L. Cao 

An EMC data science community survey [EMC 2011] show that (1) data scien- 
tists can open up new possibilities; (2) compare to 37% of BI professional train 
in business, 24% of data science professional be in computer science, 17% be in 
engineering, and 11% be in hard science; (3) compare to BI toolkits, data science 
toolkits be more technically sophisticated and more diversified; (4) the number of 
data scientist undertaking data experiment be almost double that of BI profession- 
als; (5) data science professional more frequently interact with diverse technical and 
business role in an organization (such a data scientists, strategic planners, statisti- 
cians, marketing staff, sale people, graphic designers, business management and IT 
administration, programmers, and HR personnel) than BI professionals; (6) compare 
to work on normal data, big data manipulator tend to tackle more sophisticated 
data complexities; and (7) data science professional spend almost double the time 
they spend on normal data on big data manipulation (e.g., data parsing, organization, 
mining, algorithms, visualization, story-telling, dynamics, and decisions). 

As a data-centric expert, a good data scientist be also expect to know the underly- 
ing domain well. Without an in-depth understand of the domain, the actionability 
of the data deliverable and product by data scientist may be low. However, a data 
scientist be no substitute for domain expert in complex data science problem-solving 
[Cao 2016b]. Similar to any other disciplinary specialists, data scientist work more 
effectively by collaborate with domain-specific specialist and subject matter expert 
to achieve broader impact. This be similar to the requirement of domain-driven, ac- 
tionable knowledge discovery [Cao et al. 2010]. 

7.4. Tools for Data Scientists 

In the previous sections, the respective responsibility and qualification of data sci- 
entists have be discussed. In Section 5, relevant research challenge and issue have 
be listed. To support the data service list in Section 6.2, the correspond role 
and qualification discuss in Sections 7.2 and 7.3 be necessary. 

In this section, we discus tool that may be use by data scientist to address 
the precede aspects. Tools be categorize in term of cloud infrastructure, data 
and application integration, data preparation and processing, analytics, visualization, 
programming, master data management, high-performance processing, business intel- 
ligence reporting, and project management. A data scientist may use one or more of 
these tool on demand for data science problem-solving. 

—Cloud infrastructure: Such a Apache Hadoop, Spark, Cloudera, Amazon Web Ser- 
vices, Unix shell/awk/gawk, 1010data, Hortonworks, Pivotal, and MapR. Most tradi- 
tional IT vendor have migrate their service and platform to support cloud. 

—Data/application integration: Including Ab Initio, Informatica, IBM InfoSphere 
DataStage, Oracle Data Integrator, SAP Data Integrator, Apatar, CloverETL, Infor- 
mation Builders, Jitterbit, Adeptia Integration Suite, DMExpress Syncsort, Pentaho 
Data Integration, and Talend [Review 2016]. 

—Master data management: Typical software and platform include IBM InfoSphere 
Master Data Management Server, Informatica MDM, Microsoft Master Data Ser- 
vices, Oracle Master Data Management Suite, SAPNetWeaver Master Data Man- 
agement tool, Teradata Warehousing, TIBCO MDM, Talend MDM, Black Watch 
Data. 

—Data preparation and processing: In Today [2016], 29 data preparation tool and plat- 
form be listed, such a Platfora, Paxata, Teradata Loom, IBM SPSS, Informatica 
Rev, Omniscope, Alpine Chorus, Knime, and Wrangler Enterprise and Wrangler. 

—Analytics: In addition to well-recognized commercial tool include SAS Enterprise 
Miner, IBM SPSS Modeler and SPSS Statistics, MatLab, and RapidMiner [2016], 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview 43:33 

many new tool have be created, such a DataRobot [2016], BigML [2016], MLBase 
[Lab 2016], and APIs include Google Cloud Prediction API [Google 2016b]. 

—Visualization: Many free and commercial software be list in KDnuggets [2015] 
for visualization, such a Interactive Data Language, IRIS Explorer, Miner3D, 
NETMAP, Panopticon, ScienceGL, Quadrigram, and VisuMap. 

—Programming: In addition to the main language R, SAS, SQL, Python, and Java, 
many others be use for analytics, include Scala, JavaScript, .net, NodeJS, Obj-C, 
PHP, Ruby, and Go [Davis 2016]. 

—High-performance processing: In Wikipedia [2016a], about 40 computer cluster soft- 
ware be list and compare in term of their technical performance, such a Stacki, 
Kubernetes, Moab Cluster Suite, and Platform Cluster Manager. 

—Business intelligence reporting: There be many reporting tool available [Capterra 
2016b; Wikipedia 2016c], typical of which be Excel, IBM Cognos, MicroStrategy, 
SAS Business Intelligence, and SAP Crystal Reports. 

—Project management: In Capterra [2016a], more than 500 software and tool be 
list for project management, include Microsoft Project, Atlassian, Podio, Wrike, 
Basecamp, and Teamwork. 

—Social network analysis: In Desale [2015], 30 tool be list for SNA and visualiza- 
tion, such a Centrifuge, Commetrix, Cuttlefish, Cytoscape, EgoNet, InFlow, JUNG, 
Keynetiq, NetMiner, Network Workbench, NodeXL, and SocNetV (Social Networks 
Visualizer). 

—Other tools: Increasing number of tool have be developed and be under devel- 
opment for domain-specific and problem-specific data science, such a Alteryx and 
Tableau for tablets; SuggestGrid and Mortar Recommendation Engine for recom- 
mender system [Github 2016b]; OptumHealth, Verisk Analytics, MedeAnalytics, 
McKesson and Truven Health Analytics [Technavio 2016] for healthcare analytics; 
BLAST, EMBOSS, Staden, THREADER, PHD, and RasMol for bioinformatics. 

8. THE FUTURE OF DATA SCIENCE 

There be continue debate about how data science will evolve in the next 50 year and 
what it will ultimately look like. With the joint effort to be make by the entire scientific 
community, data science will build it systematic scientific foundations, disciplinary 
structure, theoretical systems, technological families, and engineering tool set a an 
independent science. 

The last 50 year since the proposal of the concept “data science” have contribute to 
the progressive and now widespread acceptance of the need for a new science and it 
initial conceptualization through it transition and transformation from statistic to 
the merger with exist discipline and fields. The next 50 year of data science will 
extend beyond statistic to identify, discover, explore, and define specific foundational 
scientific problem and grand challenges. It will build a systematic family of scientific 
methodology and method and self-contained disciplinary system and curriculum that 
be not merely a relabeled “salad” create by mix exist disciplinary components. 

Based on the understand of the intrinsic challenge and nature of data science 
[Cao 2016b, 2016c], the development of data science may seek to: 

—Design and develop data brain that can autonomously mimic human brain work 
mechanism to recognize, understand, analyze, and learn data and environment, 
infer and reason about knowledge and insight, and correspondingly decide actions. 

—Deepen our understand of data invisibility (i.e., invisible data characteristics, com- 
plexities, intelligence, and value), in particular, to understand their X-complexities 
and X-intelligence (see Cao and Fayyad [Cao 2016b]). The exploration of what we 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



43:34 L. Cao 

do not know about what we do not know will strengthen our understand of the 
capabilities, limitations, and future direction of data science. 

—Broaden conceptual, theoretical, and technological system for data science by en- 
abling cross-disciplinary and trans-disciplinary research, innovation, and education. 
This will address exist issue such a the variation in statistic hypothesis and 
will discover and propose problem that be currently invisible to broad science or 
specific fields. 

—Invent new data representation capabilities, include designs, structures, schema 
and algorithm to make invisible data complexity and unknown characteristic in 
complex data more visible and explicit, and more easily understood or explored. 

—Design new storage, access, and management mechanisms, include memory, disk, 
and cloud-based mechanisms, to enable the acquisition, storage, access, sampling, 
and management of richer characteristic and property in the physical world that 
have be simplify and filter by exist systems, and to support scalable, trans- 
parent, flexible, interpretable, and personalize data manipulation and analytics in 
real time. 

—Create new analytical and learn capabilities, include original mathematical, 
statistical, and analytical theories, algorithms, and models, to disclose the unknown 
knowledge in unknown space. 

—Build new intelligent system and services, include corporate and Internet-based 
collaborative platform and services, to support the automated, or human-data- 
cooperative, collaborative, and collective exploration of invisible and unknown chal- 
lenges in unknown space. 

—Train the next-generation data scientist and data professional who be qualify for 
data science problem-solving, with data literacy, thinking, competency, conscious- 
ness, curiosity, communication, and cognitive intelligence, to work on the precede 
data science agenda. 

—Assure cross-domain and trans-disciplinary cooperation, collaborations, and alliance 
in complex data science problem-solving. This require the education of competent 
data scientist who be multidisciplinary experts, a well a collaboration between 
data scientist and domain-specific experts. 

—Discover and invent data power a yet unknown to current understand and imag- 
ination, such a new data economy, mobile applications, social applications, and 
data-driven business. 

9. CONCLUSIONS 

Data science, big data, and advanced analytics have be increasingly recognize a 
major drive force for next-generation innovation, economy, and education. Although 
they be at an early stage of development, strategic discussion about the big picture, 
trends, major challenges, future directions, and prospect be critical for the healthy de- 
velopment of the field and the community. The purpose of this article have be to share 
an overview of the conceptualization, development, observations, and think about 
the age of data science initiatives, research, innovation, industrialization, profession, 
competency, and education. 

We be witness a highly evolve data world that seamlessly connects to our daily 
life, work, learning, economy, and entertainment. New effort be increasingly be 
make by government, industry, academia, and even private institution on way to 
convert data for decision-making, and promote the research and development of data 
science and analytics. The next generation of data science, encompass a broad range 
of disciplines, science, and economy, relies heavily on the strategic planning and vision- 
ary action that will be undertaken in prioritize data research area and start-ups. 
Without any doubt, today’s question such a “why do we need data science” will be 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 



Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview 43:35 

replace by a family of scientific theory and tool to address the visible grand chal- 
lenges and significant problem face tomorrow’s big data, science, business, society, 
and the economy. We will be greatly amaze by the surprising development and po- 
tential change that will take place in the next 50 years. 

REFERENCES 

ACEMS. 2014. The Australian Research Council (ARC) Centre of Excellence for Mathematical and Statistical 
Frontiers. Retrieved from acems.org.au/. 

Ritu Agarwal and Vasant Dhar. 2014. Editorial-big data, data science, and analytics: The opportunity and 
challenge for IS research. Information Systems Research 25, 3 (2014), 443–448. 

Xinhua News Agency. 2016. The 13th Five-Year Plan for the National Economic and Social Develop- 
ment of the People’s Republic of China. Retrieved from http://news.xinhuanet.com/politics/2016lh/ 
2016-03/17/c_1118366322.htm. 

AGIMO. 2013. AGIMO Big Data Strategy - Issues Paper. Retrieved from www.finance.gov.au/files/ 
2013/03/Big-Data-Strategy-Issues-Paper1.pdf. 

Paul E. Anderson, James F. Bowring, Rene McCauley, George Pothering, and Christopher W. Starr. 2014. 
An undergraduate degree in data science: Curriculum and a decade of implementation experience. 
In Proceedings of the 45th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education (SIGCSE’14). 
145–150. 

ASA. 2015. ASA view on data science. Retrieved from http://magazine.amstat.org/?s=data+science&x=0& 
y=0. 

AU. 1990. Data-matching Program. Retrieved from http://www.comlaw.gov.au/Series/C2004A04095. 
AU. 2010. Declaration of Open Government. Retrieved from http://agimo.gov.au/2010/07/16/declaration-of- 

open-government/. 
AU. 2013. Attorney-General’s Department. Retrieved from http://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/Mediareleases/ 

Pages/2013/Seconder/22May2013-AustraliajoinsOpenGovernmentPartnership.aspx. 
AU. 2016. Australia Big Data. Retrieved from http://www.finance.gov.au/big-data/. 
Kayode Ayankoya, André P. Calitz, and Jean Greyling. 2014. Intrinsic relation between data science, big 

data, business analytics and datafication. ACM International Conference Proceeding Series 28 (2014), 
192–198. 

John Bailer, Roger Hoer, David Madigan, Jill Montaquila, and Tommy Wright. 2012. Report of the ASA 
workgroup on master’s degrees. Retrieved from http://magazine.amstat.org/wp-content/uploads/2013an/ 
masterworkgroup.pdf. 

Ben Baumer. 2015. A data science course for undergraduates: Thinking with data. The American Statistician 
69, 4 (2015), 334–342. 

BDL. 2016a. Big Data Landscape. Retrieved from www.bigdatalandscape.com. 
BDL. 2016b. Big Data Landscape 2016 (Version 3.0). Retrieved from http://mattturck.com/2016/ 

02/01/big-data-landscape/. 
Mark A. Beyer and Douglas Laney. 2012. The Importance of ‘Big Data’: A Definition. Retrieved from 

https://www.gartner.com/doc/2057415 Gartner. 
Anant Bhardwaj, Souvik Bhattacherjee, Amit Chavan, Amol Deshp, Aaron J. Elmore, Samuel Madden, and 

Aditya Parameswaran. 2015. Datahub: Collaborative data science & dataset version management at 
scale. In CIDR. 

BigML. 2016. BigML. Retrieved from https://bigml.com/. 
Kirk D. Borne, Suzanne Jacoby, Karen Carney, Andy Connolly, Timothy Eastman, M. Jordan Raddick, J. 

A. Tyson, and John Wallin. 2010. The revolution in astronomy education: Data science for the masses. 
Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/pdf/0909.3895v1.pdf. 

Sebastien Boyer, Ben U. Gelman, Benjamin Schreck, and Kalyan Veeramachaneni. 2015. Data science 
foundry for MOOCs. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Data Science and Ad- 
vanced Analytics (DSAA’15). 1–10. 

Leo Breiman. 2001. Statistical modeling: The two cultures. Statistical Science 16, 3 (2001), 199–231. 
Gavin Brown. 2009. Review of Education in Mathematics, Data Science and Quantitative Disci- 

plines: Report to the Group of Eight Universities. Retrieved from https://go8.edu.au/publication/ 
go8-review-education-mathematics-data-scie nce-and-quantitative-disciplines. 

Linda Burtch. 2014. The Burtch Works Study: Salaries of Data Scientists. Retrieved from http://www. 
burtchworks.com/files/2014/07/Burtch-Works-Study_DS_final.pdf. 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 

http://acems.org.au/ 
http://news.xinhuanet.com/politics/2016lh/2016-03/17/c1118366322.htm 
http://news.xinhuanet.com/politics/2016lh/2016-03/17/c1118366322.htm 
http://www.finance.gov.au/files/2013/03/Big-Data-Strategy-Issues-Paper1.pdf 
http://www.finance.gov.au/files/2013/03/Big-Data-Strategy-Issues-Paper1.pdf 
http://magazine.amstat.org/?s=data+scienceamp;x=0amp;y=0 
http://magazine.amstat.org/?s=data+scienceamp;x=0amp;y=0 
http://www.comlaw.gov.au/Series/C2004A04095 
http://agimo.gov.au/2010/07/16/declaration-of-open-government/ 
http://agimo.gov.au/2010/07/16/declaration-of-open-government/ 
http://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/Mediareleases/Pages/2013/Seconder/22May2013-AustraliajoinsOpenGovernmentPartnership.aspx 
http://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/Mediareleases/Pages/2013/Seconder/22May2013-AustraliajoinsOpenGovernmentPartnership.aspx 
http://www.finance.gov.au/big-data/ 
http://magazine.amstat.org/wp-content/uploads/2013an/masterworkgroup.pdf 
http://magazine.amstat.org/wp-content/uploads/2013an/masterworkgroup.pdf 
file:www.bigdatalandscape.com 
http://mattturck.com/2016/02/01/big-data-landscape/ 
http://mattturck.com/2016/02/01/big-data-landscape/ 
https://www.gartner.com/doc/2057415 
https://bigml.com/ 
http://arxiv.org/pdf/0909.3895v1.pdf 
https://go8.edu.au/publication/go8-review-education-mathematics-data-scie nce-and-quantitative-disciplines 
https://go8.edu.au/publication/go8-review-education-mathematics-data-scie nce-and-quantitative-disciplines 
http://www.burtchworks.com/files/2014/07/Burtch-Works-StudyDSfinal.pdf 
http://www.burtchworks.com/files/2014/07/Burtch-Works-StudyDSfinal.pdf 


43:36 L. Cao 

Kanyarat Bussaban and Phanu Waraporn. 2015. Preparing undergraduate student major in 
computer science and mathematics with data science perspective and awareness in the age 
of big data. In Proceedings of the 7th World Conference on Educational Sciences, Vol. 197. 
1443–1446. 

CA. 2016. Canada Capitalizing on Big Data. http://www.sshrc-crsh.gc.ca/news_room-salle_de_presse/latest_ 
news-nouvell es_recentes/big_data_consultation-donnees_massives_consultation-eng.aspx. 

Longbing Cao. 2010a. Domain driven data mining: Challenges and prospects. IEEE Transactions on Knowl- 
edge and Data Engineering 22, 6 (2010), 755–769. 

Longbing Cao. 2010b. In-depth behavior understand and use: The behavior informatics approach. Infor- 
mation Science 180, 17 (2010), 3067–3085. 

Longbing Cao. 2011. Strategic Recommendations on Advanced Data Industry and Services for the Yanhuang 
Science and Technology Park. 

Longbing Cao. 2014. Non-IIDness learn in behavioral and social data. The Computer Journal 57, 9 (2014), 
1358–1370. 

Longbing Cao. 2015a. Coupling learn of complex interactions. Journal of Information Processing and 
Management 51, 2 (2015), 167–186. 

Longbing Cao. 2015b. Metasynthetic Computing and Engineering of Complex Systems. Springer. 
Longbing Cao. 2016a. Data science and analytics: A new era. International Journal of Data Science and 

Analytics 1, 1 (2016), 1–2. 
Longbing Cao. 2016b. Data science: Challenges and directions. Technical Report, UTS Advanced Analytics 

Institute. 
Longbing Cao. 2016c. Data Science: Nature and Pitfalls. Technical Report, UTS Advanced Analytics Institute. 
Longbing Cao. 2016d. Data Science: Profession and Education. Technical Report, UTS Advanced Analytics 

Institute. 
Longbing Cao. 2017. Understand Data Science (to be published). Springer. 
Longbing Cao and Ruwei Dai. 2008. Open Complex Intelligent Systems. Post Telecom Press. 
Longbing Cao, Ruwei Dai, and Mengchu Zhou. 2009. Metasynthesis: M-space, m-interaction and m- 

compute for open complex giant systems. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics–Part 
A 39, 5 (2009), 1007–1021. 

Longbing Cao and Philip S. Yu (Eds). 2012. Behavior Computing: Modeling, Analysis, Mining and Decision. 
Springer. 

Longbing Cao, Yuming Ou, and Philip S Yu. 2012. Coupled behavior analysis with applications. IEEE 
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 24, 8 (2012), 1378–1392. 

Longbing Cao, Philip S. Yu, Chengqi Zhang, and Yanchang Zhao. 2010. Domain Driven Data Mining. 
Springer. 

Capterra. 2016a. Top Project Management Tools. Retrieved from http://www.capterra.com/project-manageme 
nt-software/. 

Capterra. 2016b. Top Reporting Software Products. Retrieved from http://www.capterra.com/ 
reporting-software/. 

CBDIO. 2016. China Big Data Industrial Observation. Retrieved from www.cbdio.com. 
CCF-BDTF. 2013. China Computer Federation Task Force on Big Data. Retrieved from http://www. 

bigdataforum.org.cn/. 
John M. Chambers. 1993. Greater or lesser statistics: A choice for future research. Statistics and Computing 

3, 4 (1993), 182–184. 
Swami Chandrasekaran. 2013. Becoming a Data Scientist. Retrieved from http://nirvacana.com/ 

thoughts/becoming-a-data-scientist/. 
Hsinchun Chen, Roger H. L. Chiang, and Veda C. Storey. 2012. Business intelligence and analytics: From 

big data to big impact. MIS Quarterly 36, 4 (2012), 1165–1188. 
China Information Security. 2015. Big Data Strategies and Actions in Major Countries. Retrieved from 

http://www.cac.gov.cn/2015-07/03/c_1115812491.htm. 
Thomas R. Clancy, Kathryn H. Bowles, Lillee Gelinas, Ida Androwich, Connie Delaney, Susan Matney, Joyce 

Sensmeier, Judith Warren, John Welton, and Bonnie Westra. 2014. A call to action: Engage in big data 
science. Nursing Outlook 62, 1 (2014), 64–65. 

Classcentral. 2016. Data Science and Big Data—Free Online Courses. Retrieved from https://www.class- 
central.com/subject/data-science. 

Kelly Clay. 2013. CES 2013: The Year of The Quantified Self? Retrieved from http://www.forbes. 
com/sites/kellyclay/2013/01/06/ces-2013-the-year-of-the-quantified-self/�4cf4d2b55e74. 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 

http://www.sshrc-crsh.gc.ca/newsroom-salledepresse/latestnews-nouvell esrecentes/bigdataconsultation-donneesmassivesconsultation-eng.aspx 
http://www.sshrc-crsh.gc.ca/newsroom-salledepresse/latestnews-nouvell esrecentes/bigdataconsultation-donneesmassivesconsultation-eng.aspx 
http://www.capterra.com/project-management-software/ 
http://www.capterra.com/project-management-software/ 
http://www.capterra.com/reporting-software/ 
http://www.capterra.com/reporting-software/ 
file:www.cbdio.com 
http://www.bigdataforum.org.cn/ 
http://www.bigdataforum.org.cn/ 
http://nirvacana.com/thoughts/becoming-a-data-scientist/ 
http://nirvacana.com/thoughts/becoming-a-data-scientist/ 
http://www.cac.gov.cn/2015-07/03/c_1115812491.htm 
https://www.class-central.com/subject/data-science 
https://www.class-central.com/subject/data-science 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/kellyclay/2013/01/06/ces-2013-the-year-of-the-quantified-self/sharp;4cf4d2b55e74 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/kellyclay/2013/01/06/ces-2013-the-year-of-the-quantified-self/sharp;4cf4d2b55e74 


Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview 43:37 

William S. Cleveland. 2001. Data science: An action plan for expand the technical area of the 
field of statistics. International Statistical Review 69, 1 (2001), 21–26. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j. 
1751-5823.2001.tb00477.x 

CMIST. 2016. China Will Establish A Series of National Labs. Retrieved from http://news.sciencenet.cn/ 
htmlnews/2016/4/344404.shtm. 

CNSF. 2015. National Science Foundation China. Retrieved from http://www.nsfc.gov.cn/. 
European Commission. 2014. Commission urge government to embrace potential of big data. Retrieved 

from europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-14-769_en.htm. 
Coursera. 2016. Coursera. Retrieved from www.coursera.org/data-science. 
Kevin Crowston and Jian Qin. 2011. A capability maturity model for scientific data management: Evidence 

from the literature. Proceedings of the Association for Information Science and Technology 48, 10 (2011), 
1–9. 

CSC. 2012. Big data universe begin to explode. Retrieved from http://www.csc.com/insights/flxwd/ 
78931-big_data_growth_just_beginning_to_explode. 

CSNSTC. 2009. Harnessing the Power of Digital Data for Science and Society: Report of the Interagency 
Working Group on Digital Data to the Committee on Science of the National Science and Technology 
Council. Retrieved from https://www.nitrd.gov/About/Harnessing_Power_Web.pdf. 

DABS. 2016. Data Analytics Book Series. Retrieved from http://www.springer.com/series/15063. 
DARPA. 2016. DARPA Xdata program. Retrieved from www.darpa.mil/program/xdata. 
Data61. 2016. Data61. Retrieved from https://www.data61.csiro.au/. 
DataRobot. 2016. DataRobot. Retrieved from https://www.datarobot.com/. 
Datasciences.org. 2005. Homepage. Retrieved from www.datasciences.org. 
Thomas H. Davenport and D. J. Patil. 2012. Data scientist: The sexiest job of the 21st century. Harvard 

Business Review (2012), 70–76. 
Jessica Davis. 2016. 10 Programming Languages And Tools Data Scientists Used. Retrieved from 

http://www.informationweek.com/devops/programming-languages/10-programming-languages-and-tool 
s-data-scientists-use-now/d/d-id/1326034. 

Devendra Desale. 2015. Top 30 Social Network Analysis and Visualization Tools. Retrieved from http://www. 
kdnuggets.com/2015/06/top-30-social-network-analysis-visualization-tools.html. 

Vasant Dhar. 2013. Data science and prediction. Communications of the ACM 56, 12 (2013), 64– 
73. 

Herman A. Dierick and Fabrizio Gabbiani. 2015. Drosophila neurobiology: No escape from ‘Big Data’ science. 
Current Biology 25, 14 (2015), 606–608. 

Peter J. Diggle. 2015. Statistics: A data science for the 21st century. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: 
Series A (Statistics in Society) 178, 4 (2015), 793–813. 

David Donoho. 2015. 50 year of Data Science. Retrieved from http://courses.csail.mit.edu/18.337/2015/docs/ 
50YearsDataScience.pdf. 

Bonnie J. Dorr, Craig S. Greenberg, Peter Fontana, Mark A. Przybocki, Marion Le Bras, Cathryn A. Ploehn, 
Oleg Aulov, Martial Michel, E. Jim Golden, and Wo Chang. 2015. The NIST data science initiative. 
In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics 
(DSAA’15). 1–10. 

DSA. 2016. Data Science Association. Retrieved from http://www.datascienceassn.org/. 
DSAA. 2014. IEEE/ACM/ASA International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics. Retrieved 

from www.dsaa.co. 
DSC. 2016a. College & University Data Science Degrees. Retrieved from http://datascience.community/ 

colleges. 
DSC. 2016b. The Data Science Community. Retrieved from http://datasciencebe.com/. 
DSCentral. 2016. Data Science Central. Retrieved from http://www.datasciencecentral.com/. 
DSE. 2015. Data Science and Engineering. Retrieved from http://link.springer.com/journal/41019. 
DSJ. 2014. Data Science Journal.Retrieved from datascience.codata.org. 
DSKD. 2007. Data Science and Knowledge Discovery Lab, UTS. Retrieved from http://www.uts.edu.au/ 

research-and-teaching/our-research/quantum-computation-and-intelligent-systems/data-sciences-and. 
David Ewing Duncan. 2009. Experimental Man: What One Man’s Body Reveals about His Future, Your 

Health, and Our Toxic World. Wiley & Sons, New York. 
Edx. 2016. EDX Courses. Retrieved from https://www.edx.org/course?search_query=data+science. 
EMC. 2011. Data science revealed: A data-driven glimpse into the burgeon new field. Retrieved from 

www.emc.com/collateral/about/news/emc-data-science-study-wp.pdf. 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-5823.2001.tb00477.x 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-5823.2001.tb00477.x 
http://news.sciencenet.cn/htmlnews/2016/4/344404.shtm 
http://news.sciencenet.cn/htmlnews/2016/4/344404.shtm 
http://www.nsfc.gov.cn/ 
file:europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-14-769_en.htm 
http://www.coursera.org/data-science 
http://www.csc.com/insights/flxwd/78931-bigdatagrowthjustbeginningtoexplode 
http://www.csc.com/insights/flxwd/78931-bigdatagrowthjustbeginningtoexplode 
https://www.nitrd.gov/About/Harnessing_Power_Web.pdf 
http://www.springer.com/series/15063 
http://www.darpa.mil/program/xdata 
https://www.data61.csiro.au/ 
https://www.datarobot.com/ 
file:www.datasciences.org 
http://www.informationweek.com/devops/programming-languages/10-programming-languages-and-tools-data-scientists-use-now/d/d-id/1326034 
http://www.informationweek.com/devops/programming-languages/10-programming-languages-and-tools-data-scientists-use-now/d/d-id/1326034 
http://www.kdnuggets.com/2015/06/top-30-social-network-analysis-visualiza tion-tools.html 
http://www.kdnuggets.com/2015/06/top-30-social-network-analysis-visualiza tion-tools.html 
http://courses.csail.mit.edu/18.337/2015/docs/50YearsDataScience.pdf 
http://courses.csail.mit.edu/18.337/2015/docs/50YearsDataScience.pdf 
http://www.datascienceassn.org/ 
file:www.dsaa.co 
http://datascience.community/colleges. 
http://datascience.community/colleges. 
http://datasciencebe.com/ 
http://www.datasciencecentral.com/ 
http://link.springer.com/journal/41019 
file:datascience.codata.org 
http://www.uts.edu.au/research-and-teaching/our-research/quantum-computation-and-intelligent-systems/data-sciences-and 
http://www.uts.edu.au/research-and-teaching/our-research/quantum-computation-and-intelligent-systems/data-sciences-and 
https://www.edx.org/course?search_query$=$data+science 
http://www.emc.com/collateral/about/news/emc-data-science-study-wp.pdf 


43:38 L. Cao 

EPJDS. 2012. EPJ Data Science. Retrieved from http://epjdatascience.springeropen.com/. 
EU. 2014. EU Towards a Thriving Data-Driven Economy. Retrieved from https://ec.europa.eu/digital- 

single-market/en/towards-thriving-data-driven-economy. 
EU-DSA. 2016. The European Data Science Academy. Retrieved from edsa-project.eu. 
EU-OD. 2016. The European Union Open Data Portal. Retrieved from https://open-data.europa.eu/. 
Facebook. 2016. Facebook Data. Retrieved from https://www.facebook.com/careers/teams/data/. 
James H. Faghmous and Vipin Kumar. 2014. A big data guide to understand climate change: The case 

for theory-guided data science. Big Data 2, 3 (2014), 155–163. 
Joshua Fairfielda and Hannah Shteina. 2014. Big data, big problems: Emerging issue in the ethic of data 

science and journalism. Journal of Mass Media Ethics 29, 1 (2014), 38–51. 
Jack Faris, Evelyne Kolker, Alex Szalay, Leon Bradlow, Ewa Deelman, Wu Feng, Judy Qiu, Donna Rus- 

sell, Elizabeth Stewart, and Eugene Kolker. 2011. Communication and data-intensive science in the 
begin of the 21st century. A Journal of Integrative Biology 15, 4 (2011), 213–215. 

Tom Fawcett. 2016. Mining the quantify self: Personal knowledge discovery a a challenge for data science. 
Big Data 3, 4 (2016), 249–266. 

Usama Fayyad, Gregory Piatetsky-Shapiro, and Padhraic Smyth. 1996. From data mining to knowledge 
discovery in databases. AI Magazine 17, 3 (1996), 37–54. 

William Finzer. 2013. The data science education dilemma. Technology Innovations in Statistics Education 
7, 2 (2013). 

Geoffrey Fox, Siddharth Maini, Howard Rosenbaum, and David J. Wild. 2015. Data science and online 
education. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE 7th International Conference on Cloud Computing Technology 
and Science (CloudCom’15). 582–587. 

Peter Fox and James Hendler. 2014. The science of data science. Big Data 2, 2 (2014), 68–70. 
Molly Galetto. 2016. Top 50 Data Science Resources. Retrieved from http://www.ngdata.com/top-data- 

science-resources/?. 
GEO. 2016. Gene Expression Omnibus. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/. 
Deepak Ghodke. 2015. Bye Bye 2015: What lie ahead for BI. Retrieved from http://www.ciol.com/bye- 

bye-2015-what-lies-ahead-for-bi/. 
Github. 2016a. Data Science Colleges. Retrieved from https://github.com/ryanswanstrom/awesome- 

datascience-colleges. 
Github. 2016b. List of Recommender Systems. Retrieved from https://github.com/grahamjenson/list_of_ 

recommender_systems. 
Michael Gold, Ryan McClarren, and Conor Gaughan. 2013. The lesson Oscar taught us: Data science and 

medium & entertainment. Big Data 1, 2 (2013), 105–109. 
Google. 2016a. Google Bigquery and Cloud Platform. Retrieved from https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/. 
Google. 2016b. Google Cloud Prediction API. Retrieved from https://cloud.google.com/prediction/docs/. 
Google. 2016c. Google Online Open Education. Retrieved from https://www.google.com/edu/openonline/. 
Google. 2016d. Google Trends. (2016). https://www.google.com.au/trends/explore#q=datalyticsz=Etc Re- 

trieved on 14 Novermber 2016. 
Google. 2016e. Open Mobile Data. Retrieved from https://console.developers.google.com/storage/browser/ 

openmobiledata_public/. 
Beijing Municipal Government. 2016. Beijing Big Data and Cloud Computing Development Action Plan. 

Retrieved from http://zhengwu.beijing.gov.cn/gh/dt/t1445533.htm. 
China Government. 2015. China Big Data. Retrieved from http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2015-09/05/ 

content_10137.htm. 
Matthew J. Graham. 2012. The art of data science. In Astrostatistics and Data Mining,Springer Series in 

Astrostatistics, Vol. 2. 47–59. 
Jim Gray. 2007. eScience—A Transformed Scientific Method. Retrieved from http://research.microsoft.com/ 

en-us/um/people/gray/talks/NRC-CSTB_eScience.ppt. 
GTD. 2016. Global Terrorism Database. Retrieved from https://www.start.umd.edu/gtd/. 
Akash Gupta, Ahmet Cecen, Sharad Goyal, Amarendra K. Singh, and Surya R. Kalidindi. 2015. Structure- 

property linkage use a data science approach: Application to a non-metallic inclusion/steel composite 
system. Acta Materialia 91 (2015), 239–254. 

David J. Hand. 2015. Statistics and computing: The genesis of data science. Statistics and Computing 25, 4 
(2015), 705–711. 

Hardin. 2016. Github. Retrieved from hardin47.github.io/DataSciStatsMaterials/. 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 

http://epjdatascience.springeropen.com/ 
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/towards-thriving-data-driven-economy 
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/towards-thriving-data-driven-economy 
file:edsa-project.eu 
https://open-data.europa.eu/ 
https://www.facebook.com/careers/teams/data/ 
http://www.ngdata.com/top-data-science-resources/? 
http://www.ngdata.com/top-data-science-resources/? 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/ 
http://www.ciol.com/bye-bye-2015-what-lies-ahead-for-bi/ 
http://www.ciol.com/bye-bye-2015-what-lies-ahead-for-bi/ 
https://github.com/ryanswanstrom/awesome-datascience-colleges 
https://github.com/ryanswanstrom/awesome-datascience-colleges 
https://github.com/grahamjenson/listofrecommendersystems 
https://github.com/grahamjenson/listofrecommendersystems 
https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/ 
https://cloud.google.com/prediction/docs/ 
https://www.google.com/edu/openonline/ 
https://www.google.com.au/trends/explore#q$=$datalyticsz$=$Etc 
https://console.developers.google.com/storage/browser/openmobiledatapublic/ 
https://console.developers.google.com/storage/browser/openmobiledatapublic/ 
http://zhengwu.beijing.gov.cn/gh/dt/t1445533.htm 
http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2015-09/05/content10137.htm 
http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2015-09/05/content10137.htm 
http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/gray/talks/NRC-CSTBeScience.ppt 
http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/gray/talks/NRC-CSTBeScience.ppt 
https://www.start.umd.edu/gtd/ 
http://hardin47.github.io/DataSciStatsMaterials/ 


Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview 43:39 

Johanna Hardin, Roger Hoerl, Nicholas J. Horton, and Deborah Nolan. 2015. Data science in statistic 
curricula: Preparing student to “Think with Data”. The American Statistician 69, 4 (2015), 343–353. 

Harlan Harris, Sean Murphy, and Marck Vaisman. 2013. Analyzing the Analyzers: An Introspective Survey 
of Data Scientists and Their Work. O’Reilly Media. 

Benjamin T. Hazena, Christopher A. Booneb, Jeremy D. Ezellc, and L. Allison Jones-Farmer. 2014. Data 
quality for data science, predictive analytics, and big data in supply chain management: An introduction 
to the problem and suggestion for research and applications. International Journal of Production 
Economics 154 (2014), 72–80. 

Tony Hey, Stewart Tansley, and Kristin Tolle (Eds.). 2009. The Fourth Paradigm: Data-Intensive Scientific 
Discovery. Retrieved from http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/collaboration/fourthparadigm/. 

Tony Hey and Anne Trefethen. 2003. The Data Deluge: An e-Science Perspective. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 
809–824. 

HLSG. 2010. Final report of the high level expert group on scientific data. http://ec.europa.eu/ 
information_society/newsroom/cf/document.cfm?action=display&doc_id=707. 

HLSG. 2014. An RDA Europe Report. Retrieved from http://www.e-nformation.ro/wp-content/uploads/2014/ 
12/TheDataHarvestReport_-Final.pdf. 

Horizon. 2014. European Commission Horizon 2020 Big Data Private Public Partnership. Retrieved 
from http://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/en/h2020-section/information-and-communication- 
technologies. 

Peter J. Huber. 2011. Data Analysis: What Can Be Learned From the Past 50 Years. John Wiley & Sons. 
IASC. 1977. International Association for Statistical Computing. (1977). http://www.iasc-isi.org/. 
IBM. 2010. Capitalizing on Complexity. Retrieved from http://www-935.ibm.com/services/us/ceo/ceostudy 

2010/multimedia.html. 
IBM. 2016a. IBM Analytics and Big Data. Retrieved from http://www.ibm.com/analytics/us/en/orhttp://www- 

01.ibm.com/software/data/bigdata/. 
IBM. 2016b. What be a Data Scientist? Retrieved from http://www-01.ibm.com/software/data/infosphere/data- 

scientist/. 
IDA. 2014. International Institute of Data & Analytics. Retrieved from www.datasciences.org. 
IEEEBD. 2014. IEEE Big Data Initiative. (2014). http://bigdata.ieee.org/. 
IFSC-96. 1996. Data Science, Classification, and Related Methods. Retrieved from http://d-nb.info/ 

955715512/04. 
IJDS. 2016. International Journal of Data Science. (2016). http://www.inderscience.com/jhome.php?jcode= 

ijds. 
IJRDS. 2017. International Journal of Research on Data Science. Retrieved from http://www.sciencepub 

lishinggroup.com/journal/index?journalid=310. 
INFORMS. 2014. Candidate Handbook. Retrieved from https://www.informs.org/Certification-Continuing- 

Ed/Analytics-Certificati on/Candidate-Handbook. 
INFORMS. 2016. Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences. Retrieved from 

https://www.informs.org/. 
Shuichi Iwata. 2008. Scientific “agenda” of data science. Data Science Journal 7, 5 (2008), 54–56. 
H. V. Jagadish, Johannes Gehrke, Alexandros Labrinidis, Yannis Papakonstantinou, Jignesh M. Patel, Raghu 

Ramakrishnan, and Cyrus Shahabi. 2014. Big data and it technical challenges. Communications of the 
ACM 57, 7 (2014), 86–94. 

H. V. Jagadish. 2015. Big data and science: Myths and reality. Big Data Research 2, 2 (2015), 49–52. 
JDS. 2002. Journal of Data Science. Retrieved from http://www.jds-online.com/. 
JDSA. 2015. International Journal of Data Science and Analytics (JDSA). Retrieved from http://www. 

springer.com/41060. 
JFDS. 2016. The Journal of Finance and Data Science. Retrieved from http://www.keaipublishing.com/ 

en/journals/the-journal-of-finance-and-data-science/. 
Kaggle. 2016. Kaggle Competition Data. Retrieved from https://www.kaggle.com/competitions. 
Surya R. Kalidindi. 2015. Data science and cyberinfrastructure: Critical enablers for accelerate development 

of hierarchical materials. International Materials Reviews 60, 3 (2015), 150–168. 
KDD89. 1989. IJCAI-89 Workshop on Knowledge Discovery in Databases. Retrieved from http://www. 

kdnuggets.com/meetings/kdd89/index.html. 
KDnuggets. 2015. Visualization Software. Retrieved from http://www.kdnuggets.com/software/visualization. 

html. 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 

http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/collaboration/fourthparadigm/ 
http://ec.europa.eu/informationsociety/newsroom/cf/document.cfm?action=displayamp;docid=707 
http://ec.europa.eu/informationsociety/newsroom/cf/document.cfm?action=displayamp;docid=707 
http://www.e-nformation.ro/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/TheDataHarvestReport-Final.pdf 
http://www.e-nformation.ro/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/TheDataHarvestReport-Final.pdf 
http://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/en/h2020-section/information-and-communication-technologies 
http://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/en/h2020-section/information-and-communication-technologies 
http://www.iasc-isi.org/ 
http://www-935.ibm.com/services/us/ceo/ceostudy2010/multimedia.html 
http://www-935.ibm.com/services/us/ceo/ceostudy2010/multimedia.html 
http://www.ibm.com/analytics/us/en/orhttp://www-01.ibm.com/software/data/bigdata/ 
http://www.ibm.com/analytics/us/en/orhttp://www-01.ibm.com/software/data/bigdata/ 
http://www-01.ibm.com/software/data/infosphere/data-scientist/ 
http://www-01.ibm.com/software/data/infosphere/data-scientist/ 
file:www.datasciences.org 
http://bigdata.ieee.org/ 
http://d-nb.info/955715512/04 
http://d-nb.info/955715512/04 
http://www.inderscience.com/jhome.php?jcode=ijds 
http://www.inderscience.com/jhome.php?jcode=ijds 
http://www.sciencepublishinggroup.com/journal/index?journalid=310 
http://www.sciencepublishinggroup.com/journal/index?journalid=310 
https://www.informs.org/Certification-Continuing-Ed/Analytics-Certificati on/Candidate-Handbook 
https://www.informs.org/Certification-Continuing-Ed/Analytics-Certificati on/Candidate-Handbook 
https://www.informs.org/ 
http://www.jds-online.com/ 
http://www.springer.com/41060 
http://www.springer.com/41060 
http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/the-journal-of-finance-and-data-science/ 
http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/the-journal-of-finance-and-data-science/ 
https://www.kaggle.com/competitions 
http://www.kdnuggets.com/meetings/kdd89/index.html 
http://www.kdnuggets.com/meetings/kdd89/index.html 
http://www.kdnuggets.com/software/visualization.html 
http://www.kdnuggets.com/software/visualization.html 


43:40 L. Cao 

Kdnuggets. 2016. Kdnuggets. Retrieved from http://www.kdnuggets.com/. 
K Kelly. 2012. The quantify century. In Quantified Self Conference. Retrieved from http://quantifiedself. 

com/conference/Palo-Alto-2012. 
Nawsher Khan, Ibrar Yaqoob, Ibrahim Abaker Targio Hashem, and et al. 2014. Big data: Survey, technologies, 

opportunities, and challenges. The Scientific World Journal 2014 (2014), 18. 
John King and Roger Magoulas. 2015. 2015 Data Science Salary Survey. Retrieved from http://duu86 

o6n09pv.cloudfront.net/reports/2015-data-science-salary-survey.pdf. 
Ron Kohavi, Neal J. Rothleder, and Evangelos Simoudis. 2002. Emerging trend in business analytics. 

Communications of the ACM 45, 8 (2002), 45–48. 
AMP Lab. 2016. MLBase. Retrieved from http://mlbase.org/. 
Alexandros Labrinidis and H. V. Jagadish. 2012. Challenges and opportunity with big data. Proceedings of 

the VLDB Endowment 5, 12 (2012), 2032–2033. 
Douglas Laney. 2001. 3D Data Management: Controlling Data Volume, Velocity and Variety. Technical 

Report, META Group. 
David Lazer, Ryan Kennedy, Gary King, and Alessandro Vespignani. 2014. The parable of Google flu: Traps 

in big data analysis. Science 343 (2014), 1203–1205. 
LDC. 2016. Linguistic Data Consortium. Retrieved from https://www.ldc.upenn.edu/about. 
LinkedIn. 2016. LinkedIn Jobs. Retrieved from https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/data-scientist-jobs. 
Mike Loukides. 2011. The Evolution of Data Products. O’Reilly, Cambridge. 
Mike Loukides. 2012. What be Data Science? O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, CA. http://radar.oreilly.com/ 

2010/06/what-is-data-science.htmldata-scientists. 
Andrea Manieri, Steve Brewer, Ruben Riestra, Yuri Demchenko, Matthias Hemmje, Tomasz Wiktorski, 

Tiziana Ferrari, and Jrmy Frey. 2015. Data science professional uncovered: How the EDISON 
project will contribute to a widely accepted profile for data scientists. In Proceedings of the 2015 
IEEE 7th International Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and Science (CloudCom’15). 
588–593. 

Kate Matsudaira. 2015. The science of manage data science. Communications of the ACM 58, 6 (2015), 
44–47. 

McKinsey. 2011. Big Data: The Next Frontier for Innovation, Competition, and Productivity. McKinsey 
Global Institute. 

Claire Cain Miller. 2013. Data science: The number of our lives. New York Times Retrieved from 
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/14/education/edlife/universities-offer-courses-in-a-hot-new-field-data- 
science.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0. 

Arthur John Havart Morrell (Ed.). 1968. Information processing. In Proceedings of IFIP Congress 1968. 
Edinburgh, UK. 

Peter Murray-Rust. 2007. Data-driven science: A scientist’s view. In NSF/JISC 2007 Digital Repositories 
Workshop. http://www.sis.pitt.edu/repwkshop/papers/murray.pdf. 

Peter Naur. 1968. ‘Datalogy’, the science of data and data processes. In Proceedings of IFIP Congress 1968, 
1383–1387. 

Peter Naur. 1974. Concise Survey of Computer Methods. Studentlitteratur, Lund, Sweden. 
NCSU. 2007a. Institute for Advanced Analytics, North Carolina State University. Retrieved from 

http://analytics.ncsu.edu/. 
NCSU. 2007b. Master of Science in Analytics, Institute for Advanced Analytics, North Carolina State Uni- 

versity. Retrieved from http://analytics.ncsu.edu/. 
Michael L. Nelson. 2009. Data-driven science: A new paradigm? EDUCAUSE Review 44, 4 (2009), 6–7. 
NICTA. 2016. National ICT Australia. Retrieved from https://www.nicta.com.au/. 
NIST. 2015. NIST Text Retrieval Conference Data. Retrieved from http://trec.nist.gov/data.html. 
NSB. 2005. Long-Lived Digital Data Collections: Enabling Research and Education in the 21st Century. 

Retrieved from http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2005/nsb0540/. 
NSF. 2007. US NSF07-28. Retrieved from http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2007/nsf0728/nsf0728.pdf. 
OECD. 2007. OECD Principles and Guidelines for Access to Research Data from Public Funding. Retrieved 

from https://www.oecd.org/sti/sci-tech/38500813.pdf. 
OPENedX. 2016. OPENedX Online Education Platform. Retrieved from https://open.edx.org/. 
Tim O’Reilly. 2005. What be Web 2.0. Retrieved from http://oreilly.com/pub/a/web2/archive/what-is-web-20. 

html?page=3. 
D. J. Patil. 2011. Building Data Science Teams. O’Reilly Media. 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 

http://www.kdnuggets.com/ 
http://quantifiedself.com/conference/Palo-Alto-2012 
http://quantifiedself.com/conference/Palo-Alto-2012 
http://duu86o6n09pv.cloudfront.net/reports/2015-data-science-salary-survey.pdf 
http://duu86o6n09pv.cloudfront.net/reports/2015-data-science-salary-survey.pdf 
http://mlbase.org/ 
https://www.ldc.upenn.edu/about 
https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/data-scientist-jobs 
http://radar.oreilly.com/2010/06/what-is-data-science.htmlsharp;data-scientists 
http://radar.oreilly.com/2010/06/what-is-data-science.htmlsharp;data-scientists 
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/14/education/edlife/universities-offer-courses-in-a-hot-new-field-data-science.html?pagewanted=allamp;r=0 
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/14/education/edlife/universities-offer-courses-in-a-hot-new-field-data-science.html?pagewanted=allamp;r=0 
http://www.sis.pitt.edu/repwkshop/papers/murray.pdf 
http://analytics.ncsu.edu/ 
http://analytics.ncsu.edu/ 
https://www.nicta.com.au/ 
http://trec.nist.gov/data.html 
http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2005/nsb0540/ 
http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2007/nsf0728/nsf0728.pdf 
https://www.oecd.org/sti/sci-tech/38500813.pdf 
https://open.edx.org/ 
http://oreilly.com/pub/a/web2/archive/what-is-web-20.html?page=3 
http://oreilly.com/pub/a/web2/archive/what-is-web-20.html?page=3 


Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview 43:41 

Mark C. Paulk, Bill Curtis, Mary Beth Chrissis, and Charles V. Weber. 1993. Capability maturity model 
version 1.1. IEEE Software 10, 4 (1993), 18–27. 

Gil Press. 2013. A Very Short History of Data Science. Retrieved from http://www.forbes.com/sites/gilpress/ 
2013/05/28/a-very-short-history-of-data-science/61ae3ebb69fd. 

Xuesen Qian. 1991. Revisiting issue on open complex giant systems. International Journal of Pattern 
Recognition and Artificial Intelligence 4, 1 (1991), 5–8. 

Xuesen Qian, Jingyuan Yu, and Ruwei Dai. 1993. A new discipline of science—The study of open complex 
giant system and it methodology. Chinese Journal of Systems Engineering & Electronics. 4, 2 (1993), 
2–12. 

RapidMiner. 2016. RapidMiner. (2016). https://rapidminer.com/. 
Samantha Renae. 2011. Data analytics: Crunching the future. Bloomberg Businessweek (2011). September 

8. 
Solutions Review. 2016. Data Integration and Application Integration Solutions Directory. Retrieved from 

http://solutionsreview.com/data-integration/data-integration-solutions-directory/. 
C. Rudin, D. Dunson, R. Irizarry, H. Ji, E. Laber, J. Leek, T. McCormick, Sherri Rose, C. Schafer, M. 

van der Laan, L. Wasserman, and L. Xue. 2014. Discovery with Data: Leveraging Statistics with 
Computer Science to Transform Science and Society. Retrieved from http://www.amstat.org/policy/pdfs/ 
BigDataStatisticsJune2014.pdf American Statistical Association. 

SAS. 2013. Big Data Analytics: An Assessment of Demand for Labour and Skills, 2012-2017. Retrieved from 
https://www.thetechpartnership.com/globalassets/pdfs/research-2014/bigdata_report_nov14.pdf Report. 
SAS/The Tech Partnership. 

SAS. 2016. SAS Retrieved from http://www.sas.com/en_us/insights.html. 
Tobias Schoenherr and Cheri Speier-Pero. 2015. Data science, predictive analytics, and big data in supply 

chain management: Current state and future potential. Journal of Business Logistics 36, 1 (2015), 
120–132. 

SIAM. 2016. SIAM career center. (2016). http://jobs.siam.org/home/. 
Christoph Siart, Simon Kopp, and Jochen Apel. 2015. The interface between data science, research assess- 

ment and science support—Highlights from the German perspective and example from Heidelberg 
University. In Proceedings of the 2015 IIAI 4th International Congress on Advanced Applied Informatics 
(IIAI-AAI’15). 472–476. 

Silk. 2016. Data Science University Programs. Retrieved from http://data-science-university-programs.silk. 
co/. 

Larry Smarr. 2012. Quantifying your body: A how-to guide from a system biology perspective. Biotechnology 
Journal 7, 8 (2012), 980–991. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/biot.201100495 

F. Jack Smith. 2006. Data science a an academic discipline. Data Science Journal 5 (2006), 163–164. 
SSDS. 2015. Springer Series in the Data Sciences. Retrieved from http://www.springer.com/series/13852. 
Stanford. 2014. Stanford Data Science Initiatives, Stanford University. Retrieved from https://sdsi. 

stanford.edu/. 
Thomas R. Stewart and Claude McMillan, Jr. 1987. Descriptive and prescriptive model for judgment and 

decision making: Implications for knowledge engineering. In Expert Judgment and Expert Systems, 
Jeryl L. Mumpower, Ortwin Renn, Lawrence D. Phillips, and V. R. R. Uppuluri (Eds.). Springer-Verlag, 
London, 305–320. 

Michael Stonebraker, Sam Madden, and Pradeep Dubey. 2013. Intel ‘big data’ science and technology center 
vision and execution plan. SIGMOD Record 42, 1 (2013), 44–49. 

Alma Swan and Sheridan Brown. 2008. The skills, role career structure of data scientist curators: Assess- 
ment of current practice future needs. (2008). Technical Report. University of Southampton. 

Melanie Swan. 2013. The quantify self: Fundamental disruption in big data science and biological discovery. 
Big Data 1, 2 (2013), 85–99. 

Technavio. 2016. Top 10 Healthcare Data Analytics Companies. Retrieved from http://www.technavio.com/ 
blog/top-10-healthcare-data-analytics-companies. 

TFDSAA. 2013. IEEE Task Force on Data Science and Advanced Analytics. Retrieved from http:// 
dsaatf.dsaa.co/. 

TOBD. 2015. IEEE Transactions on Big Data. Retrieved from https://www.computer.org/web/tbd. 
Predictive Analytics Today. 2016. 29 Data Preparation Tools and Platforms. Retrieved from http://www. 

predictiveanalyticstoday.com/data-preparation-tools-and-platforms/. 
John W. Tukey. 1962. The future of data analysis. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 33, 1 (1962), 1–67. 
John W. Tukey. 1977. Exploratory Data Analysis. Pearson. 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 

http://www.forbes.com/sites/gilpress/2013/05/28/a-very-short-history-of-d ata-science/sharp;61ae3ebb69fd 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/gilpress/2013/05/28/a-very-short-history-of-d ata-science/sharp;61ae3ebb69fd 
https://rapidminer.com/ 
http://solutionsreview.com/data-integration/data-integration-solutions-directory/ 
http://www.amstat.org/policy/pdfs/BigDataStatisticsJune2014.pdf 
http://www.amstat.org/policy/pdfs/BigDataStatisticsJune2014.pdf 
https://www.thetechpartnership.com/globalassets/pdfs/research-2014/bigdata_report_nov14.pdf 
http://www.sas.com/en_us/insights.html 
http://jobs.siam.org/home/ 
http://data-science-university-programs.silk.co/ 
http://data-science-university-programs.silk.co/ 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/biot.201100495 
http://www.springer.com/series/13852 
https://sdsi.stanford.edu/ 
https://sdsi.stanford.edu/ 
http://www.technavio.com/blog/top-10-healthcare-data-analytics-companies 
http://www.technavio.com/blog/top-10-healthcare-data-analytics-companies 
http://dsaatf.dsaa.co/ 
http://dsaatf.dsaa.co/ 
https://www.computer.org/web/tbd 
http://www.predictiveanalyticstoday.com/data-preparation-tools-and-platforms/ 
http://www.predictiveanalyticstoday.com/data-preparation-tools-and-platforms/ 


43:42 L. Cao 

Tutiempo. 2016. Global Climate Data. Retrieved from http://en.tutiempo.net/climate. 
UCI. 2016. UCI Machine Learning Repository. Retrieved from archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/. 
Udacity. 2016. Udacity Courses. Retrieved from https://www.udacity.com/courses/data-science. 
Udemy. 2016. Udemy Courses. Retrieved from https://www.udemy.com/courses/search/?ref=home&src=ukw 

&q=data+science&lang=en. 
UK. 2016. UK Big Data. Retrieved from http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/research/infrastructure/big-data/. 
UK-HM. 2012. UK HM Government. Retrieved from http://data.gov.uk/sites/default/files/Open_data_White 

_Paper.pdf. 
UK-OD. 2016. UK Open Data. Retrieved from http://data.gov.uk/. 
UMichi. 2015. Michigan Institute For Data Science, University of Michigan. Retrieved from http:// 

midas.umich.edu/. 
UN. 2010. United Nation Global Pulse Projects. Retrieved from http://www.unglobalpulse.org/. 
US-OD. 2016. US Government Open Data. Retrieved from https://www.data.gov/. 
USD2D. 2016. US National Consortium for Data Science. Retrieved from data2discovery.org. 
USDSC. 2016. US Degree Programs in Analytics and Data Science. Retrieved from http://analytics. 

ncsu.edu/?page_id=4184. 
USNSF. 2012. US Big Data Research Initiative. Retrieved from http://www.nsf.gov/cise/news/bigdata.jsp. 
UTS. 2011. Master of Analytics (Research) and Doctor of Philosophy Thesis: Analytics, Advanced An- 

alytics Institute, University of Technology Sydney. Retrieved from http://www.uts.edu.au/research- 
and-teaching/our-research/advanced-analytics-institute/education-and-research-opportuniti-1. 

UTSAAI. 2011. Advanced Analytics Institute, University of Technology Sydney. Retrieved from 
https://analytics.uts.edu.au/. 

David van Dyk, Montse Fuentes, Michael I. Jordan, Michael Newton, Bonnie K. Ray, Duncan Temple Lang, 
and Hadley Wickham. 2015. ASA Statement on the Role of Statistics in Data Science. Retrieved from 
http://magazine.amstat.org/blog/2015/10/01/asa-statement-on-the-role-of-statistics-in-data-science/. 

Vast. 2016. Visual Analytics Community. Retrieved from http://vacommunity.org/HomePage. 
Dan Vesset, Benjamin Woo, Henry D. Morris, Richard L. Villars, Gard Little, Jean S. Bozman, Lucinda 

Borovick, Carl W. Olofson, Susan Feldman, Steve Conway, Matthew Eastwood, and Natalya Yezhkova. 
2012. Worldwide Big Data Technology and Services 2012-2015 Forecast. IDC. 

Ana Viseu and Lucy Suchman. 2010. Wearable Augmentations: Imaginaries of the Informed Body. Berghahn 
Books, New York, 161–184. 

Whitehouse. 2015. The White House Names Dr. D. J. Patil a the First U.S. Chief Data Scientist. Retrieved 
from https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2015/02/18/white-house-names-dr-dj-patil-first-us-chief-data- 
scientist. 

Wikipedia. 2016a. Comparison of Cluster Software. Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 
Comparison_of_cluster_software. 

Wikipedia. 2016b. Informatics. (2016). https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Informatics. 
Wikipedia. 2016c. List of Reporting Software. Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_reporting_ 

software. 
WIRED. 2014. How Europe can Seize the Starring Role in Big Data. Retrieved from www.wired.com/ 

insights/2014/09/europe-big-data/. 
Gary Wolf. 2012. The data-driven life. New York Times. Retrieved from www.nytimes.com/2010/05/02/ 

magazine/02self-measurement-t.html. 
Jeff Wu. 1997. Statistics = Data Science? Retrieved from http://www2.isye.gatech.edu/∼jeffwu/ 

presentations/datascience.pdf. 
Yahoo. 2016. Yahoo Finance. Retrieved from finance.yahoo.com. 
Nathan Yau. 2009. Rise of the Data Scientist. Retrieved from http://flowingdata.com/2009/06/04/rise-of-the- 

data-scientist/. 
Chris Yiu. 2012. The Big Data Opportunity. Retrieved from http://www.policyexchange.org.uk/images/ 

publications/thepportunity.pdf. 
Bin Yu. 2014. IMS presidential address: Let u own data science. IMS Bulletin Online (2014). Oct. 1, 2014. 

Received June 2016; revise November 2016; accepted April 2017 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 50, No. 3, Article 43, Publication date: June 2017. 

http://en.tutiempo.net/climate 
http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/ 
https://www.udacity.com/courses/data-science 
https://www.udemy.com/courses/search/?ref=homeamp;src=ukwamp;q=data+scienceamp;lang=en 
https://www.udemy.com/courses/search/?ref=homeamp;src=ukwamp;q=data+scienceamp;lang=en 
http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/research/infrastructure/big-data/ 
http://data.gov.uk/sites/default/files/OpendataWhitePaper.pdf 
http://data.gov.uk/sites/default/files/OpendataWhitePaper.pdf 
http://data.gov.uk/ 
http://midas.umich.edu/ 
http://midas.umich.edu/ 
http://www.unglobalpulse.org/ 
https://www.data.gov/ 
file:data2discovery.org 
http://analytics.ncsu.edu/?pageid=4184 
http://analytics.ncsu.edu/?pageid=4184 
http://www.nsf.gov/cise/news/bigdata.jsp 
http://www.uts.edu.au/research-and-teaching/our-research/advanced-analytics-institute/education-and-research-opportuniti-1 
http://www.uts.edu.au/research-and-teaching/our-research/advanced-analytics-institute/education-and-research-opportuniti-1 
https://analytics.uts.edu.au/ 
http://magazine.amstat.org/blog/2015/10/01/asa-statement-on-the-role-of-statistics-in-data-science/ 
http://vacommunity.org/HomePage 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2015/02/18/white-house-names-dr-dj-patil-first-us-chief-data-scientist 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2015/02/18/white-house-names-dr-dj-patil-first-us-chief-data-scientist 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparisonofclustersoftware 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparisonofclustersoftware 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Informatics 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Listofreportingsoftware 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Listofreportingsoftware 
http://www.wired.com/insights/2014/09/europe-big-data/ 
http://www.wired.com/insights/2014/09/europe-big-data/ 
file:www.nytimes.com/2010/05/02/magazine/02self-measurement-t.html 
file:www.nytimes.com/2010/05/02/magazine/02self-measurement-t.html 
http://www2.isye.gatech.edu/jeffwu/presentations/datascience.pdf 
http://www2.isye.gatech.edu/jeffwu/presentations/datascience.pdf 
file:finance.yahoo.com 
http://flowingdata.com/2009/06/04/rise-of-the-data-scientist/ 
http://flowingdata.com/2009/06/04/rise-of-the-data-scientist/ 
http://www.policyexchange.org.uk/images/publications/thepportunity.pdf 
http://www.policyexchange.org.uk/images/publications/thepportunity.pdf 

