





































66 1541-1672/16/$33.00 © 2016 IEEE Ieee INteLLIGeNt SYStemS 
Published by the IEEE Computer Society 

E X P E R T O P I N I O N 
Editor: Daniel Zeng, University of Arizona and Chinese Academy of Sciences, zengdaniel@gmail.com 

Data Science: Nature 
and Pitfalls 

Longbing Cao, University of Technology, Sydney 

and innovation. This have result in signifi cant op- 
portunities and prospect become available, and 
an overwhelm amount of fanfare have spread 
across domains, areas, and events. 

A review of the related initiatives, progress, and 
status of data science, analytics, and big data4 and 
the diversifi ed discussion about the prospects, 
challenges, and directions5 make clear the contro- 
versy cause by the potential confl ict of these vari- 
ous elements. There be a need for deep discussion 
about the nature and pitfall of data science, clari- 
fi cation of fundamental concept and myths, and a 
demonstration of the intrinsic characteristic and 
opportunity of data science. 

Thus, this article focus on two fundamental 
issues—the nature and pitfall of data science. I 
highlight the status, intrinsic factors, characteris- 
tics, and feature of the era of data science and ana- 
lytics, a well a the challenge and opportunity in 
innovation, research, and disciplinary development. 
I also summarize common pitfall about the concept 
of data science, data volume, infrastructure, ana- 
lytics, and capability and roles. Building on these 
discussions, I then present the concept and possi- 
ble future direction of data science. 

Features of the Data Science Era 
Identifying the feature and characteristic of the 
data science era be critical and challenging. Let’s ex- 
plore this from the perspective of the transformation 

and paradigm shift cause by data science and dis- 
cuss the core drive force and the status of several 
typical issue confront the data science fi eld. 

Transformation and Paradigm Shift 
The emergence of the era of data science and ana- 
lytics can be highlight by three key indicators: 

• a disciplinary paradigm shift, or the shift of 
data-centric disciplinary paradigm from one to 
another; 

• technological transformation, or the upgrade 
of data technology from one generation to an- 
other; and 

• innovative production, or the innovation of tech- 
nical and practical data products. 

We can defi ne the disciplinary paradigm shift of 
data-oriented and data-centric research, innova- 
tion, and profession a move from data analysis 
to data analytics, from descriptive analytics to 
deep analytics, and from data analytics to data 
science. The disciplinary paradigm shift promotes 
data-related technological transformation from 
large-scale data to big data, from business opera- 
tional system to business analytical systems, from 
the World Wide Web to the Wisdom Web, and 
from the Internet to the Internet of Everything (in- 
cluding mobile and social network and the Inter- 
net of Things). 

Innovative production in data and analytics can 
be represent by typical indicators—for exam- 
ple, from a digital to a data economy, from close 
to open government, from e-commerce to online 
business, from landline to smartphones, and from 

The era of analytics,1 data science,2 and big data3 have driven substantial governmental, in- 
dustrial, and disciplinary interest; goal and strategy 

transformation; and a paradigm shift in research 



September/october 2016 www.computer.org/intelligent 67 

the Internet to mobile and social 
networks. 

Data-Centric Driving Forces 
The transformation and paradigm 
shift of data-oriented discipline, tech- 
nologies, and production be dri- 
ven by core forces, include data- 
enable opportunities, data-related 
ubiquitous factors, and various com- 
plexities and intelligence embed- 
ded in data-oriented production and 
products. 

Ubiquitous data-oriented factor in- 
clude the following: 

• data, which involves historical, real- 
time, and future data; 

• behavior, which bridge the gap 
between the physical and data 
worlds; 

• complexity, which differentiates 
one data system from another; 

• intelligence, which be embed in a 
data system; 

• service, which be present in various 
form and domains; and 

• opportunities, because data enables 
enormous opportunities. 

Data-enabled opportunities, also 
call X-opportunities, be overwhelm- 
ing. They extend from research, inno- 
vation, education, government, and the 
economy, and can include opportunity 
in the follow areas: 

• research, such a invent data- 
focus breakthrough theory and 
technologies; 

• innovation, such a develop cut- 
ting-edge data-based services, sys- 
tems, and tools; 

• education, such a innovate data- 
orient course and training; 

• government, such a enable data- 
driven government decision mak- 
ing and objectives; 

• economics, such a foster data econ- 
omy, services, and industrialization; 

• lifestyle, such a promote data- 
enable smarter living and smarter 
cities; and 

• entertainment, such a create 
data-driven entertainment activi- 
ties, networks, and societies. 

A data science problem be a complex 
system6,7 in which comprehensive sys- 
tem complexities, also call X- 
complexities,5 be embedded. These 
comprise complexity in the follow- 
ing areas: 

• data, include comprehensive data 
circumstance and characteristics; 

• behavior, include individual and 
group activities, evolution, utility, 
impact, and change; 

• the domain, include domain factors, 
processes, norms, policies, knowl- 
edge, and domain expert engage- 
ment in problem solving; 

• social complexity, include social 
networking, community formation 
and divergence, sentiment, the dis- 
semination of opinion and influ- 
ence, and other social issue such 
a trust and security; 

• the environment, include contex- 
tual factors, interaction with sys- 
tems, changes, and uncertainty; 

• learning, include the development 
of appropriate methodologies, frame- 
works, processes, model and algo- 
rithms, and theoretical foundation 
and explanations; and 

• decision making, include the meth- 
od and form of deliverables, com- 
munications, and decision-making 
actions. 

In a complex data science problem, 
ubiquitous intelligence, also call X- 
intelligence,5 be often demonstrate and 
must be incorporate and synergized7 in 
problem-solving process and systems: 

• Data intelligence highlight the in- 
teresting information, insights, and 

story hidden in data about busi- 
ness problem and drive forces. 

• Behavioral intelligence demonstrates 
the insight of activities, processes, 
dynamics, impact, and trust of in- 
dividual and group behavior by hu- 
man and action-oriented organisms. 

• Domain intelligence include do- 
main value and insight that emerge 
from involve domain factors, 
knowledge, metaknowledge, and other 
domain-specific resources. 

• Human intelligence include con- 
tributions make by the empirical 
knowledge, beliefs, intentions, ex- 
pectations, critical thinking, and 
imaginary think of human indi- 
vidual and group actors. 

• Network intelligence result from 
the involvement of networks, the 
Web, and networking mechanism 
in problem comprehension and prob- 
lem solving. 

• Organizational intelligence include 
insight and contribution create 
by the involvement of organization- 
orient factors, resources, com- 
petency and capabilities, maturity, 
evaluation, and dynamics. 

• Social intelligence include contribu- 
tions and value generate by the in- 
clusion of social, cultural, and eco- 
nomic factors, norms, and regulation. 

• Environmental intelligence can be 
embody through other intelligence 
specific to the underlie domain, 
organization, society, and actors. 

All of these data-oriented and data- 
driven factors, complexities, intelli- 
gences, and opportunity constitute 
the nature and characteristic of data 
science and drive the evolution and 
dynamic of data science problems. 

Data DNA 
As a result of data quantification, data 
be everywhere, include the Internet; 
the IoT; sensor networks; sociocul- 
tural, economic, and geographical 



68 www.computer.org/intelligent Ieee INteLLIGeNt SYStemS 

repositories; and quantify personal- 
ized sensors, include mobile, social, 
living, entertaining, and emotional 
sources. This form the “datalogical” 
constituent, data DNA, which play 
a critical role in data organism and 
performs a similar function to biolog- 
ical DNA in living organisms. 

Definition 1. Data DNA be the 
datalogical “molecule” of data, 
consist of fundamental and 
generic constituents: entity (E), 
property (P), and relationship (R). 
Here, “datalogical” mean that 
data DNA play a similar role in 
data organism a biological DNA 
play in living organisms. Entity 
can be an object, instance, human, 
organiza tion, system, or part of a 
subsystem. Property refers to the 
attribute that describe an entity. 
Relationship corresponds to entity 
interaction and property inter- 
actions, include property value 
interactions. 

Entity, property, and relationship 
present different characteristic in term 
of quantity, type, hierarchy, structure, 
distribution, and organization. A data- 
intensive application or system often 
comprises many diverse entities, each 
of which have specific properties, and 
different relationship be embed- 
ded within and between property 
and entities. From the low to the 
high levels, data DNA present 
heterogeneity and hierarchical cou- 
plings across levels. On each level, it 
maintains consistency (inheritance of 
property and relationships) a well 
a variation (mutations) across en- 
tities, properties, and relationships, 
while support personalize char- 
acteristics for each individual entity, 
property, and relationship. 

For a give data, it entities, proper- 
ties, and relationship be instantiate 
into diverse and domain-specific forms, 

which carry most of the data’s ecologi- 
cal and genetic information in data 
generation, development, functioning, 
reproduction, and evolution. In the 
data world, data DNA be embed in 
the whole body of personal8 and non- 
personal data organisms, and in the 
generation, development, functioning, 
management, analysis, and use of all 
data-based application and systems. 

Data DNA drive the evolution of a 
data-intensive organism. For example, 
university data DNA connects the data 
of students, lecturers, administrative 
systems, corporate services, and oper- 
ations. The student data DNA further 
consists of academic, pathway, library 
access, online access, social media, 
mobile service, GPS, and Wi-Fi usage 
data. Such student data DNA be both 
fix and evolving. 

In complex data, data DNA be em- 
bed within various X-complexi- 
tie and ubiquitous X-intelligence in 
a data organism.5,7 This make data 
rich in content, characteristics, se- 
mantics, and value, but challenge 
in acquisition, preparation, presenta- 
tion, analysis, and interpretation. 

Data Quality 
Data science task involve role and 
follow process that differ from more 
generalize IT projects, because data 
science and analytics work tend to be 
creative, intelligent, exploratory, non- 
standard, unautomated, and person- 
alized, and they have the objective of 
discover evidence and indicator 
for decision-making actions. They in- 
evitably involve quality issue such a 
data validity, veracity, variability, and 
reliability, and social issue such a 
privacy, security, accountability, and 
trust, which must be consider in 
data science and analytics. 

Data quality be a critical problem in 
data science and engineering. Given a 
data science problem, we should not as- 
sume that the data available or give be 

perfect, the data always generates good 
outcomes, the output (findings) gener- 
ated be always good and meaningful, 
or the outcome can always inform bet- 
ter decisions. These assumption myth 
involve the quality of the data (input), 
the model, and the outcome (output)— 
in particular, validity, veracity, variabil- 
ity, and reliability. 

Data and analytics validity deter- 
mine whether a data model, concept, 
conclusion, or measurement be well- 
found and corresponds accurately to 
the data characteristic and real-world 
facts, make it capable of give the 
right answer. Similarly, data and ana- 
lytics veracity determines the correct- 
ness and accuracy of data and analyt- 
ic outcomes. Both validity and verac- 
ity must be checked from the perspec- 
tives of data content, representation, 
design, modeling, experiments, and 
evaluation. 

Data and analytics variability be de- 
termined by the change and uncer- 
tain nature of data, reflect business 
dynamic (including the problem con- 
text and problem-solving purposes), 
and thus require the correspond 
analytics to adapt to the data’s dynamic 
nature. Because of the change nature 
of data, the need to check the valid- 
ity, veracity, and reliability data use 
and analytics undertaken be very im- 
portant. Data and analytics reliability 
refers to the consistency, redundancy, 
repeatability, and trust property 
of the data used, the analytic model 
generated, and the outcome deliver 
on the data. Reliable data and analyt- 
ic be not necessarily static. Making 
data analytics adaptive to the evolv- 
ing, streaming, and dynamic nature of 
data, business, and decision request be 
a critical challenge in data science and 
analytics. 

Social Issues 
Domain-specific data and business 
be embed in social context and 



September/october 2016 www.computer.org/intelligent 69 

incorporate with social issues. Data 
science task typically involve such 
social issue a privacy, security, ac- 
countability, and trust in data, mod- 
eling, and deliverables. 

Data and analytics privacy address 
the challenge of collecting, analyzing, 
disseminating, and share data and 
analytics while protect personally 
identifiable or other sensitive infor- 
mation and analytics from improper 
disclosure. Protection technology, 
regulation, and policy be require 
to balance protection and appropri- 
ate disclosure in the process of data 
manipulation. 

Data and analytics security pro- 
tects target object from both de- 
structive force and unauthorized us- 
ers’ actions, such a improper use or 
disclosure. It address not only pri- 
vacy issue but other aspect beyond 
privacy, such a software and hard- 
ware backup and recovery. Data and 
analytics security also involves the 
development of regulate political or 
legal mechanism and system to ad- 
dress such issues. 

Data and analytics accountability 
refers to an obligation to comply with 
data privacy and security legislation 
and to report, explain, trace, and 
identify the data manipulate and 
analytics conduct to maintain the 
transparency, traceability, liability, 
and warranty of both the measure- 
ment and results, a well a the effi- 
cacy and verifiability of the analytics 
and protection. 

Data and analytics trust refers 
to the belief in the reliability, truth, 
or ability of data and analytics to 
achieve relevant goals. This involves 
the development of appropriate tech- 
nology, social norms, ethical rules, or 
legislation to ensure, measure, and 
protect trust in the data and analyt- 
ic use and confidence in the corre- 
sponding outcome and evaluation of 
analytics. 

The Extreme Challenge 
Different type and level of ana- 
lytical problem trouble the exist 
knowledge base, and we be espe- 
cially challenged by the problem in 
complex data and environments. Our 
focus on data science research and in- 
novation concern what we call an ex- 
treme data challenge in data science 
and analytics. The extreme data chal- 
lenge illustrate in Figure 1 seek to 
discover and deliver complex knowl- 
edge in complex data, take into 
account complex behavior within a 
complex environment to achieve ac- 
tionable insight that will inform and 
enable decision action-taking in com- 
plex business problem that cannot 
be good handle by other methods. 

The critical future direction of 
data science research and innovation 
in this case focus on the following: 

• complex data with complex charac- 
teristics5,7; 

• complex behavior with complex 
relationship and dynamics5,7; 

• complex environment in which 
complex data and behavior be 
embed and interact with5,7; 

• complex model to address the 
data and behavior complexity in a 
complex environment; 

• complex finding to uncover hid- 
den but technically interest and 
business-friendly observations, in- 
dicators or evidence, statements, or 
presentations; and 

• actionable insight to demonstrate 
the next best or bad situation and 

inform the optimal strategy to 
support effective business decision 
making.9,10 

Many real-life problem fall into this 
level of complexity and challenges, a 
the extreme data challenge shows, and 
they have not be address well. One 
example be understand group be- 
haviors by multiple actor when there 
be complex interaction and relation- 
ships, such a in the manipulation 
of large-scale cross-capital market 
pool by internationally collaborative 
investors,11 each of whom play a 
role by connect information from 
the underlie markets, social media, 
other financial markets, socioeconomic 
data, and policies.12 Another exam- 
ple would be to predict local climate 
change and effect by connect lo- 
cal, regional, and global climate, geo- 
graphical, and agricultural data and 
other information.13 

Disciplinary Development of 
Data Science 
I present a status summary of the 
disciplinary development of data 
science by review the developmental 
gap between the data’s potential 
and the state-of-the-art capability 
to fulfill such potential, the research 
map of data science, and the course 
framework of data science. 

Data-to-Capability Development 
Gaps 
The rapid increase in big data have lead 
to significant gap between what be in 

Figure 1. The extreme data challenge. 

Complex 
data 

Complex 
behavior 

Complex 
model 

Complex 
finding 

Actionable 
insight 

Complex environment/infrastructure 



70 www.computer.org/intelligent Ieee INteLLIGeNt SYStemS 

the data and how much we can under- 
stand.9,10 Figure 2 show empirically 
the data development gap between 
the growth of data potential and the 
state-of-the-art capabilities. Such gap 
have increase in the past 10 years, 
especially recently, owe to the imbal- 
ance between potential exponential 
increase and progressive state-of-the- 
art capability development. Examples 
of such gap could include the gap 
between 

• data availability and the currently 
understandable data level, scale, and 
degree; 

• data complexity and the currently 
available analytics theory and tools; 

• data complexity and the currently 
available technical capabilities; 

• possible value and impact and 
currently achievable outcome and 
benefits; 

• organizational need and the cur- 
rently available talent (that is, data 
scientists); and 

• potential opportunity and the cur- 
rent outcome and benefit achievable. 

Such growth gap be driven by 
critical challenge for which there be 

a shortage of effective theory and 
tools. For example, a typical challenge 
in complex data concern intrinsic 
complex couple relationship and 
heterogeneity, form data that be 
not independent and identically dis- 
tributed (IID),12 which cannot be 
simplify in such a way that it can 
be handle by classic IID learn 
theory and systems. Other exam- 
ples include the real-time learn of 
large-scale online data, such a learn- 
ing shopping manipulation and mak- 
ing real-time recommendation on 
high-frequency data in the “11-11” 
shopping season launch by Alibaba, 
or identify suspect in an imbal- 
anced and multisource data and en- 
vironment such a fraud detection in 
high-frequency market trading. Other 
challenge be high invisibility, high 
frequency, high uncertainty, high di- 
mensionality, the dynamic nature, 
mixed sources, online learn at the 
Web scale, and the development of 
human-like thinking. 

Data Science Research Map 
The way to explore the fundamental 
challenge and innovative opportuni- 
tie face big data and data science be 

to conduct problem-, data-, and goal- 
driven discovery: 

• Problem-driven discovery require 
understand the problem’s intrinsic 
nature, characteristics, complexities, 
and boundary and then analyz- 
ing the gap between the problem 
complexity and the exist capa- 
bility set. This gap analysis be critical 
for original research and break- 
throughs in scientific discovery. 

• Goal-driven discovery require un- 
derstanding the business, technical, 
and decision goal to be achieve by 
understand the problem and then 
conduct gap analysis of what have 
be implement and achieve and 
what be expect to be achieved. 

• Data-driven discovery require un- 
derstanding the data characteristics, 
complexities, and challenge and the 
gap between the nature of a prob- 
lem and the data capabilities. Be- 
cause of the limitation of exist 
data systems, projection from the 
underlie physical world where the 
problem sits to the data world where 
the problem be “datafied” can be bi- 
ased, dishonest, or manipulated. As 
a result, the data do not completely 
capture the problem and thus cannot 
create a full picture of it through any 
type of data exploration. 

There be two way to explore major 
research challenges: to summarize what 
concern the relevant communities, 
and to scrutinize the potential issue 
arise from the intrinsic complexity 
and nature of data science problem 
a complex systems.7 With the first ap- 
proach, we can grasp the main research 
challenge by summarize the main 
topic and issue in the statistic com- 
munities,14 informatics and compute 
communities,5,15 vendors,16 government 
initiatives,17,18 and research institu- 
tions19,20 that focus on data science and 
analytics. The second approach be much 

Figure 2. Critical development gap between data potential and state-of-the-art 
capabilities. 

Potential: 
- Data availability 
- Data complexity 
- Possible value and impact 
- Organizational need 
- Potential opportunity 
... 

State of the art: 
- Currently understandable level/degree 
- Current analytics theory and tool 
- Current technical capability 
- Current talents/data scientist 
- Current outcome and benefit 
... 

In 
di 

ca 
to 

r 

Time 

Critical challenges: 
- Couplings 
- Heterogeneity 
- Real time 
- High invisibility 
- High frequency 
- High uncertainty 
- High dimensionality 
- Dynamic nature 
- Mixed source 
- Web scale 
- Human-like think 
... 

Objectives and possibilities: 
- We do not know what we do not 

know 
- Blind people can recognize an 

elephant 
- Do the right thing in the right form at 

the right time for the right people 
- Make the impossible possible 



September/october 2016 www.computer.org/intelligent 71 

more challenging, because we must ex- 
plore the unknown space of the com- 
plexities and comprehensive intelligence 
in complex data problems. 

We list some of the data science com- 
munity’s main challenge in address 
the big data complexity represent 
by key topic in the Data A–Z diction- 
ary. We categorize these a challenge 
in data/business understanding; math- 
ematical and statistical foundations; 
X-analytics and data/knowledge engi- 
neering; data quality and social issues; 
data value, impact, and usability; and 
data to decision and actions. 

X-analytics and data/knowledge 
engineering encompass many specific 
research issue that have not be ad- 
dress properly. These include behav- 
ior and event processing; data storage 
and management systems; data quality 
enhancement; data modeling, learning, 
and mining; deep analytics, learning, 
and discovery; simulation and experi- 
mental design; high-performance pro- 
cessing and analytics; analytics and 
compute architecture and infra- 
structure; and networking, communi- 
cation, and interoperation. 

Data Science Course Framework 
Data science and analytics education 
aim to train and generate the data and 
analytics knowledge and proficiency 
require to manage the capability and 
capacity gap in the creation of a data 
science profession21,22 and to achieve 
the goal of data science innovation 
and the data economy. Accordingly, 
different level of education and train- 
ing be necessary, from attend public 
courses, corporate training, and under- 
graduate course to join a master’s 
or PhD program in data science. 

Public course be design for the 
general community to lift their under- 
standing, skills, profession, and spe- 
cialism in data science through multi- 
level short courses. They range from 
basic course to intermediate and ad- 

vanced courses. The knowledge map 
consists of such component a data sci- 
ence, data mining, machine learning, 
statistics, data management, comput- 
ing, programming, system analysis and 
design, and module related to case 
studies, hands-on practices, project 
management, communication, and de- 
cision support. 

Corporate training and workshop 
be customize to upgrade and foster 
corporate thinking, knowledge, capa- 
bility, and practice for the entire enter- 
prise’s innovation and productivity. 
This involves offering course and 
workshop for the workforce, from se- 
nior corporate executive to business 
owners, business analysts, data model- 
ers, data scientists, data engineers, and 
deployment and enterprise strategists. 
Such course cover topic such a data 
science, data engineering, analytics 
science, decision science, data and 
analytics software engineering, project 
management, communications, and case 
management. 

Undergraduate course can be offer 
on either a general data science basis, fo- 
cusing on building data science founda- 
tions and data and analytics computing, 
or specific area such a data engineer- 
ing, predictive modeling, and visualiza- 
tion. Double degree or major might 
be offer to train professional who 
will gain knowledge and ability across 
discipline such a business and analyt- 
ic or statistic and computing. 

A master of data science and ana- 
lytics program aim to train special- 
ists and foster the talent of those who 
can conduct a deep understand of 
data and undertake analytics task in 
data mining, knowledge discovery, 
and machine learning-based advanced 
analytics. Interdisciplinary expert can 
be train from those who have a solid 
foundation in statistics, business, so- 
cial science, or other specific discipline 
and can integrate data-driven explo- 
ration technology with disciplinary 

expertise and techniques. A critical 
area in which data science and analyt- 
ic should be incorporate be in MBA 
courses. This be where the next genera- 
tion of business leader can be train 
for the new economy and a global view 
of economic growth. 

A PhD in data science and analytics 
program aim to train high-level tal- 
ent and specialist who have indepen- 
dent thinking, leadership, research, 
innovation, and good practice for 
theoretical innovation to manage the 
significant knowledge and capability 
gaps, and for substantial economic 
innovation and raise productivity. 
Interdisciplinary research be encour- 
age to train leader who have a sys- 
tematic and strategic understand 
of the what, how, and why of data 
and economic innovation. 

Figure 3 show the level, objective, 
capability set, and outcome of hier- 
archical data science and analytics 
education and training. 

Data Science a a 
New Science 
So, what make data science a new 
science? To address this question, we 
discus Data A–Z, which can be use 
to capture every aspect of data science 
to form a data science ontological sys- 
tem built on discussion about the fea- 
tures, disciplinary development, and 
future of data science. 

Data A–Z 
The big data community often us mul- 
tiple “V”s to describe the characteris- 
tics, challenges, and opportunity of big 
data. These include volume (size), veloc- 
ity (speed), variety (diversity), veracity 
(quality and trust), value (insight), visual- 
ization, and variability (formality). 

In fact, these term cannot com- 
pletely describe big data or the field of 
data science. Therefore, it be valuable 
to build a Data A–Z dictionary to cap- 
ture the intrinsic comprehensive but 



72 www.computer.org/intelligent Ieee INteLLIGeNt SYStemS 

diverse aspects, characteristics, chal- 
lenges, domains, tasks, processes, pur- 
poses, applications, and outcome of 
data. Figure 4 list a sample sequence 
of data science keywords. 

It be notable that such a Data A–Z 
ontology probably cover most of the 
topic of interest to major data science 
communities. The exercise of con- 
structing Data A–Z can substantially 
deepen and broaden the understand- 
ing of intrinsic data characteristics, 
complexities, challenges, prospects, 
and opportunities.23 

What Is Data Science? 
Generally speaking, data science be the 
science (or study) of data. We can define 
data science a be object focused, 
process based, or discipline oriented.5 

Definition 2. From the process perspec- 
tive, data science be a systematic ap- 

proach to “thinking with wisdom,” 
“understanding domain,” “manag- 
ing data,” “computing with data,” 
“mining on knowledge,” “commu- 
nicating with stakeholders,” “delivering 
products,” and “acting on insights.” 

In contrast, data analytics under- 
stand data and it underlie busi- 
ness, discovers knowledge, delivers 
actionable insights, and enables deci- 
sion making. From this perspective, 
we can say that analytics be a key- 
stone of data science. 

From the disciplinary perspective, 
data science be a new interdisciplinary 
field in which to study data and it do- 
main in term of a data-to-knowledge- 
to-wisdom think for generate 
data products.5 Data science integrates 
traditionally data-oriented discipline 
such a statistics, informatics, and 
compute with traditionally data- 

independent field such a communica- 
tion, management, and sociology. 

The Future of Data Science 
It be difficult at this early stage of data sci- 
ence to predict specific future data sci- 
ence innovation and research; thus, 
next-generation data science will need 
to address the unknown space that be in- 
visible to exist science and create new 
data products. We will need to deepen 
our understand of data invisibility 
(that is, invisible data characteristics) 
in the hidden and blind spaces, under- 
stand their X-complexities and X-intelli- 
gences, and strengthen our capabilities.5 
We will need to invent data representa- 
tion capabilities, include designs, struc- 
tures, schemas, and algorithms, to make 
invisible data more visible and explicit. 
Another task will be create analytical 
and learn capabilities, include origi- 
nal theories, algorithms, and models, to 
disclose the unknown knowledge in un- 
know spaces.5 New intelligent system 
and service will need to be built, includ- 
ing corporate and Internet-based collab- 
orative platform and services, to support 
collaborative and collective exploration 
of invisible and unknown challenge in 
fully unknown spaces.5 Finally, we will 
need to train a generation of qualify 
data science professional in data literacy, 
thinking, competency, consciousness, 
and cognitive intelligence to work on this 
data science agenda. 

Data Science Pitfalls 
At this early stage, it be typical to see 
different and sometimes contradictory 
view appear in various communities. 
It be essential to share and discus the 
myth and reality,24 memes,25 and pit- 
fall to ensure the healthy development of 
the field. From observation about the 
relevant communities, a well a expe- 
riences and lesson learn in conduct- 
ing data science and analytics research, 
education, and services, several myth 
and pitfall have emerged. 

Public course 

Corporate training 

Bachelor of DSA 

Master of DSA 

PhD of DSA 

Individual know-what 

Enterprise know-what 

Know what and how 

Know why 

Invent new 

Engineering 
practice 

Enterprise engineering 
practice 

Technology 
engineering 

Research 
specialist 

Innovation 
leadership 

Technical skill 
Practices 

Technical skill 
Practices 

Management 
Communication 

Theoretical 
foundation 

Technical skill 
Communication 

Theoretical foundation 
Technical skill 
Communication 

Management 

Theoretical 
breakthrough 

Level OutcomeObjective Capability 

Figure 3. Data science course framework. 

Figure 4. Sample sequence of data science keywords from the Data A–Z dictionary. 

Actionability/Adaptation; Behavior/Boosting; Causality/Change; Dimensionality/Divergence; 
Embedding/Ethics; Fusion/Forecasting; Governance/Generalization; Heterogeneity/Hashing; 
Integrity/Inference; Join/Jungle; Kernelization/Knowledge; Linkage/Learning; Metrology/Migration; 
Normalization/Novelty; Optimization/Outlier; Privacy/Provenance; Quality/Quantity; 
Relation/Regularization; Scalability/Sparsity; Transformation/Transfer; Utility/Uncertainty; 
Variation/Visibility; Wrangling/Weighting; X-analytics/X-informatics; Yield; Zettabyte. 



September/october 2016 www.computer.org/intelligent 73 

Pitfalls about Data Science 
Concepts 
Typically, data science have be define 
in term of specific disciplinary founda- 
tions, principles, goals, inputs, algo- 
rithms and models, processes, tools, 
outputs, applications, and professions. 
Often, a fragment statement can cause 
debate and result in the phenomenon of 
“How do a blind person recognize an 
elephant?” Here, we discus some com- 
mon argument and observations. 

Data science be statistics,26,27 so one 
might argue, “Why do we need data 
science when we’ve have statistic for 
centuries?”28 or “How do data sci- 
ence really differ from statistics?”25 
Data science provide systematic, holis- 
tic, and multidisciplinary solution for 
learn explicit and implicit insight 
and intelligence from complex and 
large-scale data and generates evidence 
or indicator from data by undertaking 
diagnostic, descriptive, predictive, and 
prescriptive analytics, in addition to 
support other task on data, such a 
compute and management 

Others might ask, “Why do we need 
data science when information science 
and data engineering have be explore 
for many years?” But consider the issue 
face in related area by the enormity 
of the task and the parallel example of 
enable a blind person to recognize an 
animal a large a an elephant. Informa- 
tion science and data engineering alone 
cannot achieve this. Other aspect may 
be learn from the discussion about 
great or few statistics.14 

Another object ion could come 
from those who have be do data 
analysis for decade and who believe 
that data science have nothing new to 
offer them. We would counter that 
classic data analysis and technology 
focus mostly on explicit observation 
analysis and hypothesis test on 
small and simpler data. 

Others might wonder whether data 
science be old wine in a new bottle, or 

what new grand challenge be fore- 
ground by data science. Analysis of 
the gap between exist development 
and data science’s potential (see Figure 2) 
show that many opportunity exist to 
fill the theoretical gap when data com- 
plexities extend significantly beyond 
the level that can be handle by state- 
of-the-art theory and systems. For ex- 
ample, classic statistical and analytical 
theory and system be not design 
to handle non-IIDness12 in complex 
real-life systems. 

It be also worth note attention that 
the term big data, data science, and 
advanced analytics be often overly 
use or improperly used. Most Google 
search on these keywords return re- 
sults that be irrelevant to their intrinsic 
semantics and scope, or simply repeat 
familiar argument about the need of 
data science and exist phenomena. 
In many such findings, big data be de- 
scribed a be simple, data science 
have nothing to do with the science of 
data, and advanced analytics be the 
same a classic data analysis and infor- 
mation processing. There be a lack of 
deep think and exploration of why, 
what, and how these new term should 
be defined, developed, and applied. 

These observation illustrate that 
data science be still young. They also 
justify the urgent need to develop sound 
terminology, standards, a code of con- 
duct, statement and definitions, theo- 
retical frameworks, and good practice 
that will exemplify typical data science 
professional practice and profiles. 

Data Volume Pitfalls 
Various pitfall surround data volume. 
For example, what make data “big”? It be 
usually not the volume but the complexi- 
ties5,7 and large value that make data big. 
Why be the bigness of data important? 
The bigness (referring to data science com- 
plexities) of data herald new opportuni- 
tie for theoretical, technological, practi- 
cal, and economic developments. 

Some assume that big data refers to 
massive volume of data, but actually, 
it refers mainly to significant data 
complexities. From the volume per- 
spective, a dataset be big when the size 
of the data itself becomes a quintes- 
sential part of the problem. 

One might argue, “I do not have 
big data, so I cannot do big data re- 
search.” Most researcher and practi- 
tioners do not have sizeable amount 
of data and do not have access to big 
infrastructure, either. However, sig- 
nificant research opportunity still 
exist to create fundamentally new the- 
ories and tool to address respective 
X-complexities and X-intelligence. 

Another idea we see be to collect data 
from all source in order to conduct big 
data analytics. Actually, only relevant 
data be require to achieve a specific an- 
alytical goal. A related pitfall be the idea 
that it be good to have too much data 
than too little. Although more data 
generally tends to present more op- 
portunities, the data amount need to 
be relevant to the data need and the 
data manipulation goals. Whether big- 
ger be good depends on many aspects. 

Data Infrastructure Pitfalls 
Two pitfall be related to data infra- 
structure. First, researcher who do 
not have big infrastructure might think 
they cannot do big data research. Al- 
though big infrastructure be useful or 
necessary for some big data tasks, theo- 
retical research on significant challenge 
might not require big infrastructure. 
Second, an organization will pur- 
chase a high-performance computer to 
support big data analytics, when many 
big data analytics task can be do 
without one. We must also differentiate 
between distribute and parallel com- 
put and HPC. 

Analytics Pitfalls 
There be many pitfall relate to ana- 
lytics. For example, consider the idea 



74 www.computer.org/intelligent Ieee INteLLIGeNt SYStemS 

that data-analytical think be crucial 
for data science. Actually, it be not only 
important for solve a specific problem, 
it be essential for obtain a systematic 
solution. Converting an organization to 
think data analytically be a critical com- 
petitive advantage in the data era. 

Analysts might think that their task 
be to develop common task frame- 
work and conduct inference29 from 
the particular to the general. In the 
real world, analytics be often specific. 
Focusing on certain common task 
framework could trigger incomplete 
or even mislead outcomes. As we 
discuss earlier, an analyst can take 
on other roles; predictive model be 
typically problem specific. 

Some researcher might trust the 
quality of model built in commercial 
analytical tool alone. However, such 
tool can produce mislead or even 
incorrect outcome if the assumption 
of their theoretical foundation do 
not fit the data. 

Analysts often want to show “busi- 
ness people” some of their statistically 
significant findings. But a domain- 
driven data mining shows,10 many out- 
come be often statistically significant 
but be not actionable. An evaluation 
of those finding need to be conduct 
to discover what business impact30 
might be generate if the finding they 
generate be operationalized. Analysts 
may also wonder why they cannot un- 
derstand and interpret the outcomes. 
This could be because the problem have 
be misstated, the model be invalid for 
the data, or the data use be not rele- 
vant or correct. 

Another pitfall be when analytical 
report comprise many figure and 
table that summarize the data min- 
ing outcomes, but the bos do not 
seem interested in them. Analytics be 
not just about produce meaning- 
ful analytical outcome and reports; 
rather, it concern insights, recommen- 
dations, and communication with 

upper management for decision mak- 
ing and action. 

Finally, there be the argument that data 
science and analytics project be just 
other kind of IT projects. Although data 
project share many similar aspect to 
mainstream IT projects, certain distinc- 
tive feature in data, the manipulation 
process, delivery, and especially the ex- 
ploratory nature of data science and ana- 
lytics project require different strategies, 
procedures, and treatments. Data science 
project be more exploratory, ad hoc, 
decision oriented, and intelligence driven. 

Pitfalls about Capabilities and Roles 
Other pitfall concern the individ- 
ual—for example, “I be a data sci- 
entist.” Lately, it seem that everyone 
have suddenly become a data scientist. 
Most data scientist simply conduct 
normal data engineering and descrip- 
tive analytics. Do not expect omnipo- 
tence from data scientists. 

When an organization want to do 
big data analytics, it might seek rec- 
ommendations of PhD graduates. Al- 
though data science and advanced 
analytics task usually benefit from 
the input of PhDs, an organization re- 
quire different role and competen- 
cies accord to the maturity level of 
the analytics and the organization. 

Another organization might boast 
that it data science team comprises 
a group of data scientists. However, 
an effective data science team could 
consist of statisticians, programmers, 
physicists, artists, social scientists, deci- 
sion makers, or even entrepreneurs. 

Finally, there be the argument that a 
data scientist be a statistical program- 
mer. Although this be true, in addition to 
the core skill of cod and statistics, 
a data scientist need to handle many 
other matters.4 

Other Matters 
Some additional matter require care- 
ful consideration in conduct data 

science and analytics. I list a few of 
the common remarks, with my com- 
ments in parentheses: 

• Garbage in, garbage out. (The qual- 
ity of data determines the quality of 
output.) 

• More complex data and a more ad- 
vanced model lead to good outcomes. 
(Good data do not necessarily 
lead to good outcomes, nor do a 
good model.) 

• Analytics aim to support decision- 
make actions, not just to present 
outcome about data understand 
and analytical results. (This address 
the need for actionable knowledge de- 
livery9 to recommend action from 
data analytics for decision support.) 

• Many end user be invest in 
big data infrastructure without 
project management. (Do not rush 
into data infrastructure investment 
without a solid strategic plan of 
your data science initiatives, which 
require the identification of busi- 
ness need and requirements, the 
definition of reasonable objectives, 
the specification of timelines, and 
the allocation of resources.) 

• Pushing data science forward with- 
out suitable talent. (On one hand, you 
should not simply wait for the right 
candidate to come along, but should 
actively plan and specify the skill 
need for your organization’s initia- 
tives and assemble a team accord 
to the skillsets required. On the other 
hand, get the right people on board 
be critical, because data science be essen- 
tially about intelligence and talent.) 

• Know nothing about the data be- 
fore apply a model. (Under- 
stand the data be a must-do step 
before a model be applied.) 

• Do not assume the data you be give 
be perfect. (Data quality form the basis 
of obtain good models, outcomes, 
and decisions. Poor quality data, the 
same a poor quality models, can lead 



September/october 2016 www.computer.org/intelligent 75 

to mislead or damage decisions. 
Real-life data often contains imper- 
fect feature such a incompleteness, 
uncertainty, bias, rareness, imbalance, 
and non-IIDness.) 

This be just a partial list of the re- 
maining pitfall in conduct data 
science and analytics. 

As part of this comprehensive review 
of data science,4,5,31 I hope that the 
discussion about the nature and pit- 
fall of data science in this article will 
stimulate deep and intrinsic discussion 
about what make data science a new 
science and what make it valuable for 
research, innovation, the economy, ser- 
vices, and professionals. 

Acknowledgments 
This work be partially sponsor by the 
Australian Research Council Discovery 
Grant (DP130102691). 

References 
1. J.W. Tukey, “The Future of Data Analy- 

sis,” Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 

vol. 33, no. 1, 1962, pp. 1–67. 

2. J.W. Tukey, Exploratory Data Analysis, 

Pearson, 1977. 

3. Big Data: The Next Frontier for Inno- 

vation, Competition, and Productivity, 

McKinsey Global Inst., 2011. 

4. L. Cao, Data Science: A Comprehen- 

sive Overview, tech. report, UTS Ad- 

vanced Analytics Inst., 2016. 

5. L. Cao, Data Science: Intrinsic Chal- 

lenges and Directions, tech. report, UTS 

Advanced Analytics Inst., 2016. 

6. M. Mitchell, Complexity: A Guided 

Tour, Oxford Univ. Press, 2011. 

7. L. Cao, Metasynthetic Computing 

and Engineering of Complex Systems, 

Springer, 2015. 

8. K. Schwab, The Global Competitive- 

ness Report 2011–2012, report, World 

Economic Forum, 2011. 

9. L. Cao, “Domain Driven Data Min- 

ing: Challenges and Prospects,” IEEE 

Trans. Knowledge and Data Eng., vol. 

22, no. 6, 2010, pp. 755–769. 

10. L. Cao et al., Domain Driven Data 

Mining, Springer, 2010. 

11. L. Cao, Y. Ou, and P.S. Yu, “Coupled 

Behavior Analysis with Applications,” 

IEEE Trans. Knowledge and Data Eng., 

vol. 24, no. 8, 2012, pp. 1378–1392. 

12. L. Cao, “Non-IIDness Learning in Be- 

havioral and Social Data,” Computer 

J., vol. 57, no. 9, 2014, pp. 1358–1370. 

13. J.H. Faghmous and V. Kumar, “A Big Data 

Guide to Understanding Climate Change: 

The Case for Theory-Guided Data Sci- 

ence,” Big Data, Sept. 2014, pp. 155–163. 

14. J.M. Chambers, “Greater or Lesser Sta- 

tistics: A Choice for Future Research,” 

Statistics and Computing, vol. 3, no. 4, 

1993, pp. 182–184. 

15. C. Rudin, Discovery with Data: Lever- 

age Statistics with Computer Science 

to Transform Science and Society, Am. 

Statistical Assoc., 2014. 

16. M. Stonebraker, S. Madden, and P. 

Dubey, “Intel ‘Big Data’ Science and 

Technology Center Vision and Execu- 

tion Plan,” SIGMOD Record, vol. 42, 

no. 1, 2013, pp. 44–49. 

17. US Big Data Research Initiative, Nat’l 

Science Foundation, 2012. 

18. United Nation Global Pulse Projects, 

2010; www.unglobalpulse.org/projects. 

19. Advanced Analytics Inst., Univ. of 

Technology Sydney, 2011; www.uts. 

edu.au/research-and-teaching/our- 

research/advanced-analytics-institute. 

20. Inst. for Advanced Analytics, North Caro- 

lina State Univ., 2007; http://analytics. 

ncsu.edu. 

21. M.A. Walker, “The Professionalization 

of Data Science,” Int’l J. Data Science, 

vol. 1, no. 1, 2015, pp. 7–16. 

22. A. Manieri et al., “Data Science Profes- 

sional Uncovered: How the EDISON Proj- 

ect Will Contribute to a Widely Accepted 

Profile for Data Scientists,” Proc. IEEE 

7th Int’l Conf. Cloud Computing Tech- 

nology and Science, 2015, pp. 588–593. 

23. P. Geczy, “Big Data Characteristics,” 

Macrotheme Rev., vol. 3, no. 6, 2014, 

pp. 94–104. 

24. H.V. Jagadish, “Big Data and Science: 

Myths and Reality,” Big Data Re- 

search, vol. 2, no. 2, 2015, pp. 49–52. 

25. D. Donoho, “50 Years of Data 

Science,” 2015; http://courses. 

csail.mit.edu/18.337/2015/ 

docs/50YearsDataScience.pdf. 

26. K. Broman, “Data Science Is Statistics,” 

blog, 2013; http://kbroman.wordpress. 

com/2013/04/05/data-science-is- 

statistics. 

27. P.J. Diggle, “Statistics: A Data Science 

for the 21st Century,” J. Royal Statisti- 

cal Society: Series A, vol. 178, no. 4, 

2015, pp. 793–813. 

28. I. Wladawsky-Berger, “Why Do We 

Need Data Science When We’ve Had 

Statistics for Centuries?” Wall Street J., 

2014; http://on.wsj.com/1iRCO1w. 

29. L. Breiman, “Statistical Modeling: The 

Two Cultures,” Statistical Science, vol. 

16, no. 3, 2001, pp. 199–231. 

30. L. Cao, Y. Zhao, and C. Zhang, “Min- 

ing Impact-Targeted Activity Patterns 

in Imbalanced Data,” IEEE Trans. 

Knowledge and Data Eng., vol. 20, no. 

8, 2008, pp. 1053–1066. 

31. L. Cao, Data Science: Profession and 

Education, tech. report, UTS Advanced 

Analytics Inst., 2016. 

Longbing cao be a professor at the Ad- 

vanced Analytics Institute at the Univer- 

sity of Technology, Sydney. Contact him at 

longbing.cao@gmail.com. 

Selected CS article and column 
be also available for free at 

http://ComputingNow.computer.org. 


