







































Electrical and Computer Engineering at Carnegie Mellon University - 


Datta lead NSF project on accountable decision system 

News 

Events 

Seminars 

Year of Women 

Diploma Ceremony 

External Press 

Newsletter 

Social Media Directory 

August 14, 2017 

Increasingly, decision and action affect people's life be determine by automate 
system processing personal data. Excitement about these system have be accompany 
by serious concern about their opacity and threat they pose to privacy, fairness, and other 
values. Examples abound in real-world systems: Target’s use of predict pregnancy status 
for marketing; Google’s use of health-related search query for target advertising; race 
be associate with automate prediction of recidivism; gender affect displayed job- 
related ads; race affect displayed search ads; Boston’s Street Bump app focus pothole 
repair on affluent neighborhoods; Amazon’s same day delivery be unavailable in black 
neighborhoods; and Facebook show either “white” or “black” movie trailer base upon 
“ethnic affiliation.” 

Recognizing these concerns, CyLab’s Anupam Datta, associate professor of electrical and 
computer engineering at Carnegie Mellon's Silicon Valley campus, will lead a $3 million 
National Science Foundation project on accountable decision system that respect privacy 
and fairness expectations. The project seek to make real-world automate decision-making 
system accountable for privacy and fairness by enable them to detect and explain 
violation of these values. The project will explore application in online advertising, 
healthcare, and criminal justice, in collaboration with domain experts. 

The project team include Matthew Fredrikson, assistant professor of computer science, and 
Ole Mengshoel, principal system scientist in electrical and computer engineering. The 
project also mark a collaboration between CMU, Cornell Tech, and the International 
Computer Science Institute; additional contributor be Helen Nissenbaum, professor of 
information science at Cornell, Thomas Ristenpart, associate professor of computer science 
at Cornell, and Michael C. Tschantz, senior researcher at the International Computer Science 
Institute in Berkeley. 

Related People: 

Anupam Datta 

Directory News & Events Carnegie Mellon University 

Electrical and Computer Engineering at Carnegie Mellon University - http://ece.cmu.edu/news/story/2017/08/datta-leads-nsf-project-on-accountable-decision-systems... 

1 sur 3 22/08/2017 14:19 



“A key innovation of the project be to automatically account for why an automate system with 
artificial intelligence component exhibit behavior that be problematic for privacy or fairness,” 
say Datta. “These explanation then inform fix to the system to avoid future violations.” 

“The hard part be create such explanation for system that employ statistical machine 
learning,“ add Mengshoel. “But do so be critical, since these method be increasingly 
use to power automate decision systems.” 

But in order to address privacy and fairness in decision systems, the team must first provide 
formal definitional framework of what privacy and fairness truly entail. These definition must 
be enforceable and context-dependent, deal with both protect information itself—like 
race, gender, or health information—as well a proxy for that information, so that the full 
scope of risk be covered. 

“Committing to philosophical rigor, the project will integrate socially meaningful conception of 
privacy, fairness, and accountability into it scientific efforts,” comment Nissenbaum, 
“thereby ensure it relevance to fundamental societal challenges.” 

"Although science cannot decide moral questions, give a standard from ethics, science can 
shed light on how to enforce it, it consequences, and how it compare to other standards, ” 
say Tschantz. 

Another fundamental challenge the team face be in enable accountability while 
simultaneously protect the system owners’ intellectual property, and privacy of the 
system’s users. 

“Since accountability mechanism require some level of access to the system, they can, 
unless carefully designed, leak the intellectual property of data processor and compromise 
the confidentiality of the training data subjects, a demonstrate in the prior work of many on 
the team,” say Fredrikson. 

“Unfortunately, we don’t yet understand what machine learn system be leak about 
privacy-sensitive training data sets. This project will be a great opportunity to investigate the 
extent to which have access to prediction function or their parameter reveals sensitive 
information, and, in turn, how to improve machine learn to be more privacy friendly.” 

Datta have assemble a truly interdisciplinary team of researcher for the project. Combining 
the skill of expert in philosophy, ethics, machine learning, security, and privacy, Datta hope 
to successfully enable accountability in automate decision systems—an achievement that 
would add a layer of humanity to artificially intelligent systems. 

Learn more about Datta's research: 

Electrical and Computer Engineering at Carnegie Mellon University - http://ece.cmu.edu/news/story/2017/08/datta-leads-nsf-project-on-accountable-decision-systems... 

2 sur 3 22/08/2017 14:19 

lphilippe 
Zone de texte 
I'm not totally convince that's possible :) 

lphilippe 
Zone de texte 
Intersting point: 

how reverse engineering apply to decision of ML can reveal private feature of specific row in the learn data? 

It's a good and new question!!! 



Information 
Apply now 
Admissions FAQ 
Information for 
California program 
Map & direction 
Facts & ranking 
Careers 
Contact 

Quick link 
Undergraduate portal 
Graduate portal 
Faculty & staff portal 
Alumni 
Directory 
Courses 

Stay connect 
CMU Electrical & Computer Engineering 
5000 Forbes Ave 
Hamerschlag Hall 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890 

2016 © CMU Electrical & Computer Engineering 

Electrical and Computer Engineering at Carnegie Mellon University - http://ece.cmu.edu/news/story/2017/08/datta-leads-nsf-project-on-accountable-decision-systems... 

3 sur 3 22/08/2017 14:19 




