


















































Decentralization in Bitcoin and Ethereum 
Networks 

Adem Efe Gencer1,2, Soumya Basu1,2, Ittay Eyal1,3, Robbert van Renesse1,2, 
and Emin Gün Sirer1,2 

1 Initiative for Cryptocurrencies and Contracts (IC3) 
2 Computer Science Department, Cornell University 

3 Electrical Engineering Department, Technion 

Abstract. Blockchain-based cryptocurrencies have demonstrate how 
to securely implement traditionally centralize systems, such a curren- 
cies, in a decentralize fashion. However, there have be few measure- 
ment study on the level of decentralization they achieve in practice. 
We present a measurement study on various decentralization metric of 
two of the lead cryptocurrencies with the large market capitaliza- 
tion and user base, Bitcoin and Ethereum. We investigate the extent of 
decentralization by measure the network resource of node and the 
interconnection among them, the protocol requirement affect the op- 
eration of nodes, and the robustness of the two system against attacks. 
In particular, we adapt exist internet measurement technique and 
use the Falcon Relay Network a a novel measurement tool to obtain 
our data. We discover that neither Bitcoin nor Ethereum have strictly 
good property than the other. We also provide concrete suggestion 
for improve both systems. 

1 Introduction 

Cryptocurrencies be emerge a a new asset class, with a market capitalization 
of about $150B a of Sept 2017 [15], a grow ecosystem, and a diverse commu- 
nity. The most prominent platform that account for over 70% of this market be 
Bitcoin [57] and Ethereum [28, 70]. The underlie technology, the blockchain, 
achieves consensus in a decentralized, open system and enables innovation in 
industry that conventionally rely upon trust authorities. Some example of 
such service include land record management [3], domain name registration [51], 
and voting [55]. The key feature that empowers such service and make these 
platform interest be decentralization. Without it, such service be technolog- 
ically easy to construct but require trust in a centralize administrator. 

Decentralization be a property regard the fragmentation of control over the 
protocol. In the Bitcoin and Ethereum protocols, user submit transaction for 
miner to sequence into blocks. Better decentralization of miner mean high 
resistance against censorship of individual transactions. For communication, Bit- 
coin and Ethereum also have a peer-to-peer network for disseminate block and 
transaction information. Both Bitcoin and Ethereum also contain full nodes, 

ar 
X 

iv 
:1 

80 
1. 

03 
99 

8v 
1 

[ 
c 

.C 
R 

] 
1 

1 
Ja 

n 
20 

18 



which serve two critical roles: (1) to relay block and transaction to miner 
(2) and to answer query for end user about the state of the blockchain. Un- 
derstanding the network property of full node be crucial for protocol design and 
analysis of each network’s resilience to attacks. Ongoing research explores way 
to make the Bitcoin and Ethereum network more decentralize without mea- 
surements on the underlie network. Hence, debate and decision about the 
underlie network be often base on assumption rather than measurement. 

In this paper, we present a comprehensive measurement study on decentral- 
ization metric in these operational system and shed light on whether or not 
exist assumption be satisfied in practice. We adapt prior Internet measure- 
ment technique for Bitcoin and Ethereum and use novel approach to obtain 
application layer data. Our main data source be (1) direct measurement of 
these network from multiple vantage points, (2) a Bitcoin relay network call 
Falcon that we deployed and operate for a year, and (3) blockchain history 
of Bitcoin and Ethereum. Our study present finding regard the network 
properties, impact of protocol requirements, security, and client interactions. 

This paper make three contributions. First, it provide new tool and tech- 
niques for measure blockchain-based cryptocurrency networks. The key tool 
introduce here be the Falcon relay network that we built to serve a a backbone 
for ferry blocks. This network be deployed for Bitcoin across five continents, 
provide a unique vantage point on prune blocks. Second, we perform a com- 
parative study of decentralization metric in Bitcoin and Ethereum. Our key 
finding are: (1) the Bitcoin network can increase the bandwidth requirement 
for node by a factor of 1.7 and keep the same level of decentralization a 2016, 
(2) the Bitcoin network be geographically more cluster than Ethereum, with 
many node likely reside in datacenters. (3) Ethereum have low mining power 
utilization than Bitcoin and would benefit from a relay network, and (4) small 
miner experience more volatility in block reward in Bitcoin than Ethereum. 

2 Bitcoin and Ethereum 

Bitcoin and Ethereum use Nakamoto consensus [5–7, 57, 38] to regulate transac- 
tion serialization in their blockchains. While architecturally very similar, these 
system differ significantly in term of their API, abstractions, and wire protocol. 

2.1 The Bitcoin Protocol 

Bitcoin be a protocol that sequence transaction into group call blocks. The 
protocol target a block production interval of 10 minute with a maximum size 
of 1 MB. At the time of our measurements, the last 100 block have a 0.99 MB 
median block size and a 9.8 minute mean interval. The wire protocol implement 
a peer-to-peer network base on flood block and transaction announcements. 

The peer to peer network be form through point to point links. To form a 
link, client establish a TCP connection and perform a protocol-level three-way 
handshake. The protocol-level handshake exchange the state of each client, such 
a the height of the blockchain and a version string associate with the software 



Measurement Network Num. Nodes Dates 

Bandwidth (All) 
Latency (BTC IPv4) 

(Single Beacon) 

BTC 
IPv4 3441 Jan 11–16;Jan 30–Mar 16 
IPv6 515 Jan 13–14;Apr 20–25 
Tor 127 Jan 13;Apr 23–25 

ETH IPv4 285 Mar 27–Apr 25 
Peer-to-Peer Latency 
(Mult. Vantage Pts.) 

BTC IPv4 3390 (5.7M edges) Jan 10–15; Jan 30–Mar 01 
ETH IPv4 4302 (9.3M edges) Mar 01–Apr 11 

Latency (Single Beacon) BTC IPv6 845 Jan 13–14; Feb 03–Apr 25 
Pruned Blocks BTC IPv4 5977 May 5 2016 – Apr 29 

Table 1: Timeline of measurements. All date be in 2017 unless otherwise noted. 

be run. When a client discovers or receives a new block, it flood the network 
with the hash of the block. If a neighbor client need the block, it request the 
block base on the hash value. There be many different block formats, such a 
compact [17] and Merkle [44] blocks, but BMS focus on retrieval of full blocks. 

2.2 The Ethereum Protocol 

The Ethereum protocol [28] focus on provide a platform to facilitate building 
decentralize application on it blockchain. To sequence transactions, Ethereum 
adopts a design inspire by Nakamoto consensus and the GHOST protocol [64]. 

Ethereum adopts a chain selection rule to harness the residual mining power 
in prune block for improve security. The protocol include such blocks, call 
uncles, in it blockchain and reward the correspond miner [70]. Ethereum 
target a block interval between 10 to 20 second [41]. The block size be indirectly 
determine by an execution fee, call gas, that fluctuates over time. At the time 
of our measurements, the last 100 block be generate with a 2.9 KB median 
block size and a 16.3 second average interval. 

Fig. 1: The measurement infrastructure 
be built on 18 globally distribute nodes. 

Ethereum employ a UDP-based 
node discovery mechanism inspire by 
Kademlia [54], but the rest of the 
P2P communication be over TCP. 
Unlike Bitcoin, message between 
node be encrypt and authenti- 
cated. Ethereum’s wire protocol be 
poorly documented, so we rely on the 
client implementation [42, 61, 19, 60] 
and Ethereum wiki page [26, 25, 29, 
30, 27] for information. 

In Ethereum, client request block 
by the correspond block hash. Older client request blocks, which consist of 
a body and header, while newer client request each piece separately. The mea- 
surement system in this paper focus on retrieval of full block and block bodies. 



3 Measurement Infrastructure 

Blockchain-based cryptocurrencies operate on global peer-to-peer network that 
span multiple administrative domains. Measurement of such network concern 
the exploration of the relationship between peers, the capability of individual 
peers, and the property of the system a a whole–e.g. it security and fair- 
ness. To characterize Bitcoin and Ethereum, we deployed Blockchain Measure- 
ment System (BMS ), a measurement system than ran experiment of vary 
duration–from a few day up to 12 months. 
Network Properties. BMS us multiple vantage point in order to gain a com- 
prehensive view of the cryptocurrency networks. To capture the evolution of 
these networks, BMS have be continuously collect data regard the pro- 
visioned bandwidth of peer and peer-to-peer latency. BMS first connects to a 
peer, collect measurements, and then disconnect before proceed to the next 
peer. These measurement target (1) Bitcoin node connect over IPv4, IPv6, 
and Tor [23] and (2) Ethereum node connect over IPv4. As of May 2017, 
Ethereum do not have any Tor node mainly because Tor be exclusively TCP, 
whereas Ethereum node discovery be UDP-based. Moreover, this study excludes 
Ethereum’s IPv6 network because BMS be unable to discover enough node to 
reach generalize conclusions. Table 1 show the timeline of the data collection 
for each network and the number of node measure in each measurement. 

To estimate the peer-to-peer latency, BMS us multiple vantage point geo- 
graphically distribute across the world. Figure 1 show the geographic distribu- 
tion of the measurement infrastructure. 15 out of 18 node reside in PlanetLab’s 
global research network [14] and the remain three node be part of Cornell’s 
academic network, locate in Ithaca, NY. 

To measure the provision bandwidth of node in Bitcoin and Ethereum, 
BMS use node with extensive resources. In particular, measure the maxi- 
mum bandwidth that Bitcoin and Ethereum node have access to require node 
with (1) high download capacity to ensure that the bottleneck be not in the 
measurement apparatus, and (2) sufficient disk capacity to store detailed re- 
sults. Since these machine need access to order of magnitude high bandwidth 
capacity than what be achievable on share infrastructure, such a PlanetLab 
nodes, some BMS data be collect use dedicated, well-provisioned beacon 
node locate at Cornell University. 

Finally, BMS need to pick a sample of node from the Bitcoin and Ethereum 
networks. As a sample, BMS us a list contain node from Bitcoin and 
Ethereum node crawl site [1, 31], and a locally deployed Ethereum supernode 
configure with a high peer limit. Interpretations in this paper assume that in- 
ferences make from the reachable public node be representative of their entire 
networks. In reality, these network contains node that be not visible to the 
public, e.g. they be behind a NAT or a firewall. One such class of node be part 
of mining . While much of the mining infrastructure be private, prior measurement 
work show that mining operation often have gateway node to communicate 
with the peer-to-peer network [56]. The property of internal mining pool node 
be orthogonal to the focus of this paper. 



Blockchain Information. A naive approach to obtain information about the 
blockchain would be to simply run a Bitcoin and Ethereum node. However, 
this precludes information that cannot be obtain through the respective wire 
protocols. Many important decentralization metric center around the analysis 
of block that be not part of the main blockchain. In Ethereum, many of these 
block become uncle which can simply be request through the wire protocol. 

In Bitcoin, however, a block that be not part of the main blockchain simply 
becomes pruned. Pruned block in Bitcoin have no effect on the state of the 
system, they be delete by client without impact correctness. Thus, it be 
crucial to connect directly to miner to capture prune blocks. 

A critical component of BMS to observe prune block be the Falcon Relay 
Network, which relay block between Bitcoin miners. The Falcon Relay Net- 
work us cut-through rout to quickly disseminate block worldwide, which 
incentivizes miner to connect to Falcon. Indeed, Falcon be directly connect to 
at least 36.4% of the entire hashpower in Bitcoin. Since there be just one other 
operational relay network for Bitcoin [18, 16], Falcon have observe block that 
have not be see on other well-connected node [8]. 

4 Measurements 

In this section, we present the measurement take by BMS. In each measure- 
ment, we describe the methodology, follow by the result of our analysis. As 
with any measurement study of a large-scale, uninstrumentable artifact, mea- 
surements be not perfect; we conclude each section by address some potential 
source of error and their mitigation. 

4.1 Provisioned Bandwidth 

Provisioned bandwidth be an estimate on a node’s transmission capacity charac- 
terizing how much bandwidth the node have to communicate with the rest of the 
cryptocurrency network. Greater provision bandwidth help miner to propa- 
gate/collect block to/from the network faster. Thus, it becomes more difficult 
for a malicious miner to situate themselves in the network to achieve the rush 
property [35] and attack the blockchain. Knowledge of provision bandwidth 
also aid in set protocol parameters, such a the block size and frequency. 
Methodology. BMS measure the provision bandwidth of each peer by re- 
quest a large amount of data from each peer and see how fast the peer 
can stream the data to BMS’s measurement nodes. BMS do this by ask for 
block that be first see over a year ago – similar to how a stale node asks 
for block to sync state. Each request asks for the same set of block in Bitcoin 
and block or the correspond body in Ethereum. Next, BMS divide the 
time into epoch and record the number of byte receive during each epoch. 
This process continue until either BMS receives all data or a predefined timeout 
of 30 second be reached. A long timeout help BMS eliminate effect from TCP 
slow start and other initialization noise a well a identify and eliminate spurious 
spike in throughput cause by buffering in the kernel by BMS. Finally, BMS 



process the collect data to determine the provision bandwidth. To do so, 
first, it identifies the independent data stream by combine successive epoch 
contain active data transfers. Then, it eliminates stream that be shorter 
than 500 millisecond to mitigate initialization artifact such a TCP slow start. 
BMS then output the maximum observe throughput among the remain 
distinct continuous stream a the provision bandwidth of the remote peer. 

The experiment in this paper be run on server with 1 Gbps link at Cornell 
University. This have not change from 2016 to 2017, which allows u to make 
comparison to a previous study in 2016 [20]. 

Bitcoin Eth. 
IPv4 IPv6 Tor IPv4 

[Mbps] [Mbps] [Mbps] [Mbps] 

10% 5.7 11.0 2.1 3.4 
33% 23.3 45.2 3.1 11.2 
50% 56.1 78.2 4.1 29.4 
67% 91.1 94.3 5.6 68.3 
90% 177.0 207.9 8.1 144.4 
Avg. 73.1 86.5 4.7 55.0 

Std. Dev. 68.4 66.9 2.4 58.8 

(a) Provisioned bandwidth statistics. (b) CDF 

Fig. 2: Statistics on distribution of provision bandwidth and the CDF. 

Results. Table 2a summarizes per-node bandwidth result that BMS have col- 
lected. We see that Bitcoin node in both IPv4 and IPv6 network have consis- 
tently high bandwidth compare to Ethereum IPv4 nodes. In particular, the 
median Bitcoin IPv4 and IPv6 node have about 1.9⇥ and 2.7⇥ the bandwidth of 
the typical Ethereum IPv4 node. In contrast, Bitcoin Tor node have an order of 
magnitude low bandwidth compare to directly connect nodes, though they 
be not unusable – e.g. 90% have more than 2 Mbit/s. Ongoing research explores 
alternative to the Tor network that also provide efficient communication [50]. 

Figure 2b show the cumulative distribution of the bandwidth measurements. 
Steep increase in the Bitcoin IPv4/IPv6 curve at around 10 Mbps and 100 
Mbps region represent typical bandwidth capacity of a home user, and a typ- 
ical Amazon EC2 Bitcoin instance. For Ethereum, we observe a similar accu- 
mulation around 10 Mbps region, but the bandwidth be more evenly distribute 
over the remain nodes. As the long tail distribution and high standard 
deviation indicates, bandwidth of Bitcoin IPv4/IPv6 node be spread out over 
a wider range of value compare to Ethereum nodes. While the most well pro- 
visioned Bitcoin node have around 300 Mbps of spare bandwidth, the high 
Ethereum node capacity that BMS have observe be limited to 250 Mbps. 

One of the most interest discovery of this study be that the Bitcoin net- 
work have improve tremendously in term of it provision bandwidth. The re- 
sults show that Bitcoin IPv4 nodes, which use to be connect to the network 
with a median bandwidth of 33 Mbit/s in 2016 [20], have a median bandwidth 



of 56 Mbit/s, a of February 2017. In other words, the provision bandwidth of 
a typical full node be now 1.7⇥ of what it be in 2016. 

Critical system parameters, such a the maximum block size and block fre- 
quency, can be increase when the provision bandwidth increases. The increase 
in provision bandwidth suggests that the block size can be increase by a fac- 
tor of 1.7 without increase centralization beyond it de facto level in 2016. 
Caveats. As with every measurement technique in the real world, our result 
above be subject to experimental limitation and expect errors. The accu- 
racy of the measurement may drop under certain circumstances, include the 
case where: (1) the network bottleneck lie on the side of the measurement 
beacon rather than the remote peer, (2) network traffic on the side of BMS 
interferes with the collect results, (3) the remote peer intentionally shape 
the traffic to selectively limit the bandwidth available to BMS, for instance via 
bandwidth throttling, and (4) different steady state bandwidth between Bitcoin 
and Ethereum, skew the number for one system over another The setup of 
our bandwidth infrastructure help minimize potential inaccuracy due to the 
first two issues. Moreover, analysis of popular Bitcoin [5] and Ethereum client 
implementation [42, 61, 19, 60] show that the third case be not support by this 
software and would require additional, potentially non-trivial, work to set up. To 
verify the impact of the last issue, we ran an Ethereum and Bitcoin client and 
saw that their bandwidth consumption differ by 0.2 Mbps, which introduces 
about a 1% error on our measurement above. 

In addition to our analysis above, we also expect to see certain artifact in our 
data. As note above, we see cluster of node around 10 Mbps and 100 Mbps, 
which be typical bandwidth capacity of home and EC2 users, respectively. 

4.2 Network Structure 

The structure of the peer-to-peer network impact the security and performance 
for cryptocurrencies. A geographically cluster network can quickly propagate 
a new block to many other nodes. This make it more difficult for a malicious 
miner to propagate conflict blocks/transactions quicker than honest nodes. 
However, a less cluster network may mean that full node be be run by a 
wider variety of user which be also good for decentralization. 
Methodology. Since it be not possible to obtain direct measurement between 
peer we do not control, we use the state of the art estimation technique to 
establish bound and gain insight into network structure. 

Single Beacon Latency. We first collect direct ICMP ping measurement from 
BMS node to all peer in the network. We report the minimum observe ping 
latency, a it provide a physical bound on the distance to the BMS beacon. 

Peer-to-Peer Latency. Measuring the peer-to-peer latency require access to 
the end points. In both Bitcoin and Ethereum, peer do not reveal their neigh- 
bors. Hiding the network structure boost privacy and security [45, 56], but also 
make it harder to infer property about the network. BMS provide latency 
estimate for a superset of the actual link between know peers. We do not 
normalize for the slightly different network sizes, 3390 for Bitcoin and 4302 for 



Ethereum, a our sample from both network be very similar. Since measure 
peer-to-peer latency directly be not feasible, we establish bound from observe 
latency from multiple beacons, use technique from prior literature [37]. BMS 
start with the measurement take from a single beacon. Then, it us the tri- 
angle inequality to estimate the upper and low bound for the latency between 
peers. Repeating this process from other vantage point yield a set of bound 
for each pair of peers. Finally, BMS determines a range for latency estimate be- 
tween each peer by pick the maximum low bound and the minimum upper 
bound. The paper also present the average of the low bound and upper bound 
latency between peers. In this study, BMS include node that do not support 
the DAO fork [10] in it measurement for Ethereum. 

Geographical Distance. BMS take the minimum of repeat latency measure- 
ments to eliminate transient network effect and capture the geographic distance 
between two node [43, 13, 69]. BMS also us IP geolocation data to calculate 
distance between peer node a an additional validation on our results. To cal- 
culate distances, BMS applies the Haversine formula [63] use the coordinate 
value gather from an IP-based geolocation service [46]. 

Single Beacon Peer-to-Peer 
Bitcoin Bitcoin Eth. 

IPv4 IPv6 IPv4 IPv4 
[ms] [ms] [ms] [ms] 

10% 29 40 48 92 
33% 78 80 79 125 
50% 89 95 109 152 
67% 98 95 152 200 
90% 201 165 286 276 
Avg. 97 103 135 171 

Std. Dev. 59 62 88 76 

Table 2: Min single beacon latency ob- 
serve and P2P latency estimates. 

Results. Our measurement indicate 
considerable difference between P2P 
latency of Bitcoin and Ethereum 
IPv4 networks, summarize in Table 2 
and PDF graph in Figure 3. 

We find that Bitcoin have many 
more node that be closer geograph- 
ically than Ethereum. Figure 3 show 
that Ethereum’s most likely laten- 
cies be center around 120ms, while 
Bitcoin node tend to be cluster 
around 50ms. Only 13% of Ethereum 
latency be under 100ms, while Bit- 
coin have a surprisingly high 46%. Ad- 
ditionally, the estimate peer-to-peer 
latency between Ethereum node be 26.7% high than Bitcoin on average. This 
geographic proximity between nodes, along with the observation that Bitcoin have 
many node with 100 Mbps of provision bandwidth (see Section 4.1), seem to 
indicate that many Bitcoin node be run in datacenters. 56% of Bitcoin’s node 
and 28% of Ethereum’s node belong to an autonomous system that provide 
dedicate host services, a difference significant at the 1% significance level. 

Indeed Ethereum node be not accumulate in a single geographical region, 
but be more evenly distribute around the world. Figure 3c show the CDF of 
distance between peer to peer node base on IP geolocation information. The 
result corroborate our finding base on network latency measurement and 
show that Ethereum node be geographically further apart than Bitcoin. As 
additional evidence, when we use geolocation on the P2P distance and plot the 
CDF in Figure 3c, we see that Ethereum node be further apart than Bitcoin. 



(a) (b) (c) 

Fig. 3: The histogram of P2P latency in Bitcoin (Fig 3a) and Ethereum (Fig 3b), 
a well a the CDF of geographical distance (Fig 3c). 

Sanity Checks. The first two column of Table 2 present single beacon latency 
in Bitcoin IPv4/IPv6 networks. The result indicate that both the median and 
the average latency to IPv4 node be small than IPv6 nodes. As there be 
few IPv6 node than IPv4 nodes, we expect this result since IPv4 node be 
more likely to be closer to our beacons. 

While there have be a large body of work show the prevalence of triangle 
inequality violation in the Internet [52, 67, 12], there be several reason BMS’s 
measurement be not affected significantly. First, such violation be show 
to occur less than 5% of network snapshot [52]. Since we take the minimum 
latency observe from a beacon, triangle inequality violation will only occur in 
our dataset less than 1% of the time [52]. TIVs be also significantly less prevalent 
when deal with latency less than 300 ms, which include almost our entire 
dataset [67]. To ensure that the above result hold for our dataset a well, we 
use a geolocation service a ground truth to verify our results. 

One other limitation in our study be that it be impossible to collect measure- 
ments use ICMP ping from node that block ICMP traffic and from Tor node 
that only communicate over TCP. 

4.3 Distribution of Mining Power 

Mining on cryptocurrency network be a complex process that typically require 
large computation power. With the current mining difficulty of Bitcoin and 
Ethereum, use commodity hardware to generate block be not feasible [21] 
which centralizes the mining process somewhat. However, a long a there be 
many different entity mining, the system be still decentralized. We compare the 
decentralization of the mining process between Bitcoin and Ethereum. 
Methodology. To identify the power of miner in Bitcoin and Ethereum, we 
examine their weekly distribution over the last 10 month start on July 15, 
2016. Our mining power estimation be base on the ratio of main chain block 
generate by distinct entities. Hence, prune block in Bitcoin and uncle in 
Ethereum do not affect these estimations. In both networks, miner voluntarily 
disclose their identity a part of each block they mine. We gather this data 
from a public API for Bitcoin [9] and a blockchain explorer for Ethereum [32]. 
In Bitcoin, 1.8% of the block be unidentified, which we treat a if they 
be generate by distinct individual miners. Finally, we manually process 
identity to detect and merge duplicates. This include pool operate by the 
same administrator [47] and multiple identity represent the same pool, which 



5 

15 

25 Ethereum 
Ra 

tio 
o 

f M 
in 

in 
g 

Po 
w 

er 
(% 

) 

5 

15 

25 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 

Bitcoin 

Miner Index (Descending Mining Power) 

Fig. 4: Distribution of mining power in Bitcoin and Ethereum networks. Bars 
indicate observe standard deviation from the average. 

we identify by look for the same pool name with a correspond tag, e.g. 
’DwarfPool1’ and ’DwarfPool2’. We do not distinguish between solo miner and 
mining pools, because it would be mislead to do so. Some claim that mining 
pool provide a modicum of decentralization, albeit invisible, because they be 
comprise of multiple solo miner who can exit the pool if the pool operator 
misbehaves. While this be true, it require detection of misbehaviors, which be 
not always possible. But in any case, our study capture a historical account 
of the mining power distribution a it take place, and at the time a block be 
commit to the chain, the pool constituent be plaintively cooperate a 
part of the same pool. 

Results. For each week of the analysis period, we calculate the correspond 
mining power of entity and ranked each miner accordingly. Figure 4 show the 
top 20 weekly mining power distribution in the Ethereum and Bitcoin networks. 
Each group of bar represent a chronologically order collection of weekly 
mining power ratios, define a the fraction of block contribute by a miner. 

Figure 4 illustrates that, in Bitcoin, the weekly mining power of a single entity 
have never exceed 21% of the overall power. In contrast, the top Ethereum miner 
have never have less than 21% of the mining power. Moreover, the top four Bitcoin 
miner have more than 53% of the average mining power. On average, 61% of 
the weekly power be share by only three Ethereum miners. These observation 
suggest a slightly more centralize mining process in Ethereum. 

Although miner do change rank over the observation period, each spot 
be only contest by a few miners. In particular, only two Bitcoin and three 
Ethereum miner ever held the top rank. The same mining pool have be at 
the top rank for 29% of the time in Bitcoin and 14% of the time in Ethereum. 
Over 50% of the mining power have exclusively be share by eight miner in 
Bitcoin and five miner in Ethereum throughout the observe period. Even 90% 
of the mining power seem to be control by only 16 miner in Bitcoin and 
only 11 miner in Ethereum. Hence, both platform rely heavily on very few 
distinct mining entity to maintain the blockchain. Indeed, we see in Figure 5 
that the mining power trend can be fit a exponential distribution with curve 



0.21e�0.19x and 0.35e�0.30x in Bitcoin and Ethereum, respectively. These curve 
yield a coefficient of determination value of 0.99. 

These result show that a Byzantine quorum system [53] of size 20 could 
achieve good decentralization than proof-of-work mining at a much low re- 
source cost. This show that further research be necessary to create a permission- 
less consensus protocol without such a high degree of centralization. 

5 

15 

25 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 

Ra 
tio 

o 
f 

M 
in 

in 
g 

Po 
w 

er 
(% 

) 

Miner Index (Descending Mining Power) 

Ethereum 
Bitcoin 

Fig. 5: Exponential trendlines for the av- 
erage distribution of mining power. 

Sanity Checks. Similar to other 
work in the literature [58, 68], we 
assume that miner accurately self- 
identify themselves. A miner that con- 
tribute a significant portion of the 
hash power to the cryptocurrency can 
exert some amount of influence over 
protocol changes. Thus, it be likely 
that miner will want to claim block 
that they generate a their own. 
While strong miner gain political clout and attract more members, get 
too large raise alarm among the community about centralization. Thus, such 
miner may conceal or obfuscate this information to appear less powerful – e.g. 
by generate multiple identities. For instance, two major mining pools, Ethpool 
and Ethermine, publicly reveal that they share the same admin [47]. Thus, any 
analysis base on the voluntary miner data skews toward a more decentralize 
network than the reality. 

4.4 Mining Power Utilization 

Mining power utilization [34], which measure the fraction of mine block that 
remain in the main chain, be a metric for evaluate the efficiency of a protocol, a 
well a a second order metric for robustness against rollbacks. As mining power 
utilization increases, the protocol be able to convert more of the energy spent to 
useful work, and therefore the cost to launch an attack be higher. 
Methodology. To study the mining power utilization, we analyze weekly and 
daily distribution of prune block in Bitcoin and uncle in Ethereum, compare 
to the main chain blocks. While uncle block in Ethereum contribute to the 
selection of the main chain and reward miners, uncle block do not sequence 
transactions. Thus, uncle block do not contribute to Ethereum’s performance, 
but do contribute to the blockchain’s security. We retrieve this data from (1) the 
Falcon network, (2) a local Bitcoin client, and (3) public blockchain explorer 
for Bitcoin [9] and Ethereum [32]. In particular, the Bitcoin blockchain explorer 
and Falcon exclusively provide 12% and 20% of the total 124 prune blocks, 
respectively. Both source commonly discover the remain 68%. 
Results. Figure 6a and Figure 6b show weekly and daily distribution of min- 
ing power utilization in Bitcoin and Ethereum networks, respectively. The re- 
sults show that Bitcoin utilization be always above 99%, which mean that a 
prune block in Bitcoin be a relatively rare event. In contrast, daily utilization in 
Ethereum be typically between 90% to 94% range and never go above the 97% 



(a) Bitcoin- weekly MPU from 99% (b) Ethereum- daily MPU from 70% 

Fig. 6: Mining power utilization (MPU) for Bitcoin and Ethereum 

threshold. During 2016, Ethereum face occasional drop in it utilization down 
from 74% to 88%, include (1) the day follow the exploitation of the DAO 
vulnerability [10] from June 17 to 18, (2) attack on Ethereum network [11, 66] 
between September 22 to October 19, and (3) the day follow the Spurious 
Dragon hard fork [48] between November 23 to 29. These result indicate a strong 
relationship between mining power utilization and real life event in Ethereum. 
This may be the result of preventive measure that spam the network to slow 
down the DAO attacker, bad actor generate block with excessive resource 
demands, and miner with outdated clients. These result indicate that a relay 
network, like Falcon, would be greatly beneficial to the Ethereum network. 
Sanity Checks. The design of the Ethereum protocol require peer to store and 
propagate uncle blocks, which be not on the main chain. In contrast, Bitcoin’s 
blockchain only store the main chain so peer do not propagate prune blocks. 
Hence, capture such block in Bitcoin require actively watch the network. 
While the Falcon relay network provide a strong incentive to miner to relay 
block through it, some miner may choose not to do so. Consequently, we may 
be miss some prune block that be generate by the Bitcoin network. 

4.5 Fairness 

1 

4 
7 Ethereum 

Fa 
irn 

e 
s 

Ra 
tio 

(lo 
g 

sc 
al 

e) 

1 

4 
7 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 

Bitcoin 

Miner Index (Descending Mining Power) 

Fig. 7: Fairness distribution. Zero fair- 
ness mean no prune block from miner. 

Section 4.3 present the mining 
power distribution, which look at 
the main chain presence of miners. 
The impact of this distribution on a 
miner’s prune block rate be unclear. 
To study this relationship, we exam- 
ine fairness define a the ratio of a 
miner’s share of prune block to her 
mining power. In a fair protocol, min- 
er generate prune block proportional to their mining power; hence, the fairness 
be close to 1. A fairness great than 1 implies that the miner be at a disadvantage, 
while a fairness less than 1 implies that the miner have an advantage. 
Methodology. We use the Falcon network, and a Bitcoin blockchain ex- 
plorer [8] to retrieve prune Bitcoin blocks. These source have, respectively, 
provide 109 and 99 blocks, yield a total of 124 distinct prune blocks. We 
collect uncle from an Ethereum blockchain explorer [32]. 

Similar to Section 4.3, our result here also assume that miner voluntarily 
identify themselves in uncles/pruned blocks. Another caveat here lie in gather- 
ing prune blocks. While we incentivize miner to relay block through Falcon, 



there be no guarantee that they necessarily will do so. We suspect that explicit 
storage of uncle in Ethereum capture a large proportion of prune blocks. 
Results. Figure 7 show the distribution of fairness of 20 miner with the high 
mining power. The result indicate that, in both networks, the top four miner 
generally be more successful at append block to the main chain. We run 
the Kolmogorov-Smirnov goodness of fit test with a p-value of 0.01 to compare 
the fairness distribution of Bitcoin and Ethereum. Perhaps surprisingly, we see 
that the fairness of Ethereum and Bitcoin differ significantly from each other 
keep a constant time period. The reason for this difference be a much large 
standard deviation in Bitcoin’s miner fairness compare to Ethereum (1.72 ver- 
sus 0.25). The mean of both fairness distributions, however, be very similar, 
with Ethereum at 1.08 and Bitcoin at 1.22. 

A high variance result in centralization pressure since small miner will 
have a more difficult time afford the loss of revenue due to a transiently 
high fairness score. This high variance be a direct result of a significantly small 
number of block be generate in Bitcoin. Since Ethereum have a high block 
frequency than Bitcoin, small miner have a more predictable payoff than large 
miners. This make Ethereum more predictable to mine for small miner due 
to the low variance in block rewards. Thus, it be important for blockchain 
protocol to take variance of the block reward in addition to the mean. 

Simply increase the block frequency may not be the solution to decrease the 
variance of block reward since the mining power distribution may be affected 
a well. The increase block frequency in Ethereum may be part of the cause of 
the slightly more centralize mining power distribution (see Section 4.3). 

Sanity Checks. Similar to Section 4.4, our result here also assume that 
miner voluntarily identify themselves in uncles/pruned blocks. As before, if 
the miner be lying, they be likely to present a more fair system than reality. 
Another caveat here lie in gathering prune blocks. While we incentivize miner 
to relay block through Falcon, there be no guarantee that they will. We suspect 
that explicit storage of uncle in Ethereum allows for more accurate analysis. 

Finally, Bitcoin have a significantly low block generation frequency than 
Ethereum. On top of that, Bitcoin also have a low prune block rate than 
Ethereum does, which mean it have significantly few prune blocks. Thus, this 
fairness metric be much noisier in Bitcoin compare to Ethereum. 

5 Related Work 

Network measurement in blockchain-based system have mainly focus on Bit- 
coin. One such study [22] demonstrate that the latency be the dominate factor 
in propagation of block small than 20 KB. Following work [20] have show that 
(1) this limit have increase to 80 KB and (2) node be provision with sub- 
stantially high bandwidth capacity than what the protocol demands. Feld et 
al. [36] point out a strong AS-level centralization that may impact Bitcoin 
network’s connectivity – i.e. 10 ASes contain over 30% of peers. Recent work [2] 
present the level of vulnerability, show that 13 ASes cover the same fraction 



of peers, but only 39 IP prefix host half of the overall mining power. Ours be 
the first work that do a similar type of study on Ethereum a well. 

Other work study various aspect of the Bitcoin overlay network. Miller et 
al. [56] found that a small fraction of the network, contain around 100 nodes, 
represent more than 75% of the mining power. The study conjecture that these 
node be well-connected to major mining pools; hence, provide high efficiency 
in broadcasting blocks. Biryukov et al. [4] examine how peer neighbor discover 
IP address that correspond to pseudonymous identities. Another study [49] 
deanonymized peer by observe anomalous relay behavior in network. Pap- 
palardo et al. [59] observe that low value transaction may experience wait 
time of over a month. Other work measure churn and geolocated peer [24]. 
Gervais et al. [40] discuss centralization concern regard the client develop- 
ment process, distribution of mining power, and spendable coins. Most of these 
work focus on attack and the structure of the overlay network, while this work 
focus on the resource capability of the node use in the overlay network. 

Recent work present way to reduce resource requirement to participate in 
blockchain systems. Such solution enhance decentralization by increase the di- 
versity of participants. Aspen [39] achieves this through sharding the blockchain. 
In this system, user store, process, and propagate only the data that be relevant 
to them, hence need few resource to join the network. Another approach [62] 
relies on authenticate data structure to reduce load on nodes. Relay net- 
work increase network efficiency through faster block propagation. The first 
such system [16] achieve this by avoid full block verification and retransmit- 
ting know transactions. Falcon, the source of prune block data in the Bitcoin 
network in this paper, relies on cut-through rout for faster block propagation. 
Finally, FIBRE incorporates cut-through rout with compact block [17] and 
forward error correction over UDP. The novelty in our work be utilize Falcon 
data in order to gain insight into transient application layer information. 

Blockchain explorer [65, 8, 32, 33] provide a variety of data on cryptocurrency 
networks, include online blockchain history; statistic on blockchain compo- 
nents, transaction fees, and market value; and node information. While these 
source of information be useful to the community, this work scientifically test 
whether the intuition provide by these source of information indeed hold. 

6 Conclusion 

Decentralization in blockchain-based platform be a component of the value 
proposition these system offer. This work present a comparative assessment of 
decentralization in two most popular cryptocurrencies, Bitcoin and Ethereum. 
To do so, it relies on novel measurement technique to obtain application layer 
information use the Falcon Network and the application of well-established 
internet measurement techniques. 

Our observation show that Bitcoin have a high capacity network than 
Ethereum,but with more cluster node likely in datacenters. We also observe 
that Bitcoin and Ethereum have fairly centralize mining process and that 



further research be need to decentralize permissionless consensus protocol fur- 
ther. In Ethereum, the block reward have less variance than Bitcoin’s. Finally, 
Ethereum have a low mining power utilization than Bitcoin, likely due to the 
high block frequency. 

Further, we see that Bitcoin have undergone tremendous growth and can in- 
crease the block size by a factor of 1.7x without any decrease in decentralization 
compare to 2016. Additionally, our study uncovers that the volatility of mining 
reward be an important, but often ignored, metric. Finally, we see that Ethereum 
would likely benefit from a relay network to increase it mining power utilization. 

7 Acknowledgements 

The author thank Vitalik Buterin and the anonymous reviewer for their feed- 
back on early draft of this manuscript. Ittay Eyal be support by the Viterbi 
Fellowship in the Center for Computer Engineering at the Technion. This work 
be partially fund and support by AFOSR grant F9550-16-0250, NSF CSR- 
1422544, NSF CNS-1601879, NSF CNS-1544613, NSF CCF-1522054, NSF CNS- 
1518779, NSF CNS-1704615, ONR N00014-16-1-2726, NIST Information Tech- 
nology Laboratory (60NANB15D327, 70NANB17H181), Facebook, Infosys, and 
IC3, the Initiative for Cryptocurrencies and Smart Contracts. This material be 
base upon work support by the National Science Foundation Graduate Re- 
search Fellowship Program under Grant No. DGE-1650441. Any opinions, find- 
ings, and conclusion or recommendation express in this material be those 
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the view of the National Science 
Foundation. 

References 

1. 21.CO. Bitnodes. https://bitnodes.21.co/, retrieve Jun. 2017. 
2. M. Apostolaki, A. Zohar, and L. Vanbever. Hijacking Bitcoin: Routing attack on 

cryptocurrencies. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.07524, 2016. 
3. Benben Team. Benben. http://benben.com.gh/, retrieve Oct. 2016. 
4. A. Biryukov, D. Khovratovich, and I. Pustogarov. Deanonymisation of client in 

Bitcoin P2P network. In Proc. of the ACM Conference on Computer and Commu- 
nications Security (CCS), page 15–29, 2014. 

5. Bitcoin Community. Bitcoin source. https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin, re- 
trieved Jun. 2017. 

6. Bitcoin Community. Protocol rules. https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Protocol_ 
rules, retrieve Jun. 2017. 

7. Bitcoin Community. Protocol specification. https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/ 
Protocol_specification, retrieve Jun. 2017. 

8. Blockchain Info Team. Blockchain Info. https://blockchain.info/, retrieve 
May. 2017. 

9. BlockTrail Team. Blocktrail API. https://www.blocktrail.com/api/docs#api_ 
data, retrieve Apr. 2017. 

10. V. Buterin. Critical update re: DAO vulnerability. https://blog.ethereum.org/ 
2016/06/17/critical-update-re-dao-vulnerability/, retrieve Apr. 2017. 



11. V. Buterin. Transaction spam attack: Next steps. https://blog.ethereum.org/ 
2016/09/22/transaction-spam-attack-next-steps/, retrieve Apr. 2017. 

12. F. Cangialosi, D. Levin, and N. Spring. Ting: Measuring and exploit latency 
between all Tor nodes. In Proc. of the ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Internet 
Measurement (IMC), page 289–302, 2015. 

13. B. Chandrasekaran, M. Bai, M. Schoenfield, A. Berger, N. Caruso, G. Economou, 
S. Gilliss, B. Maggs, K. Moses, D. Duff, et al. Alidade: Ip geolocation without 
active probing. Technical report, Duke University, 2015. 

14. B. Chun, D. Culler, T. Roscoe, A. Bavier, L. Peterson, M. Wawrzoniak, and 
M. Bowman. PlanetLab: an overlay testbed for broad-coverage services. ACM 
SIGCOMM CCR, 33(3):3–12, 2003. 

15. CoinMarketCap. Cryptocurrency market capitalizations. https: 
//coinmarketcap.com/, retrieve May. 2017. 

16. M. Corallo. The Bitcoin relay network. BIP 152, http://bitcoinrelaynetwork. 
org/, retrieve May. 2017. 

17. M. Corallo. Compact block relay. BIP 152, https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/ 
blob/master/bip-0152.mediawiki, retrieve Jun. 2017. 

18. M. Corallo. FIBRE: Fast internet Bitcoin relay engine. https://github.com/ 
bitcoinfibre/bitcoinfibre, retrieve Apr. 2017. 

19. Cpp-ethereum Authors. Ethereum C++ client. https://github.com/ethereum/ 
cpp-ethereum, retrieve Apr. 2017. 

20. K. Croman, C. Decker, I. Eyal, A. E. Gencer, A. Juels, A. Kosba, A. Miller, P. Sax- 
ena, E. Shi, E. G. Sirer, D. Song, and R. Wattenhofer. On scale decentralize 
blockchains (a position paper). In Proc. of the Workshop on Bitcoin and Blockchain 
Research (BITCOIN), Barbados, 2016. 

21. Cryptocompare Team. Cryptocurrency mining calculator. https://www. 
cryptocompare.com/mining/calculator, retrieve Jun. 2017. 

22. C. Decker and R. Wattenhofer. Information propagation in the Bitcoin network. 
In Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on Peer-to-Peer Computing, page 
1–10, Trento, Italy, 2013. 

23. R. Dingledine, N. Mathewson, and P. Syverson. Tor: The second-generation onion 
router. In Proc. of the USENIX Security Symposium, 2004. 

24. J. A. D. Donet, C. Pérez-Sola, and J. Herrera-Joancomartí. The Bitcoin P2P 
network. In Proc. of the International Financial Cryptography and Data Security 
Conference, page 87–102, Barbados, 2014. 

25. Ethereum Community. devp2p forward compatibility requirement for home- 
stead. https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-8.md, re- 
trieved Apr. 2017. 

26. Ethereum Community. D⌅Vp2p wire protocol. https://github.com/ethereum/ 
wiki/wiki/%C3%90%CE%9EVp2p-Wire-Protocol, retrieve Apr. 2017. 

27. Ethereum Community. Ethereum wire protocol. https://github.com/ethereum/ 
wiki/wiki/Ethereum-Wire-Protocol, retrieve Apr. 2017. 

28. Ethereum Community. A next generation smart contract and decentralize ap- 
plication platform. https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/White-Paper, re- 
trieved Apr. 2017. 

29. Ethereum Community. RLPx: Cryptographic network & transport proto- 
col. https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/blob/master/rlpx.md, retrieve 
Apr. 2017. 

30. Ethereum Community. RLPx encryption. https://github.com/ethereum/go- 
ethereum/wiki/RLPx-Encryption, retrieve Apr. 2017. 



31. EthereumJ. The Ethereum node explorer. https://www.ethernodes.org/, re- 
trieved Jun. 2017. 

32. Etherscan Team. Etherscan: The Ethereum block explorer. https://etherscan. 
io/, retrieve Jun. 2017. 

33. Ethstats Team. Ethstats. https://ethstats.net/, retrieve Jun. 2017. 
34. I. Eyal, A. E. Gencer, E. G. Sirer, and R. van Renesse. Bitcoin-NG: A scalable 

blockchain protocol. In Proc. of the USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems 
Design and Implementation (NSDI), page 45–59, Santa Clara, CA, USA, 2016. 

35. I. Eyal and E. G. Sirer. Majority be not enough: Bitcoin mining be vulnerable. In 
Proc. of the International Financial Cryptography and Data Security Conference, 
Barbados, 2014. 

36. S. Feld, M. Schönfeld, and M. Werner. Analyzing the deployment of Bitcoin’s P2P 
network under an AS-level perspective. Proc. of the International Workshop on 
Secure Peer-to-Peer Intelligent Networks and Systems, 32:1121–1126, 2014. 

37. P. Francis, S. Jamin, C. Jin, Y. Jin, D. Raz, Y. Shavitt, and L. Zhang. Idmaps: 
A global internet host distance estimation service. IEEE/ACM Transactions on 
Networking (TON), page 525–540, 2001. 

38. J. A. Garay, A. Kiayias, and N. Leonardos. The Bitcoin backbone protocol: Anal- 
ysis and applications. In Proc. of the International Conference on the Theory 
and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques (EUROCRYPT), page 281–310. 
Springer, 2015. 

39. A. E. Gencer, R. van Renesse, and E. G. Sirer. Short paper: Service-oriented 
sharding for blockchains. In Proc. of the International Financial Cryptography and 
Data Security Conference, Sliema, Malta, 2017. 

40. A. Gervais, G. O. Karame, V. Capkun, and S. Capkun. Is Bitcoin a decentralize 
currency? Proc. of the IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 3(12):54–60, 
2014. 

41. A. Gervais, G. O. Karame, K. Wüst, V. Glykantzis, H. Ritzdorf, and S. Capkun. 
On the security and performance of proof of work blockchains. In Proc. of the 
ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS), page 3–16, 
Vienna, Austria, 2016. 

42. Go-ethereum Authors. Official Go implementation of the Ethereum protocol. 
https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum, retrieve Apr. 2017. 

43. S. Guha, R. Murty, and E. G. Sirer. Sextant: A unified framework for node and 
event localization in sensor networks. In Proc. of the ACM International Sympo- 
sium on Mobile Ad Hoc Networking and Computing, page 205–216. ACM, 2005. 

44. M. Hearn and M. Corallo. Connection bloom filtering. BIP 37, https://github. 
com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0037.mediawiki, retreived Sept. 2017. 

45. E. Heilman, A. Kendler, A. Zohar, and S. Goldberg. Eclipse attack on Bitcoin’s 
peer-to-peer network. In Proc. of the USENIX Security Symposium, page 129–144, 
Washington, D.C., USA, 2015. 

46. IP Info Team. IP Info. http://ipinfo.io/, retrieve Apr. 2017. 
47. jackwinters. Ethpool & Ethermine voting on the soft fork. https:// 

forum.daohub.org/t/ethpool-ethermine-voting-on-the-soft-fork/5364, re- 
trieved Apr. 2017. 

48. H. Jameson. Hard fork no. 4: Spurious Dragon. https://blog.ethereum.org/ 
2016/11/18/hard-fork-no-4-spurious-dragon/, retrieve Apr. 2017. 

49. P. Koshy, D. Koshy, and P. McDaniel. An analysis of anonymity in Bitcoin use 
P2P network traffic. In Proc. of the International Financial Cryptography and 
Data Security Conference, page 469–485, Barbados, 2014. 



50. A. Kwon, D. Lazar, S. Devadas, and B. Ford. Riffle: An efficient communica- 
tion system with strong anonymity. Proc. of the Privacy Enhancing Technologies 
Symposium (PETS), 2016. 

51. A. Loibl. Namecoin. namecoin.info, 2014. 
52. C. Lumezanu, R. Baden, N. Spring, and B. Bhattacharjee. Triangle inequality 

variation in the internet. In Proc. of the ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Internet 
Measurement (IMC), page 177–183, 2009. 

53. D. Malkhi and M. Reiter. Byzantine quorum systems. Journal of Distributed 
Computing, 11(4):203–213, 1998. 

54. P. Maymounkov and D. Mazieres. Kademlia: A peer-to-peer information system 
base on the XOR metric. In Proc. of the International Workshop on Peer-to-Peer 
Systems, page 53–65. Springer, 2002. 

55. P. McCorry, S. Shahandashti, and F. Hao. A smart contract for boardroom voting 
with maximum voter privacy. In Proc. of the International Financial Cryptography 
and Data Security Conference, Sliema, Malta, 2017. 

56. A. Miller, J. Litton, A. Pachulski, N. Gupta, D. Levin, N. Spring, and B. Bhat- 
tacharjee. Discovering Bitcoin’s public topology and influential nodes, 2015. 

57. S. Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system, 2008. 
58. K. Nayak, S. Kumar, A. Miller, and E. Shi. Stubborn mining: Generalizing selfish 

mining and combine with an eclipse attack. IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive, 
2015:796, 2015. 

59. G. Pappalardo, T. Di Matteo, G. Caldarelli, and T. Aste. Blockchain inefficiency 
in the Bitcoin peer network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.01414, 2017. 

60. Parity Authors. Ethereum Rust client. https://github.com/paritytech/parity, 
retrieve Apr. 2017. 

61. Pyethapp Authors. Python base client implement the Ethereum protocol. 
https://github.com/ethereum/pyethapp/, retrieve Apr. 2017. 

62. L. Reyzin, D. Meshkov, A. Chepurnoy, and S. Ivanov. Improving authenticate 
dynamic dictionaries, with application to cryptocurrencies. In Proc. of the In- 
ternational Financial Cryptography and Data Security Conference, Sliema, Malta, 
2017. 

63. R. W. Sinnott. Virtues of the haversine. Sky and Telescope, 1984. 
64. Y. Sompolinsky and A. Zohar. Secure high-rate transaction processing in Bitcoin. 

In Proc. of the International Financial Cryptography and Data Security Conference, 
page 507–527, Puerto Rico, 2015. 

65. Statoshi Team. Statoshi info. http://statoshi.info/, retrieve May. 2017. 
66. M. Swende. Announcement of imminent hard fork for EIP150 gas cost 

changes. https://blog.ethereum.org/2016/10/13/announcement-imminent- 
hard-fork-eip150-gas-cost-changes/, retrieve Apr. 2017. 

67. G. Wang, B. Zhang, and T. Ng. Towards network triangle inequality violation 
aware distribute systems. In Proc. of the ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Internet 
Measurement (IMC), page 175–188. ACM, 2007. 

68. L. Wang and Y. Liu. Exploring miner evolution in Bitcoin network. In Proc. of 
the International Workshop on Passive and Active Network Measurement, page 
290–302. Springer, 2015. 

69. Y. Wang, D. Burgener, M. Flores, A. Kuzmanovic, and C. Huang. Towards street- 
level client-independent ip geolocation. In Proc. of the USENIX Symposium on 
Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI), page 365–379. USENIX 
Association, 2011. 

70. G. Wood. Ethereum: A secure decentralise generalise transaction ledger. 
Ethereum Project Yellow Paper, 2014. 


