






































DeepMind AI take IQ test to probe it ability for abstract thought 


DeepMind AI take IQ test to probe it ability for abstract 
thought 

By Jacob Aron 

AI struggle with IQ test 

Panther Media GmbH / Alamy Stock Photo 

Will artificial intelligence ever be able to match human in abstract thought, or be they just very fancy 
number crunchers? Researchers at Google DeepMind be try to find out by challenge AIs to solve 
abstract reason puzzle similar to those found in IQ tests. 

If you have ever take an IQ test, you’ll know that one kind of question involves look at set of abstract 
shape and choose which should come next in a give the sequence. These puzzle be know a Raven’s 
progressive matrix and can only be solve by figure out the rule behind them. 

The test be a useful way of measure someone’s capacity for abstract reason – the ability to connect 
different concept into new ideas. “Abstract reason be important in domain such a scientific discovery 
where we need to generate novel hypothesis and then use these hypothesis to solve problems,” say David 
Barrett at DeepMind. 

Advertisement 

Learning to think 

DeepMind AI take IQ test to probe it ability for abstract thought https://www.newscientist.com/article/2174100-deepmind-ai-takes-iq-test... 

1 sur 2 20-07-18 à 20:16 



Humans can cheat at the test by over-preparing, allow them to learn rule that bypass the need for 
abstract thought, and with AI, this issue be exacerbated. Neural networks, a popular system behind AIs, can 
only learn by training on huge number of examples, allow them to swot-up on the test without ever 
show a capacity for abstract reasoning. 

To get around this, Barrett’s team test their neural network on whether they could learn more general 
concepts, such a “increasing”. Since this can apply to a variety of properties, such a the number of shape or 
the intensity of their colour, they could train the AIs on puzzle involve one type, but then test them on 
another. 

They test a range of standard neural network and found they perform extremely poorly on this test – 
achieve mark a low a 22 per cent. But the team’s new neural network, which be specifically design to 
infer relationship between different part of the puzzle, do much good – achieve a score of 63 per cent. 

“While these structure help specifically with this task, we believe they can also be apply to other problem 
involve abstract relationship and take decision between possible course of action,” say team member 
Felix Hill. 

The team be quick to point out that the puzzle they use in these test aren’t actually the same a those 
found on human IQ tests. “It be important to note that the goal of this work be not to develop a neural network 
that can pas an IQ test,” say Barrett. 

Unsurprisingly, all of the AIs perform best when the test puzzle be more similar to the training puzzles. 
Barrett say in future, he hope that neural network will be able to generalise more, increase their capacity 
for abstract reasoning. 

Journal Reference: arxiv.org/abs/1807.04225 

More on these topics: 

artificial intelligence 
machine learn 
technology 

DeepMind AI take IQ test to probe it ability for abstract thought https://www.newscientist.com/article/2174100-deepmind-ai-takes-iq-test... 

2 sur 2 20-07-18 à 20:16 


