






































Deep Root Analytics sue after data breach - Business Insider 


Sean Gallup/Getty Images 

GOP data firm that expose million of 
Americans' personal information be face it 
first class-action lawsuit 

NATASHA BERTRAND 
JUN. 22, 2017, 10:51 AM 

A data-analytics firm hire by the 
Republican National Committee 
last year to gather political 
information about US 
voter accidentally leak the 
sensitive personal detail of 
roughly 198 million citizen early 
this month. And it's now face it 
first class-action lawsuit. 

Deep Root Analytics, a data firm 
contract by the RNC, store 
detail of about 61% of the US 
population on an Amazon cloud 
server without password protection 
for roughly two week before it be 
discover by security researcher 
Chris Vickery on June 12. 

The class-action lawsuit, file by James and Linda McAleer of Florida and all others similarly situated, alleges 
Deep Root fail to "secure and safeguard the public's personally identifiable information such a names, 
addresses, email addresses, telephone numbers, date of birth, reddit.com browsing history, and voter ID 
number, which Deep Root collect from many sources, include the Republican National Committee." 

The data expose by Deep Root include 1.1 terabyte "of entirely unsecured personal information" compile by 
Deep Root and at least two other Republican contractors, TargetPoint Consulting, Inc., and Data Trust, accord 
to an analysis from the cybersecurity firm UpGuard. 

"In total, the personal information of potentially near all of America's 200 million register voter be exposed, 
include names, date of birth, home addresses, phone numbers, and voter registration details, a well a data 
described a 'modeled' voter ethnicity and religions," UpGuard said. 

The lawsuit say that President Donald Trump "is on record denounce these sort of breach a 'gross 
negligence.'" 

It say that "as a direct and proximite cause of Deep Root's conduct," those expose in the data breach may 
be vulnerable to identity theft and "a loss of privacy," and argue that the "actual damages" exceed $5 million. 

The expose information do not include highly sensitive information like Social Security numbers, and much of 
it be publicly available voter-registration data provide by state government officials, a company spokesman 
told Business Insider on Tuesday. 

"Since this event have come to our attention, we have update the access setting and put protocol in place to 
prevent further access," Deep Root say in a statement. "We take full responsibility for this situation." 

Deep Root didn't immediately respond to a request for comment Wednesday. 

But the expose database combine people's personal information and political inclination — include 
proprietary information gather via predictive model tool — to create a detailed profile of nearly 200 
million Americans that would be a "gold mine" for anyone look to target and manipulate voters, say Archie 
Agarwal, the founder of the cybersecurity firm ThreatModeler. 

"This be the mother lode of all leaks," Agarwal say Monday. "Governments be make or broken on this. I don't 
even have the word to describe it." 

Joe Loomis, the founder and chief technology officer at the cybersecurity firm CyberSponse, predict that a 
series of lawsuit against Deep Root over the accidental leak would prove damaging. 

"Even if it be human error and not intentional, one IT person be probably go to put this company out of 
business," he said. 

Read the full complaint below: 

McAleer v. Deep Root by natasha bertrand on Scribd 

Deep Root Analytics sue after data breach - Business Insider http://www.businessinsider.com/deep-root-analytics-sued-after-data-brea... 

1 sur 2 16/07/2017 18:52 



Deep Root Analytics sue after data breach - Business Insider http://www.businessinsider.com/deep-root-analytics-sued-after-data-brea... 

2 sur 2 16/07/2017 18:52 


