







































We should use nuke to deflect asteroids, say astro algorithm 


We should use nuke to deflect 
asteroids, say astro algorithm 

By Jacob Aron 

asteroid 

What could we do if an asteroid be on a collision course with Earth? 

Detlev Van Ravenswaay/Science Photo Library 

IF AN asteroid be set to hit Earth, humanity would have to scramble to 

conduct the world’s riskiest experiment. We have never try to shove a 

space rock off it course, so any defence effort would be a shot in the 

dark. 

People have come up with idea – like chuck nuclear weapon at an 

incoming threat – but with limited asteroid defence budgets, which 

should we pursue? An algorithm call the Deflector Selector say 

nuke would do the job about half the time. 

To be clear, Erika Nesvold, formerly at the Carnegie Institution for 

Science in Washington DC, and her team don’t suggest we give a 

computer free reign over nuclear missiles. “We be absolutely not 

advocate put the algorithm in charge of asteroid defence,” she 

says. 

Advertisement 

Instead, their machine learn algorithm can study a population of 

potentially hazardous objects, and determine which technology have the 

best chance of deflect them from Earth’s path. 

To build the algorithm, Nesvold and her colleague simulated six 

million hypothetical object with the potential to hit Earth. Next, they 

look at how early each could be detect before collision, and the 

velocity change need to knock it off course. Finally, they look at 

which of three technology would be best at do this: nuclear 

weapons, kinetic impactors or gravity tractors. 

Nuclear weapon release an explosive force, while a kinetic impactor be 

We should use nuke to deflect asteroids, say astro algorithm https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg23731653-800-we-should-use-... 

1 sur 2 12-03-18 à 19:04 

lphilippe 
Texte surligné 
In clear, ML be use here a a powerful interpolator!!! 



essentially like try to shoot one bullet out of the air with a much 

small one. Gravity tractor be more subtle. The idea here be to put a 

spacecraft near an asteroid, and let it gravitational pull slowly tug the 

rock off course, but the concept hasn’t be tested. 

All this number crunch require a cluster of 100 computer core 

run for around 40 hours. To bring the timing down, the researcher 

turn to machine learning. Using the simulation a training data, they 

taught an algorithm to study a give population of object and decide 

which tech have the best chance of deflection. Nesvold say after the 

algorithm be trained, it can supply an answer in second instead of 

hours. 

The team try their train algorithm on three populations: hazardous 

near-Earth asteroids, comet and rubble pile – loose collection of 

material, rather than solid objects. In each case, nuclear weapon could 

tackle about 50 per cent of the objects. Kinetic impactors and gravity 

tractor have low success rate (arxiv.org/abs/1802.00458). 

That might suggest we should invest in nuclear weapon a our asteroid 

defence of choice, but there be issue when it come to mount these 

on rockets. “The risk create by pursue a nuclear asteroid defence 

programme would far outweigh the actual risk pose by asteroid 

impacts,” say Eric Christensen at the Catalina Sky Survey. 

The gravity tractor success rate improve when the asteroid be 

spot earlier. “That point to the need for good asteroid monitoring 

and detection surveys,” say Nesvold. “Earlier detection of potential 

impactors will provide more lead time to plan and execute a mission,” 

agrees Christensen. 

This article appear in print under the headline “Deflector Selector 

say nuke asteroids” 

We should use nuke to deflect asteroids, say astro algorithm https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg23731653-800-we-should-use-... 

2 sur 2 12-03-18 à 19:04 


