









































Microsoft Word - Design for trust camera ready final.docx 


Design for Trust: An Exploration of the Challenges and 
Opportunities of Bitcoin Users 

Corina Sas 
Lancaster University 

Lancaster, UK 
corina@comp.lancs.ac.uk 

Irni Eliana Khairuddin 
Universiti Teknologi MARA 

Selangor, Malaysia 
irnieliana@salam.uitm.edu.my 


ABSTRACT 
Bitcoin be a cryptocurrency which have receive increase 
interest over the last five years. Built upon a decentralize 
peer to peer system, it support transparent, fast, cost 
effective, and irreversible transactions, without the need for 
trust third party financial institutions. We know however 
little about people’s motivation and experience with bitcoin 
currency. This paper report on interview with 20 bitcoin 
user in Malaysia about their experience and trust 
challenges. Findings show that bitcoins be use more a 
store of value for speculative investment or savings’ 
protection. The paper advance the HCI theory on trust by 
identify main bitcoin characteristic and their impact on 
trust, such a decentralization, unregulation, embed 
expertise, and reputation, a well a transactions’ 
transparency, low cost, and easiness to complete. We 
discus insecure transactions, the risk of dishonest trader 
and it mitigate strategies. The paper concludes with 
design implication include support for the transparency 
of two-way transactions, tool for materialize trust, and 
tool for support reversible transactions. 

Author Keywords 
Bitcoin users; blockchain; trust; dishonest traders; risks. 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interface and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 

INTRODUCTION 
Bitcoin be a special form of alternative currency: a digital 
cryptocurrency described a the first open and decentralize 
currency [23], whose transaction be record on an open 
source, and publicly distribute ledger. This blockchain 
technology allows for secure and transparent transactions, 
while protect the identity of transaction’s party [39]. 
On the one hand, such an innovative form of financial 
transaction appear particularly appeal to bitcoin users. 


Figure 1: Merchant’s sign for accept bitcoin payment 

For example, in a preliminary study, Khairuddin and Sas 
[26] interviewed 9 user and identify three motivation for 
bitcoin use: the role of bitcoin technology in a monetary 
revolution, users’ increase empowerment due to the open, 
decentralize and unregulated technology, and their 
perception of the increase value of bitcoins. On the other 
hand, blockchain’s characteristic a a decentralize and 
pseudo-anonymous platform can pose important trust 
challenge to bitcoin user such a illicit use and 
cyberattacks [15,53]. We argue that because of these 
characteristics, blockchain offer a unique case study for 
the exploration of trust. This contrast with most HCI 
model of trust which have be inform by empirical 
work on e-commerce or e-payment system which be 
traditionally centralized, regulated, and non-anonymous. 
Hence the feasibility of these model for theorize about 
users’ trust in bitcoin require exploration. 

Since it begin in 2009, blockchain technology have 
steer increase research interest predominantly in the 
area of cryptography, security, and peer to peer computing. 
Relevant HCI work have just start to emerge [5,26,43]. We 
still know little about bitcoin user and their experience or 
how different blockchain’s characteristic impact on trust. 
This paper address this gap, by reporting on interview 
with 20 bitcoin user about their motivation and 
experience of use bitcoins and their trust related issues. 
We address the follow research questions: 
• Which be the motif for early adoption and use of 

bitcoins? How do people learn about bitcoin and how 
do they use bitcoins for? 

• How different blockchains’ characteristic impact on 
the various dimension of trust? 

• Which be the main trust challenge and how do people 
attempt to mitigate them? 

Permission to make digital or hard copy of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use be grant without fee provide that copy be 
not make or distribute for profit or commercial advantage and that copy 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
component of this work own by others than ACM must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit be permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to 
post on server or to redistribute to lists, require prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permission from Permissions@acm.org. 
CHI 2017, May 06-11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA 
© 2017 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4655-9/17/05…$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025886 

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA 

6499 



The main contribution of this work include advance the 
theoretical discourse of trust in HCI, by extend it to 
unregulated, decentralize and pseudo-anonymous system 
such a blockchain. We also identify three design 
implication for support users’ trust. 

RELATED WORK 
While the topic of trust have be well research by various 
disciplines, for our work we select theory developed in 
HCI, particularly for e-payment and e-commerce. 

Trust in HCI 
We agree with the definition of trust a the willingness to 
be vulnerable [13]. In HCI there be two main direction of 
conceptualize trust: trust between people and technology, 
and trust between people interact with technology. 
Specific HCI work explore people’s trust in bitcoin 
technology be just start to emerge. For example, in their 
framework for explore the trust challenge of bitcoin 
technology, Sas and Khairuddin [43] identify three 
dimension of trust: technological (users’ trust in bitcoin 
technology), social (trust between and among bitcoin’s 
stakeholders: users, miners, exchange and merchants), and 
institutional trust (government trust in bitcoin technology). 

Two prevalent HCI model be the model of online trust 
[13], and the framework on mechanic of trust [41]. 
Corritore and colleague [13] identify three trust factor 
include users’ perception of technology’s credibility, ease 
of use, and risk. Their four dimension of credibility 
include honesty (well intention, truthful and unbiased 
actions), expertise (knowledge, experience and 
competence), predictability (expectation that technology 
will act consistently base on past experience), and 
reputation (recognized past performance). The model have 
be extensively apply to web design in e-government, e- 
commerce, and e-banking, but it value for blockchain 
technology have receive limited attention. The model also 
share similarity with Davis’ [16] emphasis on usefulness 
and ease of use in his technology acceptance model. 

The framework on mechanic of trust [41] investigates 
technology-mediated trust between user and have be 
apply to e-commerce. This framework identifies two key 
property warrant trust in transaction’s partner: 
contextual and intrinsic properties. Contextual property 
be described a temporal, social and institutional 
embeddedness. Temporal embeddedness refers to parties’ 
potential for engage in future transactions, and interest in 
their relationship’s longevity. This in turn prevents the risk 
of defection, a the present gain come at the cost of future 
lose ones. Temporal embeddedness require traceability of 
action through “repeated interaction with stable identities” 
[p9, 41] so that the trustor can accumulate more knowledge 
and make good prediction about the trustee’s future 
behavior. Social embeddedness capture the exchange of 
information among trustor about trustees’ past 
performance. This motivates the trustee to fulfil the 
agreement in order to protect his reputation among the 

large pool of trustor access information about his past 
performances. Institutional embeddedness capture the legal 
aspect underpin transactions, able to enforce sanction 
such a litigation or punishment for the party who do not 
fulfil their agreement. Given this protection by the law 
institutions, the trustor be comfortable to engage in 
transaction with trustor of whom they know little. 

Intrinsic property of the trustee include his ability or 
motivation to act in a trustworthy manner inferable on the 
basis of his credibility; internalize norm which capture 
trustee’s integrity or respect for moral principle which can 
be support by the parties’ social identify and presence; 
and benevolence capture trustee’s concern for the 
wellbeing of the other [41]. Benevolence resembles 
Hardin’s theory of trust [24] and the encapsulate interest: 
parties’ interest in relationship which tends to be rich and 
ongoing. He also discus risk a the uncertainty of 
trustee’s choice to engage in betrayal or deflection; risk 
which be good mitigate in group or thick relationship 
where trustee’s reputation be socially embedded. 

To summarize, HCI model of trust identify key factor 
impact on users’ trust in technology or in each other 
during technology-mediated transactions. There be however 
limited work on investigate the feasibility of these model 
for the exploration of trust in bitcoin technology. 

Alternative Crypto Currency 
Historically, people create object a medium of exchange 
to replace the barter system [45]. Such object include 
shells, stone or anything valuable to both buyer and seller. 
The argument of the medium of exchange be late 
extend in the 17th century through fiat money [17]: coin 
of precious metal issue and declare valuable by the king. 
Such coin be commonly deposit with goldsmith for 
safekeeping, and in return, the owner be give receipt 
call goldsmith’s note [51]. The goldsmith role be late 
take on by the government institution issue fiat money 
through their treasury or central banks, so that nowadays 
the national fiat currency be the dominant medium of 
exchange for trading good or services. They also serve the 
role of store value for future purchase, and of unit of 
account in which good and service could be priced. Over 
the last five century however, alternative medium of 
exchange have also emerge a substitute to national fiat 
currency [21], mostly for support local economy and 
their community [20]. Developed privately, most of the 
alternative currency have no legal tender and be not 
regulate by national government [28]. Alternative 
currency have also emerge a unregulated digital 
currency issue and control by developers, and use by 
member of virtual community [18]. 

Bitcoin Technology 
A more recent development of alternative currency be 
crypto currency built through cryptographic algorithms. 
Among the over 500 cryptocurrencies available in the 
current market [12], bitcoin be one of the most popular ones. 

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA 

6500 



Designed by Nakamoto, an anonymous entity, bitcoin be 
underpinned by the blockchain technology [39] which have 
receive increase interest from both the financial and 
industrial sector [50]. The blockchain consists of a ledger 
distribute throughout a peer to peer network of node 
which record each transaction after it have be approved. 
Transactions in blockchain be represent a single data 
structure and from user’s perspective they involve three 
key components: the address where the bitcoins be stored; 
the private key own by the user to send bitcoins; and the 
wallet software, which run on user’s personal computer, 
use to receive, send or store bitcoins [47]. Each bitcoin 
transaction be create by the wallet software and 
broadcast to the network where it be test for validity 
and include in the blockchain. 

Unlike in the banking system, the blockchain ledger be not 
maintain by a central authority and the verification of 
transaction be not ensure by trust third parties. Instead 
transaction be verify and authorize by miner use 
secure crypto algorithm [15] ensure thus core security 
function [4]. A negative consequence of this unregulation 
be the feud between government and blockchain, with 
some central institution have fail to recognize it 
legality [49]. Previous work have also identify some 
scamming cyber threat face by the bitcoin user such a 
scam related to fake website, ponzi scheme, phishing, and 
application plugin [53]. As the ledger be public, blockchain 
be also know a a transparent system: each machine 
connect to the blockchain can download a full copy of the 
ledger, allow for browsing or query the global history 
of transaction a well a the remain balance of the 
bitcoins left in each wallet address [47]. Since it no longer 
require trust in third party entity to keep the ledger, 
blockchain technology have be call trustless. 

In Nakamoto’s view [39] the concept of irreversible 
transaction and trust be strongly coupled. The blockchain 
aim to address the key weakness of the traditional trust 
base model where financial institution act a trust third 
party to mediate e-payments. Bank transaction however 
be costly both in time and fees. They can also be reverse 
by the banks, in order to arbitrate dispute between the 
trading parties. The problem however be that the bank be 
not bound to enforce the contract between the trading 
parties, so that refund may be approve even if the 
contract stipulates otherwise. In contrast, blockchain be 
intend to eliminate this middle link and it high cost, a 
well a the option of reverse transactions. 

Another important aspect of the blockchain be protect the 
privacy of the party involve in bitcoin transaction [39]. 
A similar functionality be available in the banking system 
where the privacy be ensure by limit access to 
transaction information to the involve party and the 
bank. However, the protection of privacy in blockchain be 
even stronger, since it do not require any personally 
identifiable information in order to allow user to engage in 

bitcoin transactions. This make the blockchain pseudo- 
anonymous [4]: the wallet address be public while the 
identity of it owner be not [39]. It be however users’ 
responsibility to ensure that the two be never link [15]. 
To support this, Nakamoto suggest the use of new wallet 
address for each transaction [39]. The pseudo-anonymous 
nature of blockchain technology let it open to misuse on 
the online black market such a Silk Road, with negative 
consequence for blockchain’s reputation [15]. 

To conclude, the technology underpin bitcoin 
transaction have be purposefully design a 
decentralize and secure, unregulated and transparent yet 
pseudo-anonymous. These unique strength of the 
blockchain also relate to some trust challenge such a 
illicit use or damage reputation. There be however limited 
empirical study explore the relationship between 
blockchain’s property and users’ trust [30,33]. 

METHOD 
We recruit 20 bitcoin users, 18 male, 2 female, (mean age 
30, range 21-50). Six participant have less than 6 month 
experience of use bitcoins, 8 participant have between 6 
month and 2 years, while the remain 6 have more than 
2 years. In term of educational background, half of 
participant have Bachelor degrees, 7 be school leavers, 
and 3 have Master degrees. Participants have a broad range of 
occupations: 8 in administrative roles, 4 in financial and 
marketing sector, 3 school teachers, 2 unemployed, 1 in 
medical field, 1 in IT and 1 student. Each participant be 
reward RM50 (equivalent to £10 in Malaysian currency). 
Participants be recruit from five Facebook and 
Telegram group of Malaysian bitcoin users, join by the 
second author. Malaysia offer a specific opportunity for 
the exploration of bitcoin practices. On the one hand, 
despite five decade of economic growth, it be still a 
develop country with increase inflation rate, 
underdeveloped democracy and a financial system which be 
now under the scrutiny of law enforcement. On the other 
hand, Malaysia experience a massive growth of remittance 
and payment market, and interest in crypto currency, be 
in 2016 the first develop country consider 
Fintech regulation. Over the last year it also ranked fourth 
on bitcoin search on Google Trends, and first among 
develop country on the number of bitcoin nodes. 

The invitation for take part in the study be both 
publicly post and privately sent to the most active 
member in each of the online groups. We also apply 
snowball sample so that six more participant be 
introduce by the interviewed ones. We conduct semi- 
structure interview between April and May 2016, to 
explore users’ motivation, understand and use of bitcoin. 
We asked: “why be you interested in bitcoin”, “how do 
you learn about bitcoin” and “which be the benefit and 
challenge of use bitcoins”. We also ask about users’ 
challenge and trust-related issues: “what be the 
challenge that you face when use or engage with 

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA 

6501 



bitcoin technology”, and “how much trust do you have in 
bitcoin technology”, and follow up with additional 
question on perceive security and anonymity. Not at least, 
we explore participants’ perception of risk and their 
mitigation strategies: “did you experience any fraud”, and 
“will you take any action to prevent that in the future”. 

The interview take place via Skype or phone. They last 
at least an hour, be audio record and fully transcribed. 
The analysis involve a hybrid approach where exist 
concept be use for the deductive cod while new 
concept ground on the empirical data, contribute to the 
inductive cod [19]. The deductive cod include 
concept from the HCI literature on trust such a 
technological, social and institutional dimension of trust 
[43], factor of user’s trust in technology such a 
credibility, ease of use, and risk [13], and property 
warrant trust between technology user such a 
temporal, social and institutional embeddedness, a well a 
credibility, integrity and benevolence [41]. We have also 
use concept related to blockchains’ characteristic such a 
decentralization, unregulation, pseudo-anonymity, a well 
a transparent and irreversible transactions. The cod list 
be iteratively refine in the light of the interview data, a 
new code emerge under the theme of motivation, insecure 
transaction and risk mitigate strategies. 

RESULTS 
We start by outline users’ motivation for engage with 
bitcoin technology, follow by a description of it key 
characteristic and their impact on users’ trust. In particular, 
we highlight the issue of insecure transaction and the 
associate human and technology-related risks. We further 
unpack the risk of deal with dishonest traders, and the 
mitigate strategy for address them. 

Motivation for the Use of Bitcoin Currency 
This section highlight the motivation of end users, people 
with limited knowledge of bitcoin technology, who adopt 
and engage in the use of bitcoins. The motivation and 
perception of early adopter towards bitcoins can be 
grouped accord to Davis’ technology acceptance model 
[16] in perceive usefulness, and ease of use. We further 
describe the perceive usefulness of bitcoins a an external 
motivational factor and it key economic rationale. 

Economic Rationale 
The economic aspect capture people’s distrust in financial 
institution and the government legitimize them. Several 
participant refer to the importance of protect one’s 
saving in the face of an unstable economic climate, 
dominate not only by inflation but also by governments’ 
decision to control personal bank account holders’ money 
and their movement [11]. For example, the follow quote 
be illustrative for a quarter of our participants: “From what I 
learn from the Cyprus crisis, government and bank 
have the authority to take your money from your account 
[…] the trust in financial institution be go forever. So I 
look for alternative and found Bitcoin to keep the 

savings” [P16]. This outcome provide support for the 
security motive for acquire money and bitcoins’ 
perceive value for provide safety when people distrust 
the world and the future [22], particularly in the context of 
inflation and economic downturn: “currently our currency 
be fall and I be worried. As a backup plan, I convert 
my money in gold or bitcoins, which be not influence by 
any big party or power” [P8]. This be interest a 
reflect the assumption of gold a commodity, which 
wrongly conflates gold’s long-run price stability with the 
absence of power for regulate it price: while such power 
do not need to belong to centralize banks, it still require 
government’s authority [6]. 

A third economic reason underpin the adoption of 
bitcoins be speculation on their future value. Almost half of 
participant share this view: “I keep my save in bitcoins 
[because] their future value will increase over time” [P11]. 
In such cases, participant purposely explore alternative 
mean of exchange for replace their volatile fiat currency 
in order to both protect saving and more importantly, to 
invest for future income. 

Social Learning 
Findings indicate that in order to learn about the bitcoin 
currency, participant leverage the emerge social network 
of bitcoin users. This social aspect underpin the initial 
motivation of bitcoin’s early adopter include online 
community where most of participant have heard for the 
first time what bitcoin currency is: “The first time I heard 
[about bitcoins] be from the Reddit forum”. After find 
out about the bitcoin currency and it potential value, 
participant described their effort to learn more through 
self-guided online research: “First I read about bitcoin 
online in 2009, [and] in 2013 I could see the price rise 
up, so I start to learn more about” [P7]. An additional 
source of information about bitcoin be peer and friends: “I 
start to know about bitcoin a few year ago, when my 
friend told me about the wallet, the process and how 
bitcoins could eliminate banks’ transactions” [P3].This 
quote indicates how some early adopter champion the use 
of bitcoin currency by highlight it advantage against 
the national fiat currencies. 

Uses of Bitcoins 
While most of the literature describes bitcoins a 
cryptocurrency [8,12], our finding indicate that they be 
use predominantly a store of value, i.e., predictably 
valuable for late use. Eight participant use bitcoins on a 
regular basis to generate income, 7 use them occasionally 
for investment, while 5 be full time investors. This be 
interesting, because, bitcoins experience high volatility 
which make them on the long-term unreliable store of 
value [52]. It appear that the complete control over one’s 
saving be prefer over the less volatile yet less 
controllable fiat currency. Such characteristic be share 
by other cryptocurrencies such a litecoin and swisscoin 
also use by our participants. 

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA 

6502 



Another surprising find be that we have see only three 
isolated account of the use of bitcoin a currency for 
buying good or services, despite the grow number of 
merchant who accept bitcoins (Figure 1). Most of the 
payment be for online utility or phone bills, food, or 
mining equipment. For example one participant note the 
payment of his mobile phone’s prepaid credit with bitcoins 
[P10], while another refer to the payment of food 
supplement from a friend: “he just sent me his QR code and 
I scan the code and transfer the amount of bitcoins ” 
[P19]. In addition one participant mention both online 
and offline us of bitcoin currency: “I pay my utility bill 
in bitcoins from the cryptomarket.my. I even buy my 
cigarette from expedia.com, and use cheapair.com to buy 
my flight ticket and hotel booking too. Then there be a 
restaurant in Johor where I pay in bitcoins” [P12]. This 
diverse way of spending bitcoins a currency be an 
exception rather than the norm, a we fail to find any 
additional participant reporting similarly rich use of 
bitcoin currency. Interestingly, we only found one account 
of illegal purchase: “I bought an unlimited Spotify account 
from the dark web use bitcoin” [P1]. 

Blockchain’s Characteristics and their Impact on Trust 
We now describe the main characteristic of bitcoin 
technology, and how they contribute to trust in bitcoin. 
These include blockchain’s decentralization, unregulation, 
embed expertise and reputation, a well a transparent, 
low cost, easy, and insecure transactions. 

Decentralized Blockchain 
One of the main identify characteristic relates to the 
decentralize nature of bitcoin technology [47]. Findings 
indicate that most participant appreciate that bitcoin 
transaction do not involve any third party involvement 
from financial institutions: “A decentralize currency be a 
bit more secure in term of handle it be same like an asset. 
So if nobody else [third party] handle the asset, it be more 
secure for me to handle it by myself” [P20]. The 
decentralization of blockchain also foster confidence in it 
clear intention to circumvent, arguably dishonest central 
financial institutions. This in turn provide support for 
honesty a a dimension of credibility in Corritore and 
colleagues’ [13] model of online trust. 

People also understand the reduce need for the 
complicate authorization process for send and receive 
money: “if you look at the current banking system, it take 
three work day to do the settlement, but with blockchain 
you can settle it instantly” [P3]. This quote illustrates the 
appreciation for quicker transfer of money between 
accounts, and therefore the ease of use. 

Unregulated Blockchain 
Participants also express appreciation for the unregulated 
aspect of blockchain technology. As a result, more than half 
of participant perceive this a an opportunity to become 
more empower and privileged to regain control over their 
own money: “All government love to control people [but] 

they cannot control bitcoin, and that’s why they cannot 
accept it. Bitcoin be people’s money give them financial 
freedom” [P14]. This be a militant statement, which link 
back to the initial motivation for engage with blockchain 
technology: the erosion of trust in financial and government 
institution couple with the economic crisis [43]. 

Unregulation set no limit for send and receive 
money, which can take place either locally or worldwide: “I 
see no boundary for people to do trading globally or 
nationwide; a freedom to do the trading without any 
restriction from the authority” [P2]. As a decentralize and 
unregulated system, the risk of abuse of power over 
individuals’ personal asset be highly restricted. This 
confirms a limitation of the perceive risk a the third 
dimension of the model of online trust [13]. Several 
participant refer to the benefit of blockchain’s pseudo- 
anonymity, and it value in support unregulation a 
illustrate by this quote: “we can keep our money a much 
a we want and the government will not able to freeze our 
wallet because of the pseudo-anonymity” [P11]. 

Blockchain’s Embedded Expertise 
Another characteristic of bitcoin technology be people’s 
appreciation for the expertise require for mining bitcoins 
and verify transactions. This be interest give that for 
example, mining a rig need limited technical knowledge. 
Findings however indicate that the cost require by the 
mining process provide a guarantee for the invest 
expertise and ultimately for the credibility of the blockchain 
technology: “producing bitcoins be not something easy. 
There be specific way to mine and expensive equipment 
needed” [P8]. As the competition and difficulty for mining 
bitcoins increase over time, more computationally intense 
mining equipment be need which in turn lead to high 
cost for produce bitcoins. Almost a quarter of 
participant mention this complexity and the cost of the 
mining procedure. Their appreciation for miners’ expertise 
foster credibility in bitcoin currency and transactions. This 
further confirms the credibility dimension of the online 
model of trust and it application to bitcoin technology [13]. 

Blockchain’s Reputation 
The reputation of the blockchain technology have be 
notoriously damage due to illicit activity on Silk Road, 
an anonymous online marketplace predominantly for 
narcotics, which us bitcoins a it exchange currency 
[10]. Four participant mention such reputation issue due 
also to current cybercrimes, since Silk Road be close 
down in 2013: “there be lot of crime due to bitcoin’s 
anonymity: money laundering, terrorist financing and tax 
evasion” [P15] but surprisingly, with limited reference to it 
negative impact on participants’ credibility in bitcoin 
technology. Interestingly, we also found instance where 
participant in fact value the grow reputation of bitcoin 
technology: “In the long term, this technology have a very 
bright future. There be lot of big company which start 
do research on blockchain” [P17]. This quote suggests 

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA 

6503 



that the large companies’ interest in blockchain offer 
alternative route for legitimize it authenticity and 
ultimately credibility. Apart from trust in blockchain, 
participant also refer to trust in bitcoin transactions. We 
now discus the main characteristic of bitcoin transaction 
and how they support or hinder trust. 

Transparent Transactions 
Our finding indicate an important and value characteristic 
of bitcoin transactions: their transparency [47]. The public 
ledger allows public access to the movement of bitcoins 
from one wallet to another. Users be able to track any 
bitcoin transaction from the very first one, until the present 
day: “because bitcoin us blockchain, we can see the 
movement of the bitcoins in a public ledger. It be very 
transparent” [P11]. Transparency echo technology’s 
credibility dimension in Corritore and colleagues’ [13] 
model of online trust, and it honesty dimension. 

Easy and Quick Transactions 
Another value characteristic of bitcoin transaction be their 
ease and speed of completion: “With bitcoin you can move 
your money globally in just a second; very easy” [P11]. A 
similar quote emphasize the ease of complete 
worldwide transaction by compare them with the ease of 
texting: “It be easy to move money from one country to 
another. It be just like you send a text message and the 
transaction be done” [P13]. The above outcome suggest 
that through transparent, easy, and quick transactions, 
people experience ease of use. According to Corritore and 
colleagues’ [13] model of online trust, ease of use be one of 
the three factor of trust. 

Low Cost Transactions 
A third value characteristic of bitcoin transaction be their 
low cost. A few participant provide quote to support 
this: “it only cost me 10 cent for each transaction” [P6]; or 
“the main benefit of transaction be that they be easy, fast 
and cheap” [P14]. These outcome indicate that 
transactions’ low cost could further contribute to reduce 
transactions’ perceive risk, a participant do not have to 
fear hidden or high costs. In their model of online trust, 
Corritore and colleagues’ [13] refer to risk a the third 
factor of trust, and explain the direct relationship between 
users’ perception of control and their trust. If the above 
characteristic support users’ trust in their bitcoin 
transactions, finding also indicate one characteristic which 
hinders trust which be further detailed. 

Insecure Transactions 
An important find be that despite the above 
characteristic support trust in blockchain technology 
and bitcoin transactions, participant also report their 
concern about the risk associate with insecure 
transactions. It be worth mention that insecure 
transaction do not concern miners’ cryptographic protocol 
for authorize transactions. Indeed, none of participant 
report concern about the security of this protocol, but 
strong trust in miners’ expertise and in the predictability of 

the protocol. Instead, insecure transaction relate to human 
error or malice and technology’s limitation to address them. 
More specifically, we identify four type of insecure 
transactions, three related to human factors: those due to 
user themselves, to the other person or entity engage in 
transaction, or to the third human party not engage in 
transactions; and one related to technology’s limitation to 
address them. We now discus the associate risk for each 
of these type of transactions. 

Risks Due to Users’ Challenges of Handling Passwords 
Six participant mention the risk of lose the password 
for their wallets, or the risk of insufficiently protect it. 
For example, the quote below illustrates this type of risk 
and it serious consequence of no longer be able to 
access one’s bitcoins from that wallet: “Make sure you 
don’t forget your password because blockchain do not 
keep your password […] it cannot be recover and you 
will lose all your bitcoins from that wallet” [P16]. 

The second risk of insufficiently protect the password 
can have equally serious consequence of have the bitcoins 
stolen: “I lose 30 bitcoins in the last month because of my 
own security mistake. I set up my wallet password the same 
a my email password. One day, my wife clicked on a 
phishing email and the hacker be able to get my email 
password and use it to log in to my bitcoin wallet” [P12]. 

In order to address these risks, some user mention the 
importance of take responsibility for securely store and 
protect their passwords: “As user we must know how to 
make sure that our bitcoins be secured. It be the same a 
protect our own cash or any personal valuable thing 
that can be steal by others” [P15]. Some participant even 
instal additional security application in their bitcoin 
wallet such a double authentication [P12], since although 
“the system be secured, the security responsibility be with the 
user. If anyone lose their bitcoins, the first person to be 
blame be themselves, not the system” [P14]. 

Risks Due to Hackers’ Malicious Attacks 
Three participant mention that insecure transaction be 
also due to malicious hacker attacks. We have see above 
that some of these involve phishing email to target wallet 
passwords. Such attack can penetrate even through double 
authentication: “you must make sure that your password be 
difficult to guess. A friend lose 14 bitcoins even though he 
apply double authentication on multiple devices” [P11]. 

Risks Due to Failure to Recover from Human Error or Malice 
Although a third of participant consider themselves 
responsible to secure their bitcoins, a few also indicate that 
the recovery from users’ failure to protect their password 
or from hackers’ attack be limitedly support by the 
bitcoin technology. The main imitation here be that 
transaction be irreversible: “let’s say the hacker have 
divert the money to another bitcoin wallet address; you 
will never know where your money have be transfer to 
and you cannot reverse the transaction either” [P1]. This be 

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA 

6504 



an interest finding, indicate a drawback of the 
blockchain technology. The rationale for irreversible 
transaction address the limitation of the centralize 
financial system which allows reversible transaction 
without be bound to enforce the parties’ contract state 
that the sale be final [39]. However, a suggest in the 
above quote, this design feature fails to account for 
malicious transaction due to hacking, or to the dishonesty 
of the trading parties, a further detailed. 

It be important to make the distinction between how 
transaction be represent in blockchain, i.e., data 
structure allow the transfer of bitcoins from one 
electronic wallet to another; and how our participant 
perceive transactions: a two-way transfer of bitcoins and 
money/goods. Unlike the one-way remittance transaction 
well support by the bitcoin technology [27], all 
transaction report by participant be two-way, with both 
party send and receive assets. Although most 
transaction involve buying or sell bitcoins against fiat 
currency, participant be only able to track one side of 
the transaction, namely the movement of bitcoins capture 
within the blockchain. This raise major risk and trust 
issue particularly in relation to potentially dishonest 
trading partners, a the untracked part of transaction do 
not allow for scrutiny. This issue be further emphasize 
when deal with trader who be not authorize entities. 

Risks Related to Dishonest Partner of Transaction 
Findings indicate that a considerable risk factor be dishonest 
partner with whom one engages in bitcoin transactions. A 
quarter of participant report incident where either them, 
or their close friend have be cheat and their trust 
betrayed: “I transfer some bitcoins but the buyer didn’t 
pay me” [P6]. This quote illustrates the importance of 
know about the transaction partner. This point have be 
mention by other participant who express concern 
about strangers’ unknown reputation: “you don’t know 
whether the seller be scam or not” [P1]. 

Strategies for Mitigating the Risks of Dishonest Traders 
We identify five strategy for deal with dishonest 
transaction partners, and for mitigate their risks. These 
strategy involve two form of trading: directly with 
another person, or through online exchanges, i.e. service 
for match price and offer between bitcoin seller and 
buyers. These strategy be further described start with 
the most frequent one, and we shall see that the run 
theme across these strategy be the traders’ pseudo- 
anonymity and the unregulation of blockchain technology. 

Trade with Authorized Exchanges 
The online exchange be by far the first and most prefer 
form of transaction, mostly because it regulation support 
users’ trust. Indeed, although bitcoin technology and it 
cryptographic protocol be unregulated, exchange require 
authorization from the financial service such a Financial 
Conduct Authority [54]. For example, five participant 
mention their check of exchangers’ credentials: “I do 

look at their background, and legal term condition and 
from there I put trust on the exchange” [P2]. The 
exchanges’ website be crucial for foster trust: “a 
proper website, [indicating the amount of] trading, and 
testimonial [supports] trust on the exchange” [P3]. 

This extends previous HCI finding on the value of website 
for trust [3,38], to the context of cryptocurrency 
transactions. An additional source of trust be the option to 
contact directly the exchange’s agents: “I prefer this 
exchange because they have their representative to contact 
if there be any problem or question to ask” [P12]. In turn, 
this make users’ relationship with the exchanges, a more 
personal one. Apart from be authorize by financial 
services, and have credible websites, exchange also 
foster trust in transaction partners, a they require seller 
and buyer to register and have their identity verified. This 
be an important finding, indicate way to address the 
extensive concern around traders’ pseudo-anonymity. 
Surprisingly, only one participant report the use of the 
escrow service (third party hold the asset to be release 
once both party be satisfied with the transaction). 
Findings indicate that ease of use be negatively impact by 
the use of the escrow, because of it additional registration 
requirements: “it be easy and faster to do the transaction 
[directly] with other traders” [P10]. 

These finding provide support for the contextual property 
described in the framework on mechanic of trust [41], 
warrant users’ trust in exchange because of their 
successful performance and the expectation that they will 
perform consistently well in the future (temporal 
embeddedness), exchanges’ reputation (social 
embeddedness), and their legally authorize service 
(institutional embeddedness). We also found evidence for 
the intrinsic property warrant trust in exchanges, for 
example through social presence of professional website 
and contactable local representative (integrity), a well a 
reputation through testimonial (credibility). 

Trade with Socially Authorized Traders 
In comparison with exchanges, deal with individual 
trader offer weaker risk mitigate strategies. The 
strong strategy be deal with socially authorize 
traders. These be well-known, de-anonymized member of 
online group who regularly join discussion and trade 
bitcoins. Thus they become trust and their name be 
add by the group administrator to an online list of 
verify traders: “I only buy from authorize trader a lot 
of friend experienced scam and huge losses” [P18]. The 
label of authorize trader be usually provide within an 
online group of bitcoin user on the basis of a series of 
successful de-anonymized transactions. This outcome 
indicates the crucial value of de-anonymity for credibility 
and trust. These finding also provide evidence for the 
framework on mechanic of trust [41] warrant users’ 
trust in authorize trader (temporal and social 
embeddedness), but limited institutional embeddedness. 

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA 

6505 



Trade with Reputable Individual Traders 
If an authorize trader cannot be found, participant engage 
in a weaker risk mitigate strategy: deal with reputable 
traders. Unlike trader authorize by an online user group, 
reputable one benefit only by credibility by proxy, from a 
few group member who have engage in successful 
transaction with these traders. For example, participant 
indicate the use of peers’ or friends’ recommendations: “I 
knew the trader from the telegram group, and a few 
recommendation from friend who can be trusted” [P8]. 
Almost half of participant note that their first point of 
contact for background check on an unknown trader be their 
online group “If I be deal with stranger, I will ask in 
my online group to verify that particular person. If they 
don’t know him I will not proceed with the transaction” 
[P10]. In addition, more than half of participant mention 
their preference for know trader whom they have have 
successfully trust in the past: “Most of them be my close 
friends, so I have no problem trust them” [P20]. This 
show the value of reputation and benevolence in 
support traders’ credibility [13]. These finding confirm 
the framework on mechanic of trust [41] warrant users’ 
trust in trader because of their reputation (social 
embeddedness and credibility), and when deal with 
friends, because of perceive integrity and benevolence. 

Trade with De-anonymized Individual Traders 
Although less common and mostly due to lack of 
experience, sometimes bitcoin user engage in transaction 
with unknown traders. In such cases, finding indicate that 
seldom the trader remain unknown, a we identify two 
mechanism for ensure traders’ de-anonymization: face to 
face meeting, or online share of their IDs. For example, 
several participant express the view that they only 
proceed with the transaction if the trader be willing to de- 
anonymize. One way of achieve this be through face to 
face meeting, where both side of the transaction take place 
simultaneously, i.e., the exchange of bitcoins and fiat 
currency or goods: “We cannot trust them online. We need 
to see that person and to do cash on delivery” [P4]. Other 
participant require trader to de-anonymize by email 
their copy of personal ID: “I need to know their identity” 
[P5]. This strategy do not provide any contextual factor 
to allow users’ trust in unknown trader for whom they 
have no reputation-related information (neither social nor 
institutional embeddedness) [41]. Hence, user attempt to 
develop institutional embeddedness by de-anonymizing the 
traders, or by reduce the risk of asynchronous transaction 
altogether through face to face meeting to perform 
synchronous two-way exchanges. 

Regulating Bitcoin 
In order to address the challenge of dishonest traders, many 
participant express the wish that bitcoin becomes 
regulated: “I think we must demand to our politician to 
regulate bitcoin” [P1]. This be an important find 
indicate a high level strategy which do not address 
the trading itself but the unregulated nature of blockchain. 

THEORETICAL IMPLICATIONS 
We now reflect on the value of these finding for advance 
the HCI discourse on trust. We also discus the specific 
tension that unregulation and pseudo-anonymity bring to 
trust. Our implication be mostly relevant for bitcoin user 
in develop contexts. They may also hold value for 
understand and support trust in cryptocurrencies in 
general in both develop and developed contexts, but 
future work be require to explore this. 

Towards a Model of Trust among Bitcoin Users 
Our finding advance the understand of users’ trust in 
blockchain technology and in transaction partners. We 
argue for the feasibility of the consider HCI theory 
[13,41,43] for identify key blockchain’s characteristic 
support users’ trust: decentralization, unregulation, 
miners’ expertise, a well a transparent, easy, and low cost 
transactions. The main trust challenge experienced by 
bitcoin user be the risk of insecure transactions, and in 
particular that of deal with dishonest traders. 

We start by discuss the finding in the light of Sas and 
Khairuddin’s [43] bitcoin trust framework. Our finding 
suggest that technological trust of bitcoin user in 
blockchain technology be strong, a participant value it 
secure cryptographic protocol. This extends prior finding 
on users’ challenge to secure their bitcoins [29] with their 
willingness to take responsibility for their weak, easy to 
break wallet passwords. 

Findings also indicate novel insight into the social 
dimension of trust among bitcoin users. The main challenge 
here relates to dishonest bitcoin traders. With respect to 
different stakeholders, it be worth mention that our 
finding capture the blurring of the boundary between 
merchant and user when the object of transaction be 
bitcoins. In fact, we found little evidence that bitcoin user 
engage with merchant to buy goods, indicate 
participants’ preferential use of bitcoin a a store of value 
rather than currency. Our outcome also suggest extend 
this framework’s definition of institutional trust to include 
not only government trust in blockchain technology but also 
the trust of bitcoin user in government and financial 
institution. We have also see evidence for how the erosion 
of such institutional trust be crucial in users’ adoption of 
bitcoin and acceptance of it algorithmic authority [33]. 

Probing further into the exploration of technological trust, 
we apply the model of online trust [13] to identify specific 
blockchain’s characteristic impact on trust. Our finding 
provide support for extend the applicability of this 
model to bitcoin technology. Blockchain’s characteristic 
support users’ credibility include: honesty ensure by 
decentralization and public ledger’s transparency; expertise 
support by miners’ competence and hard labor; 
predictability support by the cryptographic protocol; and 
reputation support by large companies’ interest in bitcoin. 
Findings also identify blockchain’s characteristic 
support the other dimension of trust: ease of use 

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA 

6506 



ground in ease and quick transactions; and limited risk 
due to transactions’ low cost and the decentralized, 
unregulated nature of blockchain which limit the risk of 
institutional power abuse. Outcomes also suggest a specific 
technological characteristic perceive a a risk factor: the 
blockchain’s purposeful design feature for irreversible 
transactions. We found the challenge of two-way 
transaction and in particular the offline one which be not 
capture by the blockchain. The challenge of irreversible 
transaction be not ground in people’s distrust on 
transaction, but in potentially the dishonest part of 
transaction, i.e., the payment of fiat currency for acquire 
the bitcoins. If this side of agreement be not fulfilled, user 
would prefer to reverse the bitcoin transaction, an operation 
which be not possible. An interest design opportunity 
here would be explore new way of track this 
movement of fiat currency (currently not captured) in the 
blockchain. 

As a mean of explore users’ support for trust their 
transaction partners, we apply the framework on 
mechanic of trust [41]. This framework allow the 
identification of different source of trust for each of the 
risk mitigate strategies. Among these strategy for 
deal with dishonest traders, bitcoin user engage in 
decrease order of preference with exchanges, authorize 
or reputable traders, and ultimately with unknown trader 
which they attempt to de-anonymize. Only the exchanger 
provide legally authorize service [37,52], while trust in 
the other type of trader be support mostly by the 
information about their credibility and reputation within the 
thick relationship [24] of online user groups. The less 
reputation-related information user can gather about the 
traders, the strong the need to de-anonymize them. Most 
participant go even further suggest the value of 
regulate the blockchain (institutional embeddedness for 
all type of traders). 

The Paradox of Unregulation 
We argue that the exploration of bitcoin use offer an 
unprecedented opportunity for question common 
assumption that people hold about fiat money and in 
particular around the value of money, their control and 
legitimacy. Blockchain’s unregulation and the pseudo- 
anonymity of people behind transaction be crucial 
characteristic of this technology [18,28,46,49]. Together, 
these characteristic ensure the privacy of the owner of 
bitcoin addresses, which be central to Nakamoto’s vision 
[39]. Our finding however highlight an interest tension: 
bitcoin user desire regulation, mostly because of the 
challenge of deal with dishonest traders, which they 
believe may be address by de-anonymizing transaction’s 
parties. This be an important find a the effort to 
regulate bitcoin have be driven mostly by government 
and financial institution rather than user [21]. Users’ 
desire for regulation may be also related to the new form 
of think that a disruptive technology like bitcoin 
demands. Bitcoin provide freedom over one’s asset which 

many participant enjoy, but at the same time, it no longer 
provide the security that regulate financial institution 
provide, and which user be accustom with. We argue 
that at present, bitcoin user continue to operate under the 
old mind-set of fiat money in traditional centralize and 
regulate financial systems, and may need support for 
develop new mental model underpin the 
unregulated bitcoin technology. This call for new way of 
support user to further develop their digital literacy. It 
also call for the exploration of innovative technological 
and social mechanism for limit the impact of dishonest 
traders, while still preserve anonymity. 

The Challenge of Pseudo-anonymous Transactions 
Our finding indicate that blockchain’s deliberate pseudo- 
anonymity of user engage in bitcoin transaction becomes 
a challenge for the contextual property for warrant trust 
a described in the framework on mechanic of trust [41]. 
This be because all three form of temporal, social and 
institutional embeddedness would become effective only 
through the know and stable identity of bitcoin user 
across transactions. This would ensure that the transaction 
partner build together a history of transaction (temporal), 
and a reputation among other potential transaction partner 
(social), while become vulnerable to legal sanction when 
they dishonestly fail to meet their transaction agreement 
(institutional embeddedness). However, neither of these be 
possible, a the blockchain protects the privacy of the 
transaction parties, both by prevent the link between the 
wallet address and the owner’s identify, and by enable the 
loss of the link between user’s transaction over time, i.e., 
through the option of create new wallet address for 
each transaction [39]. This be problematic, a blockchain’s 
failure to support for contextual property motivate user 
to fulfil their agreement [41], mean that such fulfilment 
relies entirely on the trustees’ intrinsic property such a 
credibility, integrity, and benevolence or encapsulate 
interest [24]. We found however significant evidence that 
people do not trust the intrinsic property of the trustee, 
and aim to protect themselves by challenge the trustees’ 
pseudo-anonymity a one of blockchain’s key design 
feature [39]. This confirms finding on people’s readiness 
to take very small risk regard unknown trustee [24]. 

DESIGN IMPLICATIONS 
Now we turn our attention to the design implication [44] 
that our finding suggest. We discus the need to support 
the transparency of two-way transactions, tool for 
materialize trust, and tool for support reversible 
transactions. These design implication have be 
developed to address the identify trust challenge of 
dishonest traders, while respect blockchain’s main 
characteristic such a decentralization, unregulation and 
pseudo-anonymity. 

Supporting Transparency of Two-way Transactions 
All transaction report in the study be two-way, most of 
them sequential and asynchronous, i.e., typically one party 
sends the fiat currency and after receive it, the other party 

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA 

6507 



sends the bitcoins. However, people can only track on the 
blockchain the movement of bitcoins. Sending fiat currency 
can be fake through fraudulent statement of transfer. 
This couple with the lack of legally authorize partner 
warrant one’s trust in them, i.e., institutional 
embeddedness, lead to increase risk of defraud from 
dishonest traders. Such trader be not know and cannot be 
make accountable for fail to complete their part of 
transaction, neither responsible for the retribution it entails. 

One can imagine creative design method [42] and new 
tool for digitally capture the content of transaction 
which be not bitcoins, to ensure that their transfer be also 
verified, authorize and store on the public ledger. Our 
finding indicate that such content of transaction be often 
fiat currency. Blockchain already provide mechanism for 
create digital token back by fiat currency, i.e., Colored 
Coin, Omni Layer [48]. Such mechanism can also be 
harness for create digital token (metadata embed in 
the blockchain) back by physical goods, such a the one 
explore in the provenance context where token represent 
document accompany the transaction of good or 
finance a mean of track their ownership. Such 
mechanism need to remain decentralize and to become 
integrate into the blockchain interface so that end user 
with limited technical expertise can access and use them. 

Tools for Materializing Trust in Blockchain 
Findings indicate that in the absence of know and stable 
identities, bitcoin user who engage in transaction with 
each other rely mostly on social embeddedness. As one of 
the property warrant trust in another party [41], social 
embeddedness be reflect in users’ active effort to gather 
reputation-related information about unknown traders, 
either from people they already trust such a close friends, 
or from member of the online group where most of their 
social learn about bitcoin technology take place. One 
way to good support this data gathering be through 
design mechanism for capture and visualize 
reputation a meta-data link to a wallet address. 
Blockchain protocol already support the creation of 
metadata within a transaction, by allow the generation of 
a new secure address reference the metadata. A reputation 
management system built on top of the blockchain will 
strongly contribute to the social embeddedness for 
warrant trust among traders. This in turn, motivates 
trader to keep the same wallet address in order to grow 
their reputation, hence provide more stable, albeit still 
private, identities. For example, Carboni [7] propose 
voucher attach to transaction for the transfer of payment 
for a service. If the buyer be satisfied with the service, he 
can accept and co-sign the voucher which contains an 
incentive fee paid by the service provider to the buyer for 
leave a positive feedback. The reputation score of a 
service provider could be compute by add the voting 
fee for that service across blockchain’s relevant 
transactions. Alternative mechanism for support also 
the caption of negative feedback be much needed. 

Tools to Support Reversible Transactions 
Findings indicate that in the case of dishonest traders, the 
irreversible bitcoin transaction be problematic. This stem 
from the lack of transparency of the two-way transactions: 
while the transfer of bitcoins be capture by the blockchain, 
the counterpart asynchronous transfer of money (or goods) 
for which people receive (or pay bitcoins) be not. One way 
of address this be by explore novel mechanism for 
reverse individual two-way transaction on top of the 
irreversible blockchain protocol [2]. This be not a trivial 
issue, a in it current form, the blockchain protocol do 
not allow reverse transaction which have be already 
confirm and add to the ledger. One solution would be 
new tool for enable the de-anonymization of the owner 
of disposable wallet address (discarded after one use). 
Besides hinder dishonesty, such tool would allow users’ 
to protection their privacy on the blockchain, while 
enable them to contact the other party, and request 
reverse the bitcoin transfer. This would also support 
social embeddedness, a the reputation of a give trader 
operating in a local online group can well extend beyond 
the lifetime of a disposable wallet. Other tool could 
leverage the support of multisignature transaction enable 
by the bitcoin protocol [2]. A common example be 2-of-3 
transaction model where money be place in a joint address 
own by the both party and a third arbitrator, to be 
sign off once each party be satisfied. If there be a problem, 
the arbitrator will investigate and decide to transfer the 
payment back to the buyer or to the seller. Once the 
transaction receives 2 out of 3 signatures, it be completed. 
The multisignature tool differ from the escrow service a 
the arbitrator receives a fee agree by all three parties, but 
cannot defraud a he will need two signature for this. 
Surprisingly, no participant mention the use of 
multisignature tools, probably because of the same reason 
they do not engage with the escrow services: perceive 
difficulty of use, or limited awareness of such tools. Future 
work could further explore this. 

CONCLUSIONS 
This empirical study investigate blockchain’s 
characteristic which support and challenge users’ trust, 
alongside their motivation for bitcoin use, and strategy for 
mitigate identify risks. We advance the theory towards 
a model of trust among user of Bitcoin’s decentralized, 
unregulated and pseudo-anonymous technology in 
develop context, and provide insight into the specific 
tension around these characteristics. Study finding lead to 
a number of design implication that would support bitcoin 
user develop increase trust in each other, include 
support for the transparency of two-way transactions, tool 
for materialize trust, and tool for support reversible 
transactions. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work be support by the UK Research Council 
through the Digital Threads project, (AHRC Grant 
AH/P014186/1). 

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA 

6508 



REFERENCES 
1. Michael Bacharach and Diego Gambetta. 2003. Trust in 

Signs. In Trust in Society, Karen S. Cook (ed.),. Russell 
Sage, New York. 

2. Rachid El Bansarkhaniand Jan Sturm. 2016. An 
Efficient Lattice-Based Multisignature Scheme with 
Applications to Bitcoins. In International Conference on 
Cryptology and Network Security, 140-155. 

3. Ardion Beldad, Menno de Jong and Michaël 
Steehouder. 2010. How shall I trust the faceless and the 
intangible? A literature review on the antecedent of 
online trust. Computers in human behavior 26, 5: 857- 
869. 

4. Bitcoin Wiki. Anonymity. Retrieved September 14, 
2016 from https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Anonymity 

5. Mads Bodker. 2004. Trust and the digital environment. 
Retrieved June 10, 2016 from 
http://www.itu.dk/people/boedker/trustpaper.pdf 

6. Michael Bordo. 1981. The classical gold standard: some 
lesson for today. Review, 2-17. 

7. Davide Carboni. 2015. Feedback base Reputation on 
top of the Bitcoin Blockchain. Retrieved September 19, 
2016 from arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.01504 

8. Raul Carillo. 2015. Alternative currency be big 
than bitcoin: how they’re building prosperity from 
London to Kenya. Retrieved June 22, 2016 from 
http://www.yesmagazine.org/commonomics/alternative- 
currencies-bigger-than-bitcoin-bangla-pesa-brixton 

9. John M. Carroll and Victoria Bellotti. 2015. Creating 
Value Together: The Emerging Design Space of Peer- 
to-Peer Currency and Exchange. In Proceedings of the 
18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work & Social Computing, 1500-1510. 

10. Nicolas Christin. 2013. Traveling the Silk road: A 
measurement analysis of a large anonymous online 
marketplace. In Proceedings of the 22nd international 
conference on World Wide Web. ACM, 213-224. 

11. CNN Money. 2015. Greece shuts bank in bid to 
prevent collapse. Retrieved June 10, 2016 from 
http://money.cnn.com/2015/06/28/news/economy/greec 
e-banks-ecb/ 

12. Coin Market Cap. 2016. Crypto-currency market 
capitalizations. Retrieved June 10, 2016 from 
https://coinmarketcap.com/ 

13. Cynthia L. Corritore, Beverly Kracher and Susan 
Wiedenbeck. 2003. International Journal of Human- 
Computer Studies 58, 6: 738-758. 

14. Robert Costanza, et. al. 2003. Complementary 
currency a a method to improve local sustainable 
economic welfare. Retrieved June 10, 2016 from 
http://78.46.126.155/Record/632 

15. Michael Crosby, Nachiappan , Pradhan Pattanayak, 
Sanjeev Verma and Vignesh Kalyanaraman. 2015. 
Retrieved June 10, 2016 from 
http://scet.berkeley.edu/wp- 
content/uploads/BlockchainPaper.pdf 

16. Fred D. Davis. 1989. Perceived usefulness, perceive 
ease of use, and user acceptance of information 
technology. MIS Quarterly 13, 3: 319-340. 

17. Encyclopedia.com. 2002. Coins and currency. Retrieved 
September 19, 2016 from 
http://www.encyclopedia.com/topic/coin.aspx 

18. European Central Bank. 2012. Virtual currency 
schemes. Retrieved June 10, 2016 from 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/virtualcurrenc 
yschemes201210en.pdf 

19. Jennifer Fereday and Eimear Muir-Cochrane. 2006. 
Demonstrating rigor use thematic analysis: A hybrid 
approach of inductive and deductive cod and theme 
development. International journal of qualitative 
methods, 5, 1: 80-92. 

20. Amy Fontinelle. 2011. An introduction to 
complementary currencies. Retrieved June 10, 2016 
from 
http://www.investopedia.com/articles/economics/11/intr 
oduction-complementary-currencies.asp 

21. David Gilbert. 2016. Bitcoin’s big problem: transaction 
delay renew blockchain debate. Retrieved June 10, 
2016 from http://www.ibtimes.com/bitcoins-big- 
problem-transaction-delays-renew-blockchain-debate- 
2330143 

22. Herb Goldberg and Lewis Robert. 2000. Money 
madness: The psychology of saving, spending, loving, 
and hat money. Wellness Institute, Inc, Gretna LA, 

23. Andres Guadamuz, Chris Marsden Guadamuz. 2015. 
Blockchains and Bitcoin: Regulatory response to 
cryptocurrencies. First Monday, 20: 12-7. 

24. Russell Hardin. 2002. Trust and trustworthiness. Sage 
Foundation, New York. 

25. Garrick Hileman. 2014. From bitcoin to the brixton 
pound: history and prospect for alternative currencies. 
In International Conference on Financial Cryptography 
and Data Security ,163-165. 

26. Jofish Kaye, Janet Vertesi, Jennifer Ferreira, Barry 
Brown, and Mark Perry. 2014. #CHImoney: financial 
interactions, digital cash, capital exchange and mobile 
money. In CHI '14 Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '14). 111-114. 

27. Erol Kazan, Chee-Wee Tan, and Eric TK Lim. 2015. 
Value Creation in Cryptocurrency Networks: Towards 
A Taxonomy of Digital Business Models for Bitcoin 
Companies. The 19th Pacific Asia Conference on 
Information Systems (PACIS 2015). 

28. Irni Eliana Khairuddin, Corina Sas, Sarah Clinch, and 
Nigel Davies. 2016. Exploring Motivations for Bitcoin 
Technology Usage. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI 
Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems. ACM, 2872-2878. 

29. Brad Klontz, Sonya L. Britt, Jennifer Mentzer, and Ted 
Klontz. 2011. Money belief and financial behaviors: 
Development of the Klontz Money Script Inventory. 
Journal of Financial Therapy 2,1. 

The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA 

6509 



30. Katharina Krombholz, Aljosha Judmayer, Matthias 
Gusenbauer and Edgar Weippl. 2016. The Other Side 
of the Coin: User Experiences with Bitcoin Security 
and Privacy. Financial Cryptography and Data 
Security. 

31. Sara Lipkis and Amanda Roth. 2016. Anatomy: what be 
alternative currency? Retrieved June 10 2016 from 
http://www.worldpolicy.org/anatomy-what-alternative- 
currency 

32. Niklas Luhman. 1979. Trust: a mechanism for reduction 
of social complexity. In Trust and Power, Niklas 
Luhmann (ed). Wiley, New York, 

33. Caitlin Lustig and Bonnie Nardi. 2015. Algorithmic 
authority: The case of Bitcoin. In System Sciences 
(HICSS), 2015 48th Hawaii International Conference 
IEEE. 743-752. 

34. Roger C. Mayer, James H. Davis and F. David 
Schoorman. 1995. An integrative model of 
organizational trust. The Academy of Management 
Review 20, 3: 709 

35. Barbara A. Misztal. 1996. Trust in Modern Societies. 
The Search for Basis of Social Order. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, 42-87. 

36. Guido Mollering. 2006. Trust: Reason, Routine, 
Reflectivity. Elseiver, Netherlands. 

37. Malte Moser. 2013. Anonymity of bitcoin transactions: 
an analysis if mix service. RetrievedJune 10, 2016 
from 
https://www.wi.unimuenster.de/sites/wi/files/public/dep 
artment/itsecurity/mbc13/mbc13-moeser-paper.pdf 

38. Fiona F. Nah and Sid Davis. 2002. HCI research issue 
in e-commerce. Journal of Electronic Commerce 
Research 3.3: 98-113. 

39. Satoshi Nakamoto. 2008. Bitcoin: peer to peer 
electronic cash system. Retrieved September 14, 2016 
from https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf 

40. P2P Foundations. 2015. Definition of Bitcoin. Retrieved 
June 10, 2016 from http://p2pfoundation.net/bitcoin 

41. Jens Riegelsberger, M. Angela Sasse and John D. 
McCarthy. 2005. The mechanic of trust: a framework 
for research and design. International of Human- 
Computer Studies. 62, 3: 381-422. 

42. Antti Salovaara, Kristina Höök, Keith Cheverst, 
Michael Twidale, Matthew Chalmers, and Corina Sas. 
2011. Appropriation and creative use: link user 
study and design. In CHI '11 Extended Abstracts on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '11). 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 37-40. 

43. Corina Sas and Irni Eliana Khairuddin. 2015. Exploring 
Trust in Bitcoin Technology: A Framework for HCI 
Research. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the 
Australian Special Interest Group for Computer Human 
Interaction (OzCHI '15), 338- 342. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2838739.2838821 

44. Corina Sas, Steve Whittaker, Steven Dow, Jodi Forlizzi, 
and John Zimmerman. 2014. Generating implication 
for design through design research. In Proceedings of 
the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factor in 
compute system (CHI '14). ACM, New York, NY, 
USA, 1971-1980. 

45. Larry Schweikart. 1991. U.S. commercial banking: a 
historiographical survey. Business History Review. 65 
(Autumn): 606. 

46. Evander Smart. 2015. Top 10 Countries in which 
bitcoin be banned. Retrieved June 10, 2016 from 
https://www.cryptocoinsnews.com/top-10-countries- 
bitcoin-banned/ 

47. Melanie Swan. 2015. Blockchain blueprint for a new 
economy. O.Reilly, California. 

48. Tether. White paper. Retrieved September 19, 2016 
from 
https://www.weusecoins.com/assets/pdf/library/Tether% 
20Whitepaper.pdf 

49. The Law Library of Congress. 2014. Regulation of 
bitcoin in select jurisdiction. Retrieved June 10, 
2016 from https://www.loc.gov/law/help/bitcoin- 
survey/regulation-of-bitcoin.pdf 

50. UK Government. 2016. Distributed ledger technology 
beyond block chain. Retrieved June 10, 2016 from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/upload 
s/attachment_data/file/492972/gs-16-1-distributed- 
ledger-technology.pdf 

51. Randall L. Wray. 2012. Introduction to an alternative 
history of money. Levy Economics Institute Working 
Paper, 717. 

52. David Yermack. 2013. Is bitcoin a real currency? an 
economic appraisal. NBER Working Paper19747. 

53. Suraya Zainuddin. 2016. The complete guide to bitcoin 
scams. Retrieved June 10, 2016 from 
https://www.coingecko.com/buzz/complete-guide-to- 
bitcoin-scams?locale=en 

54. Adam Vaziri Zanjani. 2014. Bitcoin Exchanges a 
Payment Institution. Retrieved September 16, 2016 
from http://neopay.co.uk/site/wp- 
content/uploads/Diacle-Bitcoin-Regulation.pdf 





The Infrastructure of Trust CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA 

6510 




