


























































































Deterministic control of magnetic vortex wall chirality by electric field 


1Scientific REPORtS | 7: 7613 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9 

www.nature.com/scientificreports 

Deterministic control of magnetic 
vortex wall chirality by electric field 
R. P. Beardsley1, S. Bowe1,2, D. E. Parkes1, C. Reardon 3, K. W. Edmonds1, B. L. Gallagher1, 
S. A. Cavill2,3 & A. W. Rushforth1 

Concepts for information storage and logical processing base on magnetic domain wall have great 
potential for implementation in future information and communication technologies. To date, the 
need to apply power hungry magnetic field or heat dissipate spin polarize current to manipulate 
magnetic domain wall have limited the development of such technologies. The possibility of control 
magnetic domain wall use voltage offer an energy efficient route to overcome these limitations. 
Here we show that a voltage-induced uniaxial strain induces reversible deterministic switch of the 
chirality of a magnetic vortex wall. We discus how this functionality will be applicable to scheme 
for information storage and logical processing, make a significant step towards the practical 
implementation of magnetic domain wall in energy efficient computing. 

Magnetic domain wall separate region of a ferromagnetic material in which the magnetisation point in differ- 
ent directions. If the magnetic material be pattern into a quasi 1D object, such a a nanowire, the domain wall 
separate region in which the magnetisation point in opposite direction and can be propagate along the length 
of the nanowire by the application of magnetic field or electrical currents. This be highly attractive for imple- 
mentation in magnetic data storage1, 2 and concept for perform logical operations3 in which information be 
encode a the presence or position of a domain wall. It have also be propose to use the internal structure of the 
domain wall to encode information. For example, depend on the wire geometry and magnetic parameters, the 
domain wall structure can be that of a vortex consist of a circulate pattern of magnetic moment in the plane 
of the wire, which point out of the plane at the centre of the wall (Fig. 1(a)). The sense of circulation of the mag- 
netisation, i.e. the chirality of the wall, can be use to encode information a binary “1” or “0”4, and nanowire net- 
work design to use vortex domain wall to perform the key logical processing operation have be proposed5. 
In such scheme it be propose to switch the chirality by drive the domain wall through a nanowire network 
contain notch via the application of an external magnetic field or electrical current. Experimentally, chirality 
rectification have be achieve by propagate vortex domain wall along wire with asymmetric notches6, rec- 
tangular end geometries7 and around curve section of wires8 or rings9 use external magnetic fields. Similarly, 
the magnetic vortex state in nanodisks have be reverse by tailor magnetic field pulses10, 11. The use of 
externally apply magnetic field creates limitation in term of scalability and the ability to address individual 
domain walls, while the use of electrical current cause Joule heating and produce stray magnetic (Oersted) 
field which limit pack density due to interaction between neighbour elements. In order to utilise vortex 
domain wall in any commercially viable technology it will be necessary to develop electrical method to control 
the chirality of individually addressable domain wall reversibly and with low power. 

Electric field can provide a practical and energy efficient mean to control magnetisation because their 
application do not require large current density and do not generate Oersted magnetic fields. One route to 
achieve couple of the electric field to the magnetisation be via mechanical strain in a hybrid piezoelectric/fer- 
romagnet structure. A voltage apply to the piezoelectric component induces a mechanical deformation which 
transfer to the ferromagnetic layer and alters the magnetic anisotropy via inverse magnetostriction. The method 
have be use to modify magnetic anisotropy and to demonstrate rotation of the magnetic easy axis direction12, 13. 
Detailed model predicts that the implementation of these method in device consist of single domain 
magnetic element could lead to information storage device with order of magnitude good energy efficiency 
than present technology rely on electrical currents14. To date, the use of inverse magnetostriction to control 

1School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, United Kingdom. 2Diamond 
Light Source Chilton, Didcot, Oxfordshire, OX11 0DE, UK. 3Department of Physics, University of York, Heslington, 
York, YO10 5DD, United Kingdom. R. P. Beardsley and S. Bowe contribute equally to this work. Correspondence 
and request for material should be address to S.A.C. (email: stuart.cavill@york.ac.uk) or A.W.R. (email: andrew. 
rushforth@nottingham.ac.uk) 

Received: 15 May 2017 

Accepted: 5 July 2017 

Published: xx xx xxxx 

OPEN 

http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7550-6415 
mailto:stuart.cavill@york.ac.uk 
mailto:andrew.rushforth@nottingham.ac.uk 
mailto:andrew.rushforth@nottingham.ac.uk 


www.nature.com/scientificreports/ 

2Scientific REPORtS | 7: 7613 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9 

domain wall have result in movement between random pin sites15, 16 or between position along the cir- 
cumference of a ring structure17, 18, local pin of a domain wall at a position in a nanowire19, pin at mobile 
ferroelectric domain walls20 and tune of the domain wall velocity21 or width22. The possibility of switch the 
domain wall configuration by electric field have not be consider before now. 

In this article we demonstrate that the chirality of a vortex domain wall can be control reversibly by create 
a strain-induced inhomogeneous uniaxial magnetic anisotropy energy profile in the vicinity of the domain wall. 
Using micromagnetic calculation we simulate the magnetisation dynamic in response to a strain pulse and 
show that the chirality switch can arise from the nucleation of a second vortex core follow by the damped 
precessional motion of the cores. We discus how the method might be implement in device concept for low 

Figure 1. Device geometry and characteristics. (a) A representation of a vortex domain wall situate in 
a magnetic nanowire. Arrows represent the direction of the magnetisation. (b) A schematic of the device 
consist of a nickel ring situate on top of a PMN-PT chip. A voltage apply across the thickness of the chip 
generates a uniaxial strain in the plane. (c) Schematic representation of the uniaxial strain a a function of the 
electric field apply to the PMN-PT, base on ref. 23. EC be the ferroelectric coercive field. Roman numeral 
correspond to the electric field value label in Fig. 2. 

Figure 2. XMCD-PEEM image of strain-induced chirality switch in vortex domain walls. Red shade 
represent magnetisation point from right to left. Blue represent magnetisation point from left to 
right. Panel sequence (a) to (e) and (f) to (j) show the evolution of a tail to tail and head to head vortex 
wall respectively a a function of the electric field apply to the PMN-PT. The axis of the induced uniaxial 
anisotropy be represent by the arrow. Roman numeral correspond to the electric field label in Fig. 1(c). 



www.nature.com/scientificreports/ 

3Scientific REPORtS | 7: 7613 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9 

energy electric field operate non-volatile information storage and logical processing. The use of electric field to 
manipulate the configuration of magnetic domain wall will reduce the energy require to switch the magnetic 
state in non-volatile information storage and processing technology by order of magnitude. 

The experimental demonstration be achieve by position a vortex domain wall along the circumference 
of a ring structure, close to the axis of the uniaxial anisotropy. The device (Fig. 1(b)) consists of a piezoelectric 
[Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3]0.68 -[PbTiO3]0.32 (PMN-PT) (011) substrate with top and bottom electrodes, onto which be 
fabricate a 20 nm thick Ni ring of outer(inner) diameter 7.7μm (5.7 μm). Application of an electric field between 
the top and bottom electrode result in mechanical deformation of the PMN-PT substrate and induces a uniaxial 
strain of order 10−3 in the plane of the Ni ring. Images of the magnetic contrast be obtain use the x-ray 
photoemission electron microscope (X-PEEM) on beamline I06 at the Diamond Light Source synchrotron. 

The application of an electric field across the thickness direction of a PMN-PT (011) substrate be know 
to result in a two stage reversal of the ferroelectric polarisation vector at the ferroelectric coercive field EC23. 
Switching of the polarisation vector between the <111> direction with component point out of the plane 
be mediate by a range of electric field for which the polarisation point in the plane. This be accompany by a 
large uniaxial strain of order 10−3 in the plane in a narrow range of electric field around EC, which be approxi- 
mately 0.18–0.19MV/m for our device (Fig. 1(c)). This result in a uniaxial anisotropy energy of order 10 kJm−3 12. 
Further increase of the electric field result in the strain return to a value close to that at zero field a the 
ferroelectric vector rotates out of the plane towards the < 111 > directions. The sequence of magnetic contrast 
image in Fig. 2 reveals that this transition be accompany by a reversal of the vortex wall chirality. Figure 2(a) 
and (b) show the transition from a clockwise tail to tail wall to an anti-clockwise tail to tail wall at electric field 
illustrate by point (i) and (ii) in Fig. 1(c). The same transition occurs between Fig. 2(d) and (e) for the opposite 
sign of apply electric field ((iv) and (v) in Fig. 1(c)), but an identical uniaxial strain transition. The intermediate 
magnetic state be not capture for these transition because of the sharpness of the transition at EC result in 
the uniaxial strain state be induced and remove between successive images. An intermediate magnetic state 
can be observe in Fig. 2(c) when the electric field have be increase further beyond the ferroelectric coercive 
field to point (iii) in Fig. 1(c). Here a reversible uniaxial strain be also present, albeit small than that generate at 
the ferroelectric coercive field. Removal of this uniaxial strain result in the switch of the vortex wall chirality, 
from anti-clockwise to clockwise in the sequence from Fig. 2(b) to (d). To summarise, Fig. 2(a) to (e) show that 
three successive application of a uniaxial strain induce three successive reversal of the vortex wall chirality. 
The chirality switch be also observe for a head to head vortex wall show in Fig. 2(f) to (j), but the sequence 
be interrupt by the movement of the domain wall along the circumference of the ring in Fig. 2(h) to (j). The 
importance of pin of the domain wall position will be discuss in the next section. 

A full understand of the mechanism by which the vortex domain wall chirality switch would require 
knowledge of how the strain profile varies, both spatially and temporally. The structure of ferroelectric domain 
in PMN-PT and the process involve in switch of the ferroelectric polarisation vector be area of intense 
research at present. It be know that domain can range in size from tens24 or hundreds12 of nm up to several 
ten of µm24 and that different domain region can represent different polarisation vector a well a different 
structural phases25 because the [Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3]0.68 -[PbTiO3]0.32 composition sits close to a morphotropic 
phase boundary. The application of an electric field can induce reorientation of nanoscale domain and move- 
ment of the boundary of micron scale domain within the same sample24. For our sample we cannot image 
the ferroelectric domain structure because the presence of the top electrode prevents escape of photoelectron 
from the PMN-PT. We can, however consider the extreme cases: (i) the strain in the region of the vortex domain 
wall switch homogeneously (e.g. via the reorientation of nanoscale ferroelectric domain of size much small 
than the vortex domain wall) and (ii) the change in strain sweep across the device (e.g. due to a ferroelectric 
domain wall move across the region beneath the vortex domain wall). We find that both mechanism can 
induce switch of the vortex wall chirality. We describe the first mechanism in detail here because the result of 
micromagnetic simulation most closely match the experimental result obtained, and the result of our investi- 
gations of the second mechanism be described in the Supplementary Note. 

We perform micromagnetic simulation use the OOMMF simulation package26 use realistic parameter 
for nickel (see Methods). Results from the simulations, present in Fig. 3(a) to (e), show successive switch of 
vortex wall chirality from anticlockwise to clockwise and back to anticlockwise. The switch event be induced 
by the application of a uniaxial magnetic anisotropy favour an easy axis perpendicular to the circumference of 
the ring in the vicinity of the domain wall, i.e. along the y-axis. The anisotropy cause a flux closure domain pat- 
tern to form, characterise by red and blue triangular region in Fig. 3(b) and (d), in order to minimise the mag- 
netic free energy. There be similarity between these pattern and the experimental image in Fig. 2(c). Crucially, 
the final position of the flux closure pattern in Fig. 3(b) and (d) be offset slightly to the right or left of the axis of 
the anisotropy depend upon the initial chirality of the domain wall. When the anisotropy be change to an 
easy axis tangential to the ring in the region of the domain wall (i.e. parallel to the x-axis), the flux closure pattern 
evolves back to a vortex domain wall, with the opposite chirality to the original state. 

We now examine in detail the important transition involve in this process. In Fig. 3(a) the initial vortex 
domain wall state be make to resemble that in the experimental images, in particular the “s-shape” of the central 
white region, by apply a uniaxial anisotropy of KU = −3 kJm−3 parallel to the x-axis. Here the minus sign 
denotes the axis of the anisotropy such that a positive or negative value for KU represent an easy axis parallel 
to the y or x axis respectively. A small uniaxial anisotropy could arise during fabrication of the ring due to dif- 
ferent thermal contraction of the Ni and PMN-PT, or due to the ferroelectric domain state prior to electric field 
poling12. Upon the application of a uniaxial anisotropy of KU = +10 kJm−3 (easy axis along the y-axis, also repre- 
sented by the dash line in Fig. 3), the flux closure pattern form by reverse the direction of magnetisation in 
a region on the inner circumference of the ring, indicate by the dash circle in Fig. 3(b) and (d). The position 
of the reverse region depends upon the initial chirality of the domain wall, such that the flux closure pattern be 



www.nature.com/scientificreports/ 

4Scientific REPORtS | 7: 7613 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9 

make up of two vortex core of opposite chirality – one from the original domain wall and one form when the 
magnetisation in the region indicate by the dash circle reverses. In our simulation, the reversal occurs by the 
precessional dynamic of the magnetisation, which be trigger by abruptly change the anisotropy, and allow 
to proceed use a realistic damp coefficient of α = 0.02. In the laboratory experiment, we do not know the 
timescale over which the anisotropy changes. This will likely be govern by the reorientation of ferroelectric 
domain or the movement of ferroelectric domain wall between pin site trigger by thermal activation. 
If the anisotropy change on a timescale that be long compare to the damp of the magnetisation (a few ns), 
then the reversal of the magnetisation can still occur through thermal activation of the magnetisation precession. 
We have not investigate such processes. Once the region indicate have reversed, then the flux closure pattern 
oscillates along the circumference of the ring and settle to the final position on a timescale of several nano- 
seconds. The sequence in Supplementary Videos 1 and 2 show this oscillatory behaviour for the transition in 
Fig. 3(a) to (b) and (c) to (d) respectively. The formation of the reverse region cause an initial rapid movement 
of the pattern to the left or right a the vortex core gyrate. The direction of this initial motion be determine by 
the chirality of the original domain wall. The final offset of the flux closure pattern along the ring be determine 
by this initial motion of the vortices, after which damp of the magnetisation reduces subsequent oscillations. 
Upon set the anisotropy back to KU = −3 kJm−3 the formation of the vortex wall proceeds by domain wall 
motion result in the annihilation of the inner triangular region adjacent to the region marked by the dash 
ring in Fig. 3(b) and (d). This sequence be show in Supplementary Videos 3 and 4 for the transition in Fig. 3(b) 
to (c) and (d) to (e) respectively. For these transition to the single domain wall state the damp parameter be 
set to a large value (α = 0.5) to suppress motion of the domain wall around the ring. If a more realistic value for 
the damp parameter be use (α = 0.02) then the domain wall move around the ring by 90°. Experimentally, 
we do not observe such motion due to pin of the domain wall, likely by material defect or edge roughness. 
The exception to this be the sequence in Fig. 2(h) and (i). Previous studies17, 18 of vortex domain wall in Ni-ring/ 
PMN-PT device observe rotation of the domain wall position around the ring, but do not report switch of 
the chirality. 

The sequence in the simulation be deterministic. The initial wall chirality determines the offset of the flux 
closure pattern which in turn determines the chirality of the newly form domain wall. In real device the final 
position of the flux closure pattern will depend on several factor include the ring dimensions, defects, edge 
roughness, the size of the induced strain, thermal fluctuation and material parameter such a the magnetisa- 
tion and damping. Such factor may introduce some stochasticity into the magnetisation dynamic which could 
prevent repeatable switch of the chirality. A detailed investigation of the influence of such factor be beyond 
the scope of the present work. It should be possible however, to set the chirality of the domain wall by set the 
offset of the flux closure pattern use an external impetus, such a a weak magnetic field pulse, or an electrical 
current pulse. 

The functionality described here have potential for application in device for information storage and logical 
processing. The inhomogeneous magnetic anisotropy profile require to switch the chirality of a vortex domain 
wall could also be induced in a straight nanowire with voltage gate electrode position to produce a strain in a 
local region along the wire. The geometry be show in Fig. 4 and simulation of the chirality reversal in response 
to a voltage pulse be present in Supplementary Video 5. The wire could form part of a large nanowire circuit 
use for logical processing base on domain walls. A gate design that produce an anisotropy gradient may also 

Figure 3. Micromagnetic simulation of a head to head vortex domain wall under the action of a uniaxial 
magnetic anisotropy energy. (a) to (e) show successive switch of the chirality of the vortex wall. The 
transition from panel (a) and (c) to panel (c) and (e) respectively involve the reversal of the x-component of 
the magnetisation in the region marked by dash circle in (b) and (d). 

http://1 
http://2 
http://3 
http://4 
http://5 


www.nature.com/scientificreports/ 

5Scientific REPORtS | 7: 7613 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9 

be use to move the domain wall along the wire. Although the investigation of domain wall motion in magnetic 
anisotropy gradient be beyond the scope of the present work, we suggest that a device design in which a succes- 
sion of gate be implement to move and switch the chirality of vortex domain wall would avoid the need to use 
magnetic field or electrical current in information processing scheme use domain walls, thereby remove 
some of the major practical limitation to the development of such technologies. 

Methods 
10 mm × 10 mm × 0.5 mm PMN-PT(110) substrate be purchase from Atom Optics Co., Ltd. Atomic Force 
Microscopy measurement reveal a surface roughness of order 1 nm. Ti(5 nm)/Au(35 nm) electrode be 
deposit onto the top and bottom side of the PMN-PT by thermal evaporation. The ring pattern be define 
use electron beam lithography before deposition of Ni(20 nm)/Al(2 nm) by magnetron sputter follow by 
lift-off. 

Magnetic contrast image be obtain use the x-ray photoemission electron microscope (PEEM) on 
beamline I06 at the Diamond Light Source synchrotron. Illuminating the sample at oblique (16°) incidence 
and make use of XMCD at the Ni L3 edge (853 eV) a the contrast mechanism allow sensitivity to in-plane 
moment with a spatial resolution of approximately 50 nm. Azimuthal rotation of the sample with respect to the 
incident polarization vector allow unambiguous assignment of the magnetization direction in each domain. 
Additional electrical feedthroughs allow the in-situ application of voltage to the PMN-PT whilst imaging. 

Micromagnetic simulation be carry out use the Object Oriented Micromagnetic Framework 
(OOMMF) package26 instal on the University of Nottingham High Performance Computing cluster. 
Simulations be perform for a half ring geometry with inner diameter = 5.7 µm, outer diameter = 7.7 µm and 
thickness = 20 nm. A zoomed-section be show in Fig. 3. The mesh size be 5 nm × 5 nm × 20 nm. Magnetisation 
M = 490 kAm−1. The damp constant be state in the main text. The end of the half ring section be set to 
critical damp to suppress the reflection of spin waves. Simulations be carry out use uniaxial anisotropy 
energy value of KU = −3 kJm−3 and +10 kJm−3. 

References 
1. Parkin, S. S. P., Hayashi, M. & Thomas, L. Magnetic domain-wall racetrack memory. Science 320, 190 (2008). 
2. Lavrijsen, R. et al. Magnetic ratchet for three-dimensional spintronic memory and logic. Nature 493, 647 (2014). 
3. Allwood, D. A. et al. Magnetic domain-wall logic. Science 309, 1688 (2005). 
4. Pushp, A. et al. Domain wall trajectory determine by it fractional topological edge defects. Nature Phys. 9, 505 (2013). 
5. Omari, K. A. & Hayward, T. J. Chirality-based vortex domain-wall logic gates. Phys. Rev. Applied 2, 044001 (2014). 
6. Brandão, J. et al. Control of the magnetic vortex chirality in Permalloy nanowires with asymmetric notches. J. Appl. Phys. 116, 

193902 (2014). 
7. Wilhelm, E.-S., McGrouther, D., Heyne, L., Bisig, A. & Kläui, M. Vortex domain wall chirality rectification due to the interaction 

with end domain spin structure in permalloy nanowires. Appl. Phys. Lett. 95, 252501 (2009). 
8. Omari, K. et al. Ballistic rectification of vortex domain wall chirality at nanowire corners. Appl. Phys. Lett. 107, 222403 (2015). 

Figure 4. A method to switch the chirality of a vortex domain wall by apply strain locally. A schematic 
representation of a device element for reverse the chirality of a vortex domain wall in a nanowire fabricate 
on a piezoelectric substrate. A voltage apply to the electrode induces a mechanical strain and a uniaxial 
anisotropy favour an easy axis transverse to the wire. (a), A vortex domain wall position at the edge of 
the electrode region be transform to a flux closure domain pattern near the electrode (b). (c), Relaxation of 
the induced anisotropy lead to the formation of a vortex domain wall with the opposite chirality to the initial 
domain wall. 



www.nature.com/scientificreports/ 

6Scientific REPORtS | 7: 7613 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9 

9. Bisig, A. et al. Dynamic domain wall chirality rectification by rotate magnetic fields. Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, 122401 (2015). 
10. Uhlir, V. et al. Dynamic switch of the spin circulation in taper magnetic nanodisks. Nature Nanotech. 8, 341 (2013). 
11. Antos, R. & Otani, Y. Simulations of the dynamic switch of vortex chirality in magnetic nanodisks by a uniform field pulse. Phys 

Rev. B 80(R), 140404 (2009). 
12. Buzzi, M. et al. Single Domain Spin Manipulation by Electric Fields in Strain Coupled Artificial Multiferroic Nanostructures. Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 111, 027204 (2013). 
13. Rushforth, A. W. et al. Voltage control of magnetocrystalline anisotropy in ferromagnetic-semiconductor/piezoelectric hybrid 

structures. Phys. Rev. B 78, 085314 (2008). 
14. Hu, J.-M., Li, Z., Chen, L.-Q. & Nan, C.-W. High-density magnetoresistive random access memory operating at ultralow voltage at 

room temperature. Nature Commun. 2, 553 (2011). 
15. Parkes, D. E. et al. Non-volatile voltage control of magnetization and magnetic domain wall in magnetostrictive epitaxial thin films. 

Appl. Phys. Lett. 101, 072402 (2012). 
16. Brintlinger, T. et al. In Situ Observation of Reversible Nanomagnetic Switching Induced by Electric Fields. Nano. Lett. 10, 1219 

(2010). 
17. Hockel, J. L., Bur, A., Wu, T., Wetzlar, K. P. & Carman, G. P. Electric field induced magnetization rotation in pattern Ni ring/ 

Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3](1-0.32)-[PbTiO3]0.32 heterostructures. Appl. Phys. Lett. 100, 022401 (2012). 
18. Sohn, H. et al. Electrically driven magnetic domain wall rotation in multiferroic heterostructures to manipulate suspend on-chip 

magnetic particles. ACS Nano 9, 4814 (2015). 
19. Lei, N. et al. Strain-controlled magnetic domain wall propagation in hybrid piezoelectric/ferromagnetic structures. Nature Commun. 

4, 1378 (2013). 
20. Franke, K. J. A. et al. Reversible Electric-Field-Driven Magnetic Domain-Wall Motion. Phys. Rev. X 5, 011010 (2015). 
21. De Ranieri, E. et al. Piezoelectric control of the mobility of a domain wall driven by adiabatic and non-adiabatic torques. Nature 

Mater. 12, 808 (2013). 
22. Bryan, M. T., Bance, S., Dean, J., Schre, T. & Allwood, D. A. Transverse and vortex domain wall structure in magnetic nanowires with 

uniaxial in-plane anisotropy. J. Phys. Cond. Matt. 24, 024205 (2012). 
23. Wu, T. et al. Domain engineer switchable strain state in ferroelectric (011)[Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3](1-x)-[PbTiO3]x (PMN-PT, 

x = 0.32) single crystals. J. Appl. Phys. 109, 124101 (2011). 
24. Sato, Y., Hirayama, T. & Ikuhara, Y. Real-time direct observation of polarisation reversal in a piezoelectric crystal: Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3) 

O3-PbTiO3 study via in situ electrical biasing transmission electron microscopy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 187601 (2011). 
25. Rafalovskyi, I., Guennou, M., Gregora, I. & Hlinka, J. Macroscopic lamellar heterophase pattern in Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3-PbTiO3 single 

crystals. Phys. Rev. B 93, 064110 (2016). 
26. Donahue, M. and Porter, D. G. Interagency report NISTIR 6376, OOMMF User’s Guide, Version 1.0 (National Institute of Standards 

and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, 1999). 

Acknowledgements 
This work be support by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council [grant number EP/ 
H003487/1 and EP/K503800/1]. The author would like to acknowledge Diamond Light Source for the provision 
of beamtime under SI-9521 and 11327. We be grateful for access to the University of Nottingham High 
Performance Computing Facility. 

Author Contributions 
R.B., S.B., D.E.P., K.W.E., S.A.C. and A.W.R. conduct the PEEM measurements. C.R. perform electron beam 
lithography and S.B. carry out the sputter deposition. A.W.R. and S.A.C. design the experiments. A.W.R. 
carry out the micromagnetic simulations. All author contribute to the manuscript. 

Additional Information 
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at doi:10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9 
Competing Interests: The author declare that they have no compete interests. 
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claim in publish map and 
institutional affiliations. 

Open Access This article be license under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permit use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 

format, a long a you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre- 
ative Commons license, and indicate if change be made. The image or other third party material in this 
article be include in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicate otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material be not include in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intend use be not per- 
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permit use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. 

© The Author(s) 2017 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-07944-9 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 

Deterministic control of magnetic vortex wall chirality by electric field 
Methods 
Acknowledgements 
Figure 1 Device geometry and characteristics. 
Figure 2 XMCD-PEEM image of strain-induced chirality switch in vortex domain walls. 
Figure 3 Micromagnetic simulation of a head to head vortex domain wall under the action of a uniaxial magnetic anisotropy energy. 
Figure 4 A method to switch the chirality of a vortex domain wall by apply strain locally. 




