






































Developing a secure, un-hackable net 


Developing a secure, un-hackable net 

A method of securely communicate between multiple quantum 

device have be developed by a UCL-led team of scientists, bring 

forward the reality of a large-scale, un-hackable quantum network. 

To date, communicate via quantum network have only be possible 

between two device of know provenance that have be built 

securely. 

With the EU and UK commit €1 billion and £270 million* 

respectively into funding quantum technology research, a race be on to 

develop the first truly secure, large-scale network between city that 

work for any quantum device. 

“We’re in a technology arm race of sorts. When quantum computer 

be fully developed, they will break much of today’s encryption whose 

security be only base on mathematical assumptions. To pre-emptively 

solve this, we be work on new way of communicate through large 

network that don’t rely on assumptions, but instead use the quantum 

law of physic to ensure security, which would need to be broken to 

hack the encryption,” explain lead author, Dr Ciarán Lee (UCL 

Physics & Astronomy). 

Developing a secure, un-hackable net https://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/0118/110118-unhackable-qua... 

1 sur 3 12-01-18 à 19:03 



Published in Physical Review Letters and fund by the Engineering 

and Physical Sciences Research Council, the study by UCL, the 

University of Oxford and the University of Edinburgh scientist detail a 

new way of communicate securely between three or more quantum 

devices, irrespective of who built them. 

“Our approach work for a general network where you don’t need to 

trust the manufacturer of the device or network for secrecy to be 

guaranteed. Our method work by use the network's structure to limit 

what an eavesdropper can learn,” say Dr Matty Hoban (University of 

Oxford, previously University of Edinburgh). 

The approach bridge the gap between the theoretical promise of 

perfect security guaranteed by the law of quantum physic and the 

practical implementation of such security in large networks. 

It test the security of the quantum device prior to engage in 

communication with the whole network. It do this by check if the 

correlation between device in the network be intrinsically quantum 

and cannot have be create by another means. 

These correlation be use to establish secret key which can be use to 

encrypt any desire communication. Security be ensure by the unique 

property that quantum correlation can only be share between the 

device that create them, ensure no hacker can ever come to learn 

the key. 

The team use two method – machine learn and causal inference – 

to develop the test for the un-hackable communication system. This 

approach distributes secret key in a way that cannot be effectively 

intercepted, because through quantum mechanic their secrecy can be 

test and guaranteed. 

“Our work can be thought of a create the software that will run on 

hardware currently be built to realise the potential of quantum 

communications. In future work, we’d like to work with partner in the 

UK national quantum technology programme to develop this further. 

We hope to trial our quantum network approach over the next few 

years,” conclude Dr Lee. 

The team acknowledge that an un-hackable network could be abuse in 

Developing a secure, un-hackable net https://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/0118/110118-unhackable-qua... 

2 sur 3 12-01-18 à 19:03 



the same way that current network are, but highlight that there be also 

a clear benefit to ensure privacy too. 

Links 

Research paper in Physical Review Letters 

Dr Ciarán Lee's academic profile 

UCL Physics & Astronomy 

*UK National Quantum Technology Programme 

The Quantum Age: technological opportunity by the UK Government 

Image 

Quantum compute (credit: Kevin Dooley, source: Flickr) 

Media contact 

Bex Caygill 

Tel: +44 (0)20 3108 3846 

Email: r.caygill [at] ucl.ac.uk 

Developing a secure, un-hackable net https://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/0118/110118-unhackable-qua... 

3 sur 3 12-01-18 à 19:03 


