


















































Early Warnings of Cyber Threats in Online 
Discussions 

Anna Sapienza* 
USC 

Information Sciences Institute 
Marina del Rey, California, 90292 

Paulo Shakarian 
Arizona State University 
Tempe, Arizona, 85281 

Alessandro Bessi* 
USC 

Information Sciences Institute 
Marina del Rey, California, 90292 

Kristina Lerman 
USC 

Information Sciences Institute 
Marina del Rey, California, 90292 

Saranya Damodaran 
Arizona State University 
Tempe, Arizona, 85281 

Emilio Ferrara 
USC 

Information Sciences Institute 
Marina del Rey, California, 90292 

Abstract—We introduce a system for automatically generate 
warning of imminent or current cyber-threats. Our system 
leverage the communication of malicious actor on the darkweb, 
a well a activity of cyber security expert on social medium 
platform like Twitter. In a time period between September, 2016 
and January, 2017, our method generate 661 alert of which 
about 84% be relevant to current or imminent cyber-threats. 
In the paper, we first illustrate the rationale and workflow of 
our system, then we measure it performance. Our analysis be 
enrich by two case studies: the first show how the method 
could predict DDoS attacks, and how it would have allow 
organization to prepare for the Mirai attack that cause 
widespread disruption in October 2016. Second, we discus 
the method’s timely identification of various instance of data 
breaches. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

On October 21, 2016, hundred of popular Websites, in- 
cluding Twitter, Netflix, and Paypal, become unreachable due 
to a massive cyber-attack direct against the infrastructure 
of the Internet. Attackers exploit a vulnerability in the 
software use by Internet of Things (IoT) device that en- 
abled them to commandeer a vast number of such devices. 
Attackers, then, use this so call botnet to unleash a massive 
Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack against Dyn, a 
popular domain name system (DNS) service provider. The 
overwhelmed Dyn DNS server stop rout Internet traffic 
effectively, result in widespread disruption of the involve 
Websites and therefore massive economic damage 1. Despite 
the suddenness of the attack, there be signal indicate the 
availability of the IoT botnet in question a well a evidence 
of threat actor willing to employ this platform prior to the 
attack. This could have give decision maker key warning 
to prepare for the imminent exploit. 

To conduct a cyber-attack, malicious actor typically have to 
1) identify vulnerabilities, 2) acquire the necessary tool and 
tradecraft to successfully exploit them, 3) choose a target and 
recruit participants, 4) create or purchase the infrastructure 

*A. Sapienza and A. Bessi contribute equally to this work. 
1https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2016/10/a-lot/505025/ 

needed, and 5) plan and execute the attack. Other actors— 
system administrators, security analysts, and even victims— 
may discus vulnerability or coordinate a response to attacks. 
These activity be often conduct online through social 
media, (open and dark) Web forums, and professional blogs, 
leave digital trace behind. Collectively, these digital trace 
provide valuable insight into evolve cyber-threats and can 
signal a pending or develop attack well before malicious 
activity be note on a target system. For example, exploit be 
discuss on Twitter before they be publicly disclose [1] and 
on darkweb forum even before they be discuss on social 
medium [2]. 

Here, we introduce a lightweight framework that leverage 
online social medium sensor such a Twitter and darkweb 
forums, to generate alert that function a early warning of 
cyber-threats. The system monitor social medium feed of a 
number of prominent security researchers, analysts, and white- 
hat hackers, scan for post (tweets) related to exploits, 
vulnerabilities, and other relevant cyber-security topics. After- 
wards, it applies text mining technique to identify important 
term and remove irrelevant ones. Then, the system verifies 
whether the term that be identify during the filter 
stage have ever be use in darkweb hack forums, and 
eventually report the volume of mention a well a the con- 
tent of posts. Such information might be extremely valuable, 
since mention that have be found by the algorithm might 
point to link to steal credential a well a thread where 
a novel vulnerability be discuss along with source code 
aim at exploit it. Our framework relies on a database, 
update daily, of post publish on nearly 200 darkweb and 
deepweb hack forum and marketplace [3]–[5]. Finally, 
the system generates warning for the newly discover terms, 
along with their frequency of appearance on social medium and 
darkweb, the content of possible mention found in darkweb 
and deepweb, and a collection of word provide semantic 
context for facilitate situational awareness and interpretation 
of the warning. The algorithm design allows for generation of 
additional warning over the same time period. This choice be 

ar 
X 

iv 
:1 

80 
1. 

09 
78 

1v 
1 

[ 
c 

.C 
R 

] 
2 

9 
Ja 

n 
20 

18 



due to the willingness to keep track of the attention around the 
possible cyber-threat, and in particular to monitor the evolution 
of darkweb activity related to the discover terms. 

To test the precision of the method we collect warning 
generate between September 1, 2016 and January 31, 2017. 
Then, we ask to 5 human annotator with knowledge of 
cyber-security to independently annotate each warn a a 
legitimate cyber-threat or a false alarm (see Section III for 
additional details). We found that about 84% of the total 
generate warning be related to imminent or current cyber- 
threats, whereas the vast majority of false alarm be due 
to foreign language term (e.g. German) or term related to 
cyber-security yet too generic to be consider a imminent or 
current threats. In future version of our algorithm, the number 
of false alarm could be reduce by add dictionary and 
update the exist ones. The average time require to 
complete it entire workflow—from data retrieval to warn 
generation—is only 0.6 seconds. This make our system 
amenable to real-time monitoring of multiple online platform 
for imminent cyber-threats. Indeed, our system currently run 
continuously in a cloud environment: all data be store on 
Amazon EC2 and retrieve via Elastic Search, an open source 
distribute search engine that provide a powerful, scalable, 
and fast infrastructure for data retrieval. The endpoint of the 
system be design to deliver early warning to analyst and 
enable decision make allow for preventive measure to 
face incoming attacks. 

The rest of the paper be organize a follows. Section II 
illustrates and explains the algorithm, from data retrieval to 
early-warnings generation. Section III be dedicate to the eval- 
uation of it performance and discovery accuracy. In Section 
IV, we consider two different case studies, show the use 
of the method to predict distribute denial of service attacks, 
specifically Mirai, and to detect instance of data breaches. 
Finally, in Section VI we discus future improvement a well 
a promising research directions. 

II. METHOD 

In this section we provide a detailed explanation of our 
method, illustrate it workflow, from data retrieval to warn- 
ing generation passing through data processing and sensor 
fusion. To facilitate the comprehension of our framework, 
we provide some practical example throughout the section. 
Moreover, Figure 1 provide a graphical illustration of the 
system’s workflow. 

A. Data Retrieval 

We compile a list of well know and reliable Twitter 
expert who post frequently on issue related to cyber-security. 
This manually curated list include 69 international researcher 
and security analyst associate with security firms, a well a 
widely-followed whitehat hackers. The list can be arbitrarily 
extend by include other expert with similar degree of 
activity and trustworthiness. We hourly collect all tweet 
post in the previous 60 minute by these experts. The tweet 
be collect in real-time by mean of Twitter API, store 

Data Retrieval 

Amazon EC2 

Data Processing 

Darknet 
post 

Tweets 

Dictionaries 

Sensor Fusion 

Warning Generation 

Fig. 1. Workflow of the method. 

in Amazon EC2, and retrieve use Elastic Search, an open 
source search engine base on Apache Lucene that provide a 
distributed, multitenant-capable full-text search with a schema- 
free JSON documents. 

Darkweb and deepweb crawl infrastructure.: We 
briefly recap the infrastructure for crawl the darkweb and 
deepweb originally introduce in [4], [5]. In this context, dark- 
web refers to site access through anonymization protocol 
such a Tor and i2p, while deepweb refers to non-indexed site 
on the open Internet [6]. Our crawl infrastructure handle 
site of both types. The framework consists of an infrastructure 
that enables lightweight crawler and parser that be focus 
on specific sites. At the time of this writing, we have create 
crawler and parser for a manually-compiled list of nearly 
200 site relate to malicious hack and/or online financial 
fraud, include fishing, spear-fishing, ransomware, credit card 
frauds, etc. While our framework enables common crawl 
and parse task base on aspect such a protocol and site 
structure, it remains imperative to use focus crawler due 
to the variety of sites. The use of customize parser allow 
information from a variety of website to be store in a 
unified RDBMS schema which simplifies data cleaning [4], 
tag [7], and other analysis [8]. These step help ensure that 
the obtain data remains relevant to cyber-security use cases: 
indeed, many darkweb and deepweb forum and marketplace 
also involve other illicit activity such a drug market and 
the sale of steal goods. To interface with the remainder of 
our method, we use a REST-based API, that allows to access 
posts’ content and metadata such a publication date, authors’ 
usernames, authors’ reputations, etc. 

B. Data Processing 

After every iteration of the data collection, the tweet that 
have be retrieve be pre-processed use traditional text 
mining techniques: each tweet be lowercased, and numbers, 
symbols, Twitter handle and URLs be removed. At the end 
of this pre-processing stage, text be tokenized and all the tweet 
collect be aggregate and reduce to a unique list of terms. 



For example, on September 5th 2016, between 8am and 9am 
GMT, a tweet that read ”My interview to @MalwareMustDie 
for @SecurityAffairs on a new Botnet target #IoT. Details 
on #Mirai trojan #Linux ” have be retweeted seven time by 
the cyber-security expert that our system be monitoring. These 
seven identical tweet have be reduce to the follow list 
of terms: my, interview, to, for, on, a, new, botnet, targeting, 
iot, details, mirai, trojan, linux. 

Each execution of the data pre-processing stage result in a 
very long list of terms, many of which be not related to cyber- 
threats. To address this issue, our framework automatically 
excludes any discover term that appear in any of the 
follow dictionaries: 

• english dictionary: 235, 892 common English 
words—e.g. interview, new, details, ...; 

• stopwords dictionary: 2, 390 stopwords (for En- 
glish, German, Italian, French, etc.)—e.g. to, on, a, for, 
...; 

• technical dictionary: 57, 459 technical and 
context-specific term that have be use from January, 
2013 to August, 2016 by cyber-security expert the al- 
gorithm be monitoring—e.g. hacker, domain, dns, ...; we 
manually create and curated this dictionary by analyze 
the past six and a half year of activity of such expert 
on Twitter; 

• threat dictionary: 25 general term indicat- 
ing know type of cyber-threats—e.g. ddos, phishing, 
databreach, botnet, etc; we curated this list manually; 

• italian dictionary: 129, 121 common Italian 
words—e.g. intervista, attacco, spazio, ...—needed since 
sometimes a few of the cyber-security expert tweet in 
Italian; other non-English dictionary may be also use 
depend on the set of expert that the system leverages. 

The four-stage filter process allows the system to gener- 
ate warning only for term that be likely to be related to new 
cyber-threats. Using english dictionary, stopwords 
dictionary, italian dictionary, we filter out com- 
mon word that be unlikely to be related to cyber-threats; 
whereas by mean of the technical dictionary we 
remove several context-specific word that have be use in 
the past by the cyber-security expert that we be monitoring. 
Finally, those word that do not co-occur with term contain 
in the threat dictionary be removed. This last stage 
of the filter process be necessary to avoid the generation of 
warning for word that because of their novelty be likely to 
pas through the first three filter stages—e.g. word related 
to socio-political or novel trend topic discuss on Twitter. 

Continuing the illustrative example, after the filter pro- 
cess, the original list of term obtain by tokenizing tweet 
have be reduce to a list contain only a single word: 
mirai. The four-stage filter process be able to filter out 
common word (interview, new, details), stopwords (my, to, 
for, on, a) and several context-specific word (targeting, botnet, 
linux, trojan, iot) include in the dictionaries. Then, since the 
unique word left, mirai, co-occurs with term related to cyber- 

threat include in the threat dictionary, the algorithm 
proceeds to the third stage: sensor fusion. 

C. Sensor Fusion 

After raw data have be process and irrelevant term 
filter out, the algorithm verifies whether the newly discov- 
ered term have ever be use in a set of darkweb hack 
forums. In fact, our algorithm relies on an up-to-date collection 
of all the post that have be publish in nearly 200 darkweb 
hack forum a well a social media. These post be 
store in Amazon EC2 and retrieve use Elastic Search. 
Continuing our example, in this stage the algorithm make a 
Elastic Search query to look for occurrence of the word mirai 
throughout all the post that have be publish on deepweb 
and darkweb forums. Eventually, the algorithm report volume 
and content of post mention the discover term, often 
point either to link to steal credential or thread where 
a novel vulnerability be discussed. 

D. Warnings Generation 

In the final stage, the algorithm generates alert provide 
some information related to it. Eventually, for each alert that 
pass all the four filter stage and that occur more than 
once in the observe period, the algorithm generates a warn 
reporting: 

• The term that have be discover and that be likely to 
be related to current or imminent cyber-threats; 

• The number of time that the discover term have be 
mention on Twitter during the previous 60 minutes; 

• The number of time that the discover term have be 
mention on deepweb and darkweb hack forum and 
marketplace so far; 

• The content of post where the discover term have be 
mention on deepweb and darkweb hack forum so 
far; 

• A collection of term include in the threat 
dictionary that co-occurred in the tweet mention 
the discover term. Such a collection of word provide 
semantic context for situational awareness that facilitates 
the interpretation of the generate warning. 

Continuing our example, the warn that have be gener- 
ated after data processing and sensor fusion is: 

• time: current time; 
• threat: mirai; 
• frequency on Twitter: 7; 
• frequency on Darknet/Deepweb: 0; 
• post on Darknet/Deepweb: empty; 
• context: botnet, linux, iot, trojan. 

III. PRECISION AND PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 

To evaluate the accuracy of our framework, we ran it from 
September 1, 2016 to January 31, 2017 and collect all the 
warning that have be generate during that period. Then, 
we ask to 5 annotator with extensive knowledge in cyber- 
security to independently annotate each warn a legitimate 
cyber-threat or false alarm. Annotators be instruct to 



Fig. 2. Number of warning generate on a daily basis, along with their precision, the average fraction of expert agree on false alarms, and the 
amount of related tweet and darknet posts. Main event related to different type of attack be also annotate on the timeline. 

annotator threat false alarm precision (%) 
1 540 121 81.69 
2 532 129 80.48 
3 565 96 85.48 
4 534 127 80.79 
5 578 83 87.44 

TABLE I 
ALGORITHM’S PRECISION ACCORDING TO DIFFERENT ANNOTATORS. 

mark a warn a legitimate cyber-threat if and only if the 
discover word be strongly related to imminent or current 
cyber-threats. The annotator be further instruct about the 
possibility of use Google search to try identify attack that 
occur before, during, or after the warn generation time 
involve the specific threat. This enhance the annotator’s 
ability to determine whether the warn generate by our 
system be correlate to an actual attack or just a spurious 
coincidence (e.g., an old news regard some old threat be 
retweeted and become contemporary even though no current 
or future threat occurred). 

Over this period, the algorithm generate 661 alerts, of 
which about 84% have be consider legitimate cyber- 
threats, from data breach to novel vulnerabilities, by the 
majority (i.e. at least 3) of the annotators. Table I report 
precision accord to each annotator. 

Warnings annotate a false alarm be mostly represent 
by term too generic to be consider legitimate cyber-threats 
or foreign language terms. Notice that the performance of 
our algorithm could be improve use additional dictionary 
(e.g., other foreign languages) or add new word to existent 
dictionaries. 

Figure 2 show the number of warning generate along 
with the average fraction of expert agree on false alarms, 
and the number of related post occur on Twitter and 
on the Darknet/Deepweb. For each day, we also show the 

achieve discover precision. Table II show some popular 
cyber-threats for which the algorithm generate several warn- 
ings. In particular, the algorithm found malware and ran- 
domware softwares, such a gooligan and luabot, both asso- 
ciated with disruptive attack occur during our observation 
period; vulnerability such a Mirai; and data breach such a 
AdultFriendFinder, and BrazzersForum, which we will discus 
in the follow section. 

Concerning the execution performance, the average time 
require to complete the entire workflow—from data retrieval 
to warn generation—is 0.6 seconds. Such a fast execution 
time be guaranteed by streamline it entire workflow by 
mean of Elastic Search, a distribute search engine that 
provide a powerful, scalable, and fast infrastructure for data 
retrieval. 

IV. SCENARIO ANALYSIS 

In this section we provide evidence of the effectiveness of 
our method. In particular, we analyze two different scenarios, 
show how our algorithm be able to identify imminent and 
current cyber-threats: 

• Vulnerabilities: we will discus how the method can 
be effectively use to timely predict vulnerability 
that can be exploit in association with future cyber 
attacks. We will focus on the most prominent event 
during our analysis period (September 1, to January 31, 
2017), namely Mirai and the disruption of the Dyn DNS 
operation occur in October 2016; 

• Data breaches: we will demonstrate how the method 
timely identify the availability of leak data on dark- 
web/deepweb, a a consequence of data breach due to 
cyber attacks; we will cover two instance of such data 
breaches, namely the publication on the darkweb of sen- 



Fig. 3. Timeline of Mirai warnings. 

discover type of number of mention on mention on 
word threat warning twitter darkweb 
mirai vulnerability 94 537 85 

teamxrat ransomware 13 30 0 
luabot trojan 12 27 0 

cryptoluck ransomware 12 29 0 
clixsense data breach 12 26 5 
gooligan malware 9 26 0 

usbee malware 9 18 0 
adultfriendfinder data breach 9 23 0 

starhub data breach 9 82 0 
badepilogue malware 8 21 0 

evony data breach 8 25 0 
TABLE II 

TOP CYBER-THREATS ANTICIPATED BY THE METHOD. 

sitive data on user of two platforms, AdultFriendFinder, 
and BrazzersForum. 

A. Vulnerabilities 

a) Mirai.: In the introduction of this paper we mention 
the attack perpetrate on October 21, 2016 towards Dyn, a 
popular domain name system service provider. In this section 
we show how our algorithm generate warning that could 
have allow the organization to anticipate and prepare for 
the attack. 

The first warning related to the vulnerability that eventually 
lead to the aforementioned cyber attack be generate on 
September 5, 2016 between 7am and 9am GMT. A tweet 
link to a blog post describe a vulnerability in the operat- 
ing system of Internet of Things (IoT) device be retweeted 
several time by the monitor cyber-security experts. Our 
algorithm generate two warning for the term mirai on that 
morning. The warning generate by our system show that 
the term mirai be mention 14 time between 7am and 9am 
GMT of September 5, 2016 along with term related to cyber- 
threat such a malware, botnet, linux, iot, trojan. 

Mirai be a malware that turn computer system run 
Linux—primarily IoT device such a remote camera and 
home routers—into remotely control bots, that can be use 
a part of a botnet in large-scale network attacks. Devices 
infect by Mirai continuously scan and identify further vul- 
nerable IoT device use a table of more than 60 common 
factory default usernames and passwords; once a vulnerable 
device be identified, Mirai log into it and infects it with a 

copy of it malware. Infected device will continue to function 
normally, except for an increase use of bandwidth, associate 
to the scan activity, and/or the execution of distribute 
denial of service attack (DDoS). There be hundred of 
thousand of IoT device that use default settings, make 
them vulnerable to infection. Once infected, the device will 
monitor a command and control server which indicates the 
target of an attack. The use of a large number of IoT device 
allows to bypass some anti-DDoS software which monitor 
the IP address of incoming request and filter or set up a 
block if it identifies an abnormal traffic pattern—e.g. if too 
many request come from a particular IP address. Moreover, 
a large number of different infect device can provide more 
bandwidth than the perpetrator can assemble alone, a well a 
reduce the chance of be traced. 

On October 1, the algorithm generate further warning for 
the term mirai and found that mirai be mention several 
time on darkweb forum a well. Indeed, on September 30, 
the source code of a software kit exploit this vulnerability 
be release on one of the darkweb forum that the method 
constantly monitors. 

In the follow days, several warning be generate for 
the term mirai, always emphasize it co-occurrence with 
term such a botnet and iot. In fact, the news of source code 
release quickly spread online, through blog post and news 
stories, cause significant online chatter on Twitter and hacker 
forum that be promptly detect by our system. Figure 3 
show the timeline of warning generate for the word mirai. 

Summarizing, the algorithm be able to generate warning 



for a vulnerability with a lead time of 49 day before hacker 
manage to exploit it to take over thousand of IoT device 
and launch large scale distribute attacks. Moreover, since 
October 1—almost three week before the main attack of 
October 21, 2016—the warning be advise that the term 
mirai be mention on darkweb/deepweb forum where user 
be share knowledge and source code to exploit such 
a vulnerability, thus indicate that the threat be real and 
imminent. 

This scenario illustrates the inherent predictability of such 
type of cyber attacks: the preparation of these event often oc- 
cur in plain sight, discuss on online platform and publicly- 
accessible discussion forums. Our system leverage the human 
component that contributes to the attacks’ preparation and 
leaf online digital trace behind. 

B. Data Breaches 

a) AdultFriendFinder.: On November 14, 2016 several 
news outlet report that more than 300M account of the 
popular adult date website AdultFriendFinder be expose 
in a massive data breach. 

The day before, on November 13, 2016 the algorithm 
start to issue several warning related to the word adult- 
friendfinder and associate with term such a breach, ac- 
counts, databreach (see Fig. 4). Our warning point to 6 
mention of adultfriendfinder in darkweb and deepnet forums. 
Further inspection of these post provide information about 
how to access to the leak data, a well a link to market- 
place be the leak data be sold. 

b) BrazzersForum.: On September 5, 2016 newspaper 
and magazine report that nearly 800K account for popular 
adult website Brazzers be expose in a data breach. 

On September 6, 2016 our algorithm generate 4 warning 
related to the word brazzersforum and associate with term 
such a account and databreach (see Fig. 5). Initially, the 
algorithm do not find any mention to brazzersforum in 
deepnet and darkweb forums, but two day later, on September 
8, the algorithm generate additional warning indicate 65 
mention to brazzersforum in deepnet and darkweb forums. 
Such sources, again, provide various form of access to these 
leak data. 

This case demonstrates that some event be more challeng- 
ing to predict than others, since the system do not anticipate 
the data breach, differently from the AdultFriendFinder case. 
However, the method be yet capable of identify source 
that provide data availability, yield actionable insight to 
analyst and decision maker to limit the damage of cyber- 
threat that have already occurred. 

V. RELATED WORK 

The framework introduce in this paper leverage the 
communication of malicious actor on darkweb and deepnet 
hack forum a well a the activity of cyber-security expert 
on Twitter. 

Previous work analyze hacker forum to detect threat that 
pose great risk to individuals, organizations, and governments. 

Research show that the distribution of information among 
user be base on their skill level and reputation [9]–[11]. 
Still, user disseminate tacit knowledge and share tool such 
a malware sample and source code by simply attach 
them to post message [12], [13]. Moreover, knowledge 
and methodology be disseminate among hacker in the form 
of tutorial either write a text file or in the form of 
instructional video [10]. Many of these tutorial directly 
enable reader to launch criminal cyber attack such a denial 
of services, SQL injections, cross-scripting attacks, and more 
[14]. Researchers identify the presence of such hacker com- 
munities to be common across various geopolitical regions, 
include the US, China, Russia, the Middle-East, and other 
region where information technology be either ubiquitous 
or rapidly grow [15], [16]. 

Previous study on online social medium suggest that Twit- 
ter might serve a an important tool to predict future event 
in different domains, include earthquake detection [17], 
epidemiology [18], [19], and the stock market [20], [21]. In 
the security domain, much work have be devote to Twitter a 
object of manipulation and abuse [22], study the effect of 
spam account [23], [24], social bot [25], [26], and malicious 
campaign [27]–[31]. Sabottke et al. publish the first study 
to use social medium to identify cyber vulnerability [1]; we 
push this concept further and use security expert and their 
Twitter activity a source for cyber-threat anticipation. 

VI. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 

In this paper we introduce a framework that generates 
warning for imminent or current cyber-threats by leverag- 
ing unconventional, public data sensor such a Twitter and 
the Darknet. The performance evaluation report in Section 
III highlight that our system provide very high discovery 
precision, which could be easily improve by add new 
dictionary (e.g., foreign language dictionaries), enrich the 
existent one, and improve the threat dictionary to include 
new attack terms. Indeed, the vast majority of false alarm 
report by the annotator be due to foreign language term 
and term related to cyber-security yet too generic to be 
consider a real threats. The recall of our system may be 
improve by expand the list of monitor experts, and 
add further data sources. 

In Section IV, our analysis of the timeline of warning 
point out how our algorithm could have allow orga- 
nizations to anticipate and prepare for attack that cause 
wide spread disruption in fall 2016. In particular, the sys- 
tem generate warning for mirai—the vulnerability that be 
exploited—49 day before hacker take over thousand of IoT 
device and unleashed a massive DDoS attack that put the 
Internet infrastructure on it knee and disrupt the operation 
of hundred of organizations, include bank and financial 
institutions, the entertainment industry, the US government, 
and various foreign countries. Furthermore, start three 
week before the attack, the warning be also identify 
that the term mirai be mention on darkweb hacker forums, 
in association with the availability of software toolkits to 



Nov 11 2016 Nov 13 2016 Nov 15 2016 Nov 17 2016 Nov 19 2016 Nov 21 2016 Nov 23 2016 
0 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

w 
a 
rn 

in 
g 
s 

First warning Data breach 
report by news outlet 

Fig. 4. Timeline of AdultFriendFinder warnings. 

Sep 04 2016 Sep 05 2016 Sep 06 2016 Sep 07 2016 Sep 08 2016 Sep 09 2016 Sep 10 2016 Sep 11 2016 
0 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

w 
a 
rn 

in 
g 
s 

Data breach report 
by news outlet 

Warnings point to 
65 mention in darknet 

Fig. 5. Timeline of BrazzersForum warnings. 

automate attack operations, stress out that the threat be 
imminent even further. 

However, we have notice that for certain threats, such a 
the one related to BrazzersForums, our algorithm be not able to 
produce warning before the actual event occurs. To face this 
problem, we be now work on extend our algorithm to 
monitor multiple data source at a time, e.g., Twitter, Darkweb 
forums, cyber security related Blogs, etc. This new extension 
will allow to generate warning from several data source and 
thus to detect cyber threat that might be not mention in 
Twitter or that might be mention in other source early 
than in Twitter. As an example, by continuously monitoring the 
warning generate by our method we be able to detect the 
two major attack that occur on May 12th, 2017 and on Jun 
27th, 2017 respectively related to the ransomwares Wannacry 
and Petya. The method take Twitter a a primary source 
produce the follow warnings. 

a) Wannacry: 24 warning related to the word wannacry, 
and 7 to wannacrypt be generate on May 12th. However, 
by monitoring other source we have mention in cyber 
security related Blogs of the word wannacry, wannacrypt, 
and wcry, which first appear in Apr 18th and that our method 
could easily mark a warnings. 

b) Petya: : 5 and 3 warning related to the word petrwrap 
(other name for petya) be respectively generate back in 
March, 15th and March 21st. This signal disappears in Twitter 
until Jun 27th, the day of the cyber attack. The method 
be indeed able to generate early warning related to this 
ransomware. However, the use of additional source could help 
to continuously monitor the mention of a discover word. 
In the present, case we have see mention of petwrwrap in 
the Darkweb forum both in March and April, 2017. 

Future work will be also devote both to find a baseline 
model that could be use to compare the performance of 
our algorithm and to develop a method to automatically 
annotate the date in which a cyber threat becomes public. This 
improvement will enable to further evaluate the algorithm, by 
compute the average temporal length of the algorithm to 
discover new cyber threat in advance. 

Finally, our method be still be improve with the aim 
to generate more detailed and informative warnings. Future 
version of the algorithm will include a Natural Language 
Processing (NLP) stage aim at extract knowledge and 
insight from the Darkweb post mention the discover 
terms. In particular, we be develop NLP method to 
recognize entity such a actor (hackers or groups), target 



(organizations, specific sectors, etc.), source codes, etc. We 
will consider extend our monitor keyword list to layman 
term (out-of-service, unavailable, etc., instead of e.g., DDoS), 
monitor community of open-source software developer (e.g., 
Android, Linux, etc.) to timely identify new bug and vulner- 
ability a they become publicly known. 

We plan to leverage computational linguistic method to 
investigate personality trait and socio-cultural trait of user 
mention the discover word on darkweb forums: this will 
allow u to determine the credibility of a threat base on the 
expertise and the intent demonstrate by the actor associate 
to it. 

VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The author be support by the Office of the Director of 

National Intelligence (ODNI) and the Intelligence Advanced 
Research Projects Activity (IARPA) via the Air Force Re- 
search Laboratory (AFRL) contract number FA8750-16-C- 
0112. The U.S. Government be authorize to reproduce and 
distribute reprint for Governmental purpose notwithstanding 
any copyright annotation thereon. Disclaimer: The view and 
conclusion contain herein be those of the author and 
should not be interpret a necessarily represent the offi- 
cial policy or endorsements, either express or implied, of 
ODNI, IARPA, AFRL, or the U.S. Government. 

The author would like to thank Sindhu Kiranmai Ernala 
of Georgia Institute of Technology for her contribution to the 
paper. 

REFERENCES 
[1] C. Sabottke, O. Suciu, and T. Dumitras, “Vulnerability disclosure in 

the age of social media: Exploiting twitter for predict real-world 
exploits.” in USENIX Security, vol. 15, 2015. 

[2] E. Nunes, A. Diab, A. Gunn, E. Marin, V. Mishra, V. Paliath, J. Robert- 
son, J. Shakarian, A. Thart, and P. Shakarian, “Darknet and deepnet 
mining for proactive cybersecurity threat intelligence,” in Intelligence 
and Security Informatics (ISI), 2016 IEEE Conference on. IEEE, 2016, 
pp. 7–12. 

[3] S. Mittal, P. K. Das, V. Mulwad, A. Joshi, and T. Finin, “Cybertwitter: 
Using twitter to generate alert for cybersecurity threat and vulnerabil- 
ities,” in Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM), 
2016 IEEE/ACM International Conference on. IEEE, 2016, pp. 860– 
867. 

[4] E. Nunes, A. Diab, A. T. Gunn, E. Marin, V. Mishra, V. Paliath, 
J. Robertson, J. Shakarian, A. Thart, and P. Shakarian, “Darknet and 
deepnet mining for proactive cybersecurity threat intelligence,” in IEEE 
Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics, ISI, 2016, pp. 
7–12. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISI.2016.7745435 

[5] J. Robertson, A. Diab, E. Marin, E. Nunes, V. Paliath, J. Shakarian, and 
P. Shakarian, Darkweb Cyber Threat Intelligence Mining. Cambridge 
University Press, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://books.google.com/ 
books?id=aKtRvgAACAAJ 

[6] J. Shakarian, A. T. Gunn, and P. Shakarian, “Exploring malicious 
hacker forums,” in Cyber Deception, Building the Scientific Foundation. 
Springer, 2016, pp. 261–284. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10. 
1007/978-3-319-32699-3 11 

[7] E. Marin, A. Diab, and P. Shakarian, “Product offering in 
malicious hacker markets,” in IEEE Conference on Intelligence and 
Security Informatics, ISI, 2016, pp. 187–189. [Online]. Available: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISI.2016.7745465 

[8] J. Robertson, V. Paliath, J. Shakarian, A. Thart, and P. Shakarian, 
“Data driven game theoretic cyber threat mitigation,” in Proceedings 
of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, February 
12-17, 2016, Phoenix, Arizona, USA., 2016, pp. 4041–4046. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/IAAI/IAAI16/paper/view/ 
12041 

[9] T. J. Holt, “Subcultural evolution? examine the influence of on-and 
off-line experience on deviant subcultures,” Deviant Behavior, vol. 28, 
no. 2, pp. 171–198, 2007. 

[10] T. J. Holt, D. Strumsky, O. Smirnova, and M. Kilger, “Examining the 
social network of malware writer and hackers,” International Journal 
of Cyber Criminology, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 891, 2012. 

[11] T. Jordan and P. Taylor, “A sociology of hackers,” The Sociological 
Review, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 757–780, 1998. 

[12] H. Fallmann, G. Wondracek, and C. Platzer, “Covertly probe under- 
ground economy marketplaces,” in International Conference on Detec- 
tion of Intrusions and Malware, and Vulnerability Assessment. Springer, 
2010, pp. 101–110. 

[13] V. Benjamin and H. Chen, “Securing cyberspace: Identifying key actor 
in hacker communities,” in Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), 
2012 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2012, pp. 24–29. 

[14] V. Benjamin, W. Li, T. Holt, and H. Chen, “Exploring threat and 
vulnerability in hacker web: Forums, irc and card shops,” in 
Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), 2015 IEEE International 
Conference on. IEEE, 2015, pp. 85–90. 

[15] M. Motoyama, D. McCoy, K. Levchenko, S. Savage, and G. M. Voelker, 
“An analysis of underground forums,” in Proceedings of the 2011 ACM 
SIGCOMM conference on Internet measurement conference. ACM, 
2011, pp. 71–80. 

[16] V. Benjamin and H. Chen, “Time-to-event model for predict 
hacker irc community participant trajectory,” in Intelligence and Security 
Informatics Conference (JISIC), 2014 IEEE Joint. IEEE, 2014, pp. 25– 
32. 

[17] T. Sakaki, M. Okazaki, and Y. Matsuo, “Earthquake shake twitter users: 
real-time event detection by social sensors,” in Proceedings of the 19th 
international conference on World wide web. ACM, 2010, pp. 851–860. 

[18] E. Aramaki, S. Maskawa, and M. Morita, “Twitter catch the flu: detect- 
ing influenza epidemic use twitter,” in Proceedings of the conference 
on empirical method in natural language processing. Association for 
Computational Linguistics, 2011, pp. 1568–1576. 

[19] D. A. Broniatowski, M. J. Paul, and M. Dredze, “National and local 
influenza surveillance through twitter: an analysis of the 2012-2013 
influenza epidemic,” PloS one, vol. 8, no. 12, p. e83672, 2013. 

[20] J. Bollen, H. Mao, and X. Zeng, “Twitter mood predicts the stock 
market,” Journal of computational science, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2011. 

[21] J. Bollen, H. Mao, and A. Pepe, “Modeling public mood and emotion: 
Twitter sentiment and socio-economic phenomena.” ICWSM, vol. 11, 
pp. 450–453, 2011. 

[22] E. Ferrara, “Manipulation and abuse on social media,” ACM SIGWEB 
Newsletter, no. Spring, p. 4, 2015. 

[23] A. H. Wang, “Don’t follow me: Spam detection in twitter,” in Security 
and Cryptography (SECRYPT), Proceedings of the 2010 International 
Conference on. IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–10. 

[24] F. Benevenuto, G. Magno, T. Rodrigues, and V. Almeida, “Detecting 
spammer on twitter,” in Collaboration, electronic messaging, anti-abuse 
and spam conference (CEAS), vol. 6, 2010, p. 12. 

[25] E. Ferrara, O. Varol, C. Davis, F. Menczer, and A. Flammini, “The rise 
of social bots,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 96–104, 
2016. 

[26] V. Subrahmanian, A. Azaria, S. Durst, V. Kagan, A. Galstyan, K. Ler- 
man, L. Zhu, E. Ferrara, A. Flammini, and F. Menczer, “The darpa 
twitter bot challenge,” Computer, vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 38–46, 2016. 

[27] J. Ratkiewicz, M. Conover, M. R. Meiss, B. Gonçalves, A. Flammini, 
and F. Menczer, “Detecting and track political abuse in social media.” 
ICWSM, vol. 11, pp. 297–304, 2011. 

[28] K. Thomas, C. Grier, and V. Paxson, “Adapting social spam infrastruc- 
ture for political censorship.” in LEET, 2012. 

[29] A. Bessi and E. Ferrara, “Social bot distort the 2016 u presidential 
election online discussion,” First Monday, vol. 21, no. 11, 2016. 

[30] O. Varol, E. Ferrara, C. Davis, F. Menczer, and A. Flammini, “Online 
human-bot interactions: Detection, estimation, and characterization,” in 
International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, 2017, pp. 
280–289. 

[31] E. Ferrara, “Disinformation and social bot operation in the run up to the 
2017 french presidential election,” First Monday, vol. 22, no. 8, 2017. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISI.2016.7745435 
https://books.google.com/books?id=aKtRvgAACAAJ 
https://books.google.com/books?id=aKtRvgAACAAJ 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-32699-3_11 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-32699-3_11 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISI.2016.7745465 
http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/IAAI/IAAI16/paper/view/12041 
http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/IAAI/IAAI16/paper/view/12041 

I Introduction 
II Method 
II-A Data Retrieval 
II-B Data Processing 
II-C Sensor Fusion 
II-D Warnings Generation 

III Precision and Performance Evaluation 
IV Scenario Analysis 
IV-A Vulnerabilities 
IV-B Data Breaches 

V Related Work 
VI Discussion and Conclusions 
VII Acknowledgments 
References 

