






































Editing brain activity with holography 


Editing brain activity with holography 

What if we could edit the sensation we feel; paste in our brain picture that we never saw, cut out 
unwanted pain or insert non-existent scent into memory? 

UC Berkeley neuroscientist be building the equipment to do just that, use holographic 
projection into the brain to activate or suppress dozen and ultimately thousand of neuron at 
once, hundred of time each second, copying real pattern of brain activity to fool the brain into 
think it have felt, see or sense something. 

Video show neuron activity in three layer of a small chunk of the somatosensory cortex of a 
mouse’s brain. Activated neuron fluoresce green. Those neuron that be activate by holographic 
laser light be indicate by a purple arrow. Projected via a microscope through a window into the 
brain, the holographic system can activate neuron to simulate real brain activity and insert false 
sensations. (UC Berkeley video by Stephen McNally and Roxanne Makasdjian use Alan Mardinly 
footage) 

The goal be to read neural activity constantly and decide, base on the activity, which set of 
neuron to activate to simulate the pattern and rhythm of an actual brain response, so a to 
replace lose sensation after peripheral nerve damage, for example, or control a prosthetic limb. 

“This have great potential for neural prostheses, since it have the precision need for the brain to 
interpret the pattern of activation. If you can read and write the language of the brain, you can 
speak to it in it own language and it can interpret the message much better,” say Alan Mardinly, 
a postdoctoral fellow in the UC Berkeley lab of Hillel Adesnik, an assistant professor of molecular 
and cell biology. “This be one of the first step in a long road to develop a technology that could be a 
virtual brain implant with additional sens or enhance senses.” 

Mardinly be one of three first author of a paper appear online April 30 in advance of 
publication in the journal Nature Neuroscience that describes the holographic brain modulator, 
which can activate up to 50 neuron at once in a three-dimensional chunk of brain contain 
several thousand neurons, and repeat that up to 300 time a second with different set of 50 
neurons. 

“The ability to talk to the brain have the incredible potential to help compensate for neurological 
damage cause by degenerative disease or injury,” say Ehud Isacoff, a UC Berkeley professor of 
molecular and cell biology and director of the Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, who be not 
involve in the research project. “By encode perception into the human cortex, you could allow 
the blind to see or the paralyze to feel touch.” 

Holographic projection 

Each of the 2,000 to 3,000 neuron in the chunk of brain be outfit with a protein that, when 
hit by a flash of light, turn the cell on to create a brief spike of activity. One of the key 
breakthrough be find a way to target each cell individually without hit all at once. 

Editing brain activity with holography http://news.berkeley.edu/2018/04/30/editing-brain-activity-with-holography/ 

1 sur 3 04-05-18 à 08:30 



A sample hologram with 50 randomly distribute neuron target span a region 500 micron 
square and 250 micron deep. 

To focus the light onto just the cell body — a target small than the width of a human hair — of 
nearly all cell in a chunk of brain, they turn to computer generate holography, a method of 
bending and focus light to form a three-dimensional spatial pattern. The effect be a if a 3D 
image be float in space. 

In this case, the holographic image be project into a thin layer of brain tissue at the surface of 
the cortex, about a tenth of a millimeter thick, though a clear window into the brain. 

“The major advance be the ability to control neuron precisely in space and time,” say postdoc 
Nicolas Pégard, another first author who work both in Adesnik’s lab and the lab of co-author 
Laura Waller, an associate professor of electrical engineering and computer sciences. “In other 
words, to shoot the very specific set of neuron you want to activate and do it at the characteristic 
scale and the speed at which they normally work.” 

The researcher have already test the prototype in the touch, vision and motor area of the 
brain of mouse a they walk on a treadmill with their head immobilized. While they have not note 
any behavior change in the mouse when their brain be stimulated, Mardinly say that their brain 
activity — which be measure in real-time with two-photon image of calcium level in the 
neuron — show pattern similar to a response to a sensory stimulus. They’re now training mouse 
so they can detect behavior change after stimulation. 

Prosthetics and brain implant 

The area of the brain cover — now a slice one-half millimeter square and one-tenth of a 
millimeter thick — can be scale up to read from and write to more neuron in the brain’s outer 
layer, or cortex, Pégard said. And the laser holography setup could eventually be miniaturize to 
fit in a backpack a person could haul around. 

Mardinly, Pégard and the other first author, postdoc Ian Oldenburg, construct the holographic 
brain modulator by make technological advance in a number of areas. Mardinly and 
Oldenburg, together with Savitha Sridharan, a research associate in the lab, developed good 
optogenetic switch to insert into cell to turn them on and off. The switch — light-activated ion 
channel on the cell surface that open briefly when trigger — turn on strongly and then quickly 
shut off, all in about 3 milliseconds, so they’re ready to be re-stimulated up to 50 or more time 
per second, consistent with normal fire rate in the cortex. 

Editing brain activity with holography http://news.berkeley.edu/2018/04/30/editing-brain-activity-with-holography/ 

2 sur 3 04-05-18 à 08:30 



Pégard developed the holographic projection system use a liquid crystal screen that act like a 
holographic negative to sculpt the light from 40W laser into the desire 3D pattern. The laser 
be pulse in 300 femtosecond-long burst every microsecond. He, Mardinly, Oldenburg and their 
colleague publish a paper last year describe the device, which they call 3D-SHOT, for three- 
dimensional scanless holographic optogenetics with temporal focusing. 

“This be the culmination of technology that researcher have be work on for a while, but 
have be impossible to put together,” Mardinly said. “We solve numerous technical problem at 
the same time to bring it all together and finally realize the potential of this technology.” 

As they improve their technology, they plan to start capture real pattern of activity in the cortex 
in order to learn how to reproduce sensation and perception to play back through their 
holographic system. 

Other UC Berkeley co-authors be graduate student Evan Lyall, undergraduate Kirill Chesnov and 
Stephen Brohawn, an assistant professor of molecular and cell biology. The work be support by 
The New York Stem Cell Foundation, Arnold and Mabel Beckman Foundation, National Institute 
of Neurological Diseases and Stroke, McKnight Foundation, Simon’s Foundation Collaboration for 
the Global Brain, David and Lucille Packard Foundation and Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency. 

RELATED INFORMATION 

Precise multimodal optical control of neural ensemble activity (Nature Neuroscience) 
Three-dimensional scanless holographic optogenetics with temporal focus (3D- 
SHOT) (2017 Nature Communications) 
Hillel Adesnik’s lab website 
Laura Waller’s lab website 

Editing brain activity with holography http://news.berkeley.edu/2018/04/30/editing-brain-activity-with-holography/ 

3 sur 3 04-05-18 à 08:30 


