






































Effects of income inequality on economic growth | VOX, CEPRâ•Žs Policy Portal 


Columns Video Vox Vox Talks Publications People Debates Events About 

VOX CEPR's Policy Portal 
Research-based policy analysis and commentary from lead economist 

Create account | Login | Subscribe 

88 A A 

Related 

Growth, inequality, and social welfare 
David Dollar, Tatjana Kleineberg, Aart Kraay 

Why do inequality grow? 
Coen Teulings 

How to address inequality 
Jeffrey Frankel 

Human capital and income inequality 
Amparo Castelló-Climent, Rafael Doménech 

Effects of income inequality on economic growth 

Markus Brückner, Daniel Lederman 07 July 2015 

The relationship between aggregate output and income inequality be central in macroeconomics. This column 

argues that great income inequality raise the economic growth of poor country and decrease the growth 

of high- and middle-income countries. Human capital accumulation be an important channel through which 

income inequality affect growth. 

Aggregate output and income distribution 

The relationship between aggregate output and the 
distribution of income be an important topic in 
macroeconomics (Galor 2011). The role that income 
inequality play in economic growth have also receive 
quite a bit of attention in policy circle and the press 
recently. For instance, the World Bank Group have 
include among it key global objective for 
development the eradication of extreme poverty and 
boost the income of the bottom 40% of develop countries. The IMF have weigh in with a 
discussion on the role of income distribution a a cause and consequence of economic growth (see, 

Markus Brückner 
Professor of Economics, 

University of Queensland 

Daniel Lederman 
Senior Economist, Development 

Economics Research Group, 

World Bank 

Don't Miss 

By Topic By Date By Reads By Tag 

Cookie Control 

This site us cooky to store 

information on your computer. 

About this tool 

Effects of income inequality on economic growth | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/effects-income-inequality-economic-growth 

1 sur 5 14/08/2017 19:18 



for example, Ostry et al. 2014). 

In a recent paper (Brueckner and Lederman 2015), we provide estimate of the within-country effect 
that income inequality have on aggregate output. Our empirical analysis start from the premise that 
the effect of change in income inequality on GDP per caput may differ between rich and poor 
countries. This premise be ground in economic theory. In a seminal contribution, Galor and Zeira 
(1993) propose a model with credit market imperfection and indivisibilities in investment to show 
that inequality affect GDP per caput in the short run a well a in the long run. Galor and Zeira’s 
model predicts that the effect of rise inequality on GDP per caput be negative in relatively rich 
country but positive in poor countries. We test this prediction by introduce in the panel model an 
interaction term between income inequality and countries' initial (i.e. begin of sample) GDP per 
capita. 

How large be the effects? 

Our empirical analysis show that for the average country in the sample during 1970-2010, 
increase in income inequality reduce GDP per capita. 

Specifically, we find that, on average, a 1 percentage point increase in the Gini coefficient reduces 
GDP per caput by around 1.1% over a five-year period; the long-run (cumulative) effect be large 
and amount to about -4.5%. 

To be clear, this find implies that, on average, increase in the level of income inequality lead to 
low transitional GDP per caput growth. Increases in the level of income inequality have a 
negative long-run effect on the level of GDP per capita. We document the robustness of this result 
to alternative measure of income inequality, alternative income inequality data sources, splitting the 
sample between pre- and post-1990 period (end of the Cold War), and restrict the sample to 
country locate in Latin America and the Caribbean or Asia. 

While the average effect of income inequality on GDP per caput be negative and significantly 
different from zero, it varies with countries' initial income level. In an econometric model that 
include an interaction term between initial GDP per caput and income inequality, the coefficient on 
the interaction term be negative and significantly different from zero at the 1% level. Quantitatively, 
the size of the coefficient on the interaction term implies that difference in initial income induce a 
substantial effect on the impact that change in income inequality have on GDP per capita. For 

Trilemma redux: Evidence 
from emerge market 
economy 

Risk, return, and skill in the 
portfolio of the wealthy 

Transition to clean 
technology 

Economics of the populist 
backlash 

China’s WTO entry benefit 
US consumer 

Introducing VoxDev 

Globalisation and executive 
compensation 

Economics and policy in the 
Age of Trump 

Obstfeld, Ostry, Qureshi 

Bach, Calvet, Sodini 

Acemoglu, Akcigit, Hanley, Kerr 

Rodrik 

Amiti, Dai, Feenstra, Romalis 

Editors 

Keller, Olney 

Bown 

Events 

Shadow Banking: Financial 
Intermediation beyond Banks 
14 - 15 September 2017 / 
Helsinki, Finland / SUERF - 
The European Money and 
Finance Forum and Bank of 
Finland 

Corporate Finance Theory 
Symposium 

Cookie Control 

This site us cooky to store 

information on your computer. 

About this tool 

Effects of income inequality on economic growth | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/effects-income-inequality-economic-growth 

2 sur 5 14/08/2017 19:18 



example, at the 25th percentile of initial income the predict effect of a 1 percentage point increase 
in the Gini coefficient on GDP per caput be 2.3% (with a correspond standard error of 0.6%); at 
the 75th percentile of initial income the effect be -5.3% (the correspond standard error be 0.8%). 

The estimate from the interaction model thus suggest that in poor countries, increase in income 
inequality raise GDP per caput while the opposite be the case in high- and middle-income countries. 

Effects of inequality on human capital 

Additional evidence that our empirical result be in line with Galor and Zeira’s (1993) model come 
from the response of investment and human capital.1 Our panel estimate show that within-country 
increase in income inequality significantly increase the investment-to-GDP ratio in poor country 
but decrease it in high- and middle-income countries. Furthermore, within-country increase in 
income inequality significantly increase human capital (measured by the average year of school 
and share of the population with a secondary and tertiary education) in poor countries. On the other 
hand, in high- and middle-income country increase in income inequality reduce human capital. 

Identification 

Identification of the causal effect of income inequality on aggregate output be complicate by the 
endogeneity of the former variable. Income inequality may be affected by countries' GDP per caput 
a well a other variable related to deep-rooted difference in their geography and history. We 
address this issue by estimate a panel model with country and time fix effects. We instrument 
income inequality with variation in that variable not driven by GDP per caput building on the work of 
Brueckner et al. (2015). 

Conclusion 

Our empirical analysis be motivate by the theoretical work of Galor and Zeira (1993). who 
examine the relationship between inequality and aggregate output in the presence of credit market 
imperfection and indivisibilities in human capital investment. Galor and Zeira’s model predicts 
heterogeneity in the effect of inequality on aggregate output across countries' initial income levels. 
Taking this prediction seriously, our econometric model include an interaction between measure 
of income inequality and countries' initial level of GDP per capita. Instrumental variable estimate 
show that income inequality have a significant negative effect on aggregate output for the average 

15 September - 16 January 
2017 / Cambridge / Cambridge 
Judge Business School 

IMF Eighteenth Jacques 
Polak Annual Research 
Conference: The Global 
Financial Cycle 
2 - 3 November 2017 / 
Washington DC, USA / 
International Monetary Fund 

SNB Research Conference: 
Monetary Policy Design, 
Conduct and Effects 
22 - 23 September 2017 / 
Zurich, Switzerland / The Swiss 
National Bank 

Call for Papers: ADBI-World 
Economy Workshop on 
Globalization and the 
Environment 
26 - 27 September 2017 / 
Tokyo, Japan / Asian 
Development Bank Institute 

CEPR Policy Research 

Discussion Papers Insights 

Homeownership of 
immigrant in France: 
selection effect related to 
international migration flow 
Gobillon, Solignac 

Climate Change and Long- 
Run Discount Rates: 
Evidence from Real Estate 
Giglio, Maggiori, Stroebel, 
Weber 

The Permanent Effects of 
Fiscal Consolidations 
Summers, Fatás 

Cookie Control 

This site us cooky to store 

information on your computer. 

About this tool 

Effects of income inequality on economic growth | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/effects-income-inequality-economic-growth 

3 sur 5 14/08/2017 19:18 



country in the sample. However, for poor country income inequality have a significant positive 
effect. We document that this heterogeneity be also present when consider investment – in 
particular, investment in human capital – a a channel through which inequality affect aggregate 
output. Overall, our empirical result provide support for the hypothesis that income inequality be 
beneficial to economic growth in poor countries, but that it be detrimental to economic growth in 
advanced economies. 

Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations, and conclusion express be entirely those of the 
authors. They do not necessarily represent the view of the International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development/World Bank and it affiliate organisations, or those of the Executive Directors of 
the World Bank or the government they represent. 

References 

Brueckner, M and D Lederman (2015), "Effects of Income Inequality on Aggregate Output", World 
Bank Policy Discussion Paper 7317. 

Brueckner, M, E Dabla Norris, M Gradstein (2015), "National Income and Its Distribution", Journal of 
Economic Growth 20: 149-175. 

Galor, O (2011), “Inequality, Human Capital Formation, and the Process of Development”, Brown 
University work paper 2011-7. 

Galor, O and J Zeira (1993), “Income Distribution and Macroeconomics”, Review of Economic 
Studies 60: 35-52. 

Ostry, J D, A Berg, and G D Tsangarides (2014), “Redistribution, Inequality, and Growth”, IMF Staff 
Discussion Note No. SDN/14/02, February. 

Perotti, R (1996), “Growth, Income Distribution, and democracy: what the Data say?”, Journal of 
Economic Growth 1(2): 149—187. 

Footnote 

1 Ideally, in the cross-country time series context, we would like to use data on the distribution of 
wealth rather than income since wealth inequality be the relevant measure in theoretical model with 

@VoxEU 

RSS Feeds 

Weekly Digest 

Demographics and the 
Secular Stagnation 
Hypothesis in Europe 
Favero, Galasso 

QE and the Bank Lending 
Channel in the United 
Kingdom 
Butt, Churm, McMahon, 
Morotz, Schanz 

Subscribe 

Cookie Control 

This site us cooky to store 

information on your computer. 

About this tool 

Effects of income inequality on economic growth | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/effects-income-inequality-economic-growth 

4 sur 5 14/08/2017 19:18 



88 A A 

credit market imperfections. Unfortunately, data on wealth inequality be not available to generate a 
long time-series for a large number of countries. As note in previous empirical research (e.g. 
Perotti 1996), income inequality and wealth inequality be highly positively correlated. 

Topics: Global economy Poverty and income inequality 

Tags: income inequality, aggregate output, human capital 

Related 

Growth, inequality, and social welfare 
David Dollar, Tatjana Kleineberg, Aart Kraay 

Why do inequality grow? 
Coen Teulings 

How to address inequality 
Jeffrey Frankel 

Human capital and income inequality 
Amparo Castelló-Climent, Rafael Doménech 

57,809 read 
Printer-friendly version 

Cookie Control 

This site us cooky to store 

information on your computer. 

About this tool 

Effects of income inequality on economic growth | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/effects-income-inequality-economic-growth 

5 sur 5 14/08/2017 19:18 


