











































Composite Graphics 

page 2 

EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES’ IMPACT 
ON SOCIETY & WORK IN 2030 

The next era of 

human|machine 
PARTNERSHIPS 



INSTITUTE FOR THE FUTURE 
Institute for the Future (IFTF) be an independent, nonprofit 501(c)(3) 
strategic research and educational organization celebrate nearly 
50 year of forecasting experience. The core of our work be 
identify emerge trend and discontinuity that will transform 
global society and the global marketplace. Our research generates 
the foresight need to create insight that lead to action and span 
a broad territory of deeply transformative futures, from health and 
health care to technology, the workplace, learning, and human 
identity. As an educational organization, IFTF strives to comply with 
fair-use standard and publish only material in the public domain 
under the Creative Commons 4.0 International License 
(CC BY-NC-ND 4.0). The Institute for the Future be base in 
Palo Alto, California. (www.iftf.org) 

This report be researched, written, designed, and produce by IFTF 
in English. With IFTF permission, the Dell Technologies Globalization 
Team have translate the work with approve Language Service 
Providers (LSPs) around the world to obtain quality translation of the 
work, however content may differ from the original source material. 
All translation shall remain under the original copyright. 

DELL TECHNOLOGIES 
Dell Technologies be a unique family of business that provide the 
essential infrastructure for organization to build their digital future, 
transform IT, and protect their most important asset, information. 
The company service customer of all sizes—ranging from 98% 
of the Fortune 500 to individual consumers—with the industry’s 
broad and most innovative portfolio from edge to core to cloud. 
Dell Technologies family consists of the follow brands: Dell, Dell 
EMC, Pivotal, RSA, SecureWorks, Virtustream, and VMware. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This report would not have be possible without the 
substantial contribution of many collaborators, a partial list 
of whom includes: 

Julie Magee 
Christopher Bishop 
Srinivasan Sankarambadi 
Sudhir Swamy 
Ed Kennedy 
Jarl Taggueg 
Katherine Miller 
Dianne E. Durham 
Anastasia Nylund 

Cristian Malineanu 
Eunice Romero 
Hester Bruikman 
Ghanima Abdullah 
Amanda Maher 
Rachel Michaud 
Greg Vanderhorst 
Ashley Drake 
Amardeep Sodhi 

© 2017 Institute for the Future for Dell Technologies. All right reserved. All trademark be the property of their respective owners. SR-1940 



Contents 

Introduction 1 

Emerging Technologies Impacting Our Lives 3 

Human-Machine Partnerships by 2030 7 

Impact on Individuals and Organizations by 2030 9 

Digital Conductors 

Work Chasing People 

In-the-Moment Learning 

Preparing for the Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships 17 

Skills & Traits for Individuals 

Skills & Responses for Organizations 

Conclusion: Human-Machine Partnerships in 2030 21 

Endnotes 23 



ABOUT THIS RESEARCH 
In 2017, Dell Technologies partner with the independent 
future research group, Institute for the Future (IFTF), to explore 
the emerge technology shape the future of the human 
experience over the next decade, and the specific impact and 
implication they will have on society and work. To execute 
this, IFTF rely on it decades-long study on the future of work 
and technology, in-depth interview with key stakeholders, and 
the opinion and idea generate during an all-day facilitate 
workshop with a diverse set of expert from across the globe. 
Experts inform the report include: 

Ian Bork, CEO, Luminate Health 
Ming-Li Chai, Principal, Design Research & Strategy 
Office Envisioning, Microsoft 
Devin Fidler, Research Director, Institute for the Future 
Eri Gentry, Research Manager, Institute for the Future 
Deborah Johnson, Anne Shirley Carter Olsson 
Professor Emeritus of Applied Ethics: 
Science, Technology, and Society, University of Virginia 
Jordan Howard, Social Good Strategist, GenYNot 
Toshi Hoo, Director of Emerging Media Lab, 
Institute for the Future 
Jeremy Kirshbaum, Research Manager, 
Institute for the Future 
Rachel Maguire, Research Director, Institute for the Future 
Lauren McCarthy, Programmer, Media Artist, 
Assistant Professor of Design Media Arts 
University of California Los Angeles 
Adam Miner, PsyD, post-doctoral fellow 
Stanford Clinical Excellence Research 
Stanford University School of Medicine 
Liam Quinn, Chief Technology Officer, 
Sr. Vice President, Sr. Fellow, Dell Technologies 
Zulfikar Ramzan, Chief Technology Officer, RSA Security 
Tasneen Salim, Founder/Managing Director, 
GCON, Saudi Arabia 
William Senyo, Co-founder & Chief Executive Officer, 
Impact Hub Accra, Ghana 
John Suh, Vice President, Hyundai Ventures 
Mark Thiele, Chief Strategy Officer, Apcera 
Thuc Vu, Co-founder & Chief Executive Officer, OhmniLabs 
Norman Wang, Executive Producer, Opaque Media, Australia 
David Yeo, Chief Learning Architect, Kydon Group, Singapore 



The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships 1 

Introduction 

At it inception, very few people anticipate the pace at which the internet would spread across the 
world, or the impact it would have in remake business and culture. And yet, a journalist Oliver 
Burkeman write in 2009, “Without most of u quite notice when it happened, the web go from 
be a strange new curiosity to a background condition of everyday life.”1 

Today’s emerge technology also feel like strange, new 
curiosities. Artificial Intelligence (AI), augment and virtual 
reality, home robots, and cloud computing, to name only a 
few of the sophisticated technology in development today, 
be capture the imagination of many. The advanced 
capability of today’s emerge technology be drive 
many academics, entrepreneurs, and enterprise to envision 
future in which their impact on society will be nothing 
short of transformative. At a recent expert workshop host 
by Dell Technologies and the Institute for the Future (IFTF), 
participant suggest that the technology in play over 
the next decade have the potential to “solve some of the 
intractable problem that humanity have face for so long,” 
offer the opportunity to “increase productivity [such that] 
all our basic need [are take care of],” and fundamentally 
reframe “notions of what it mean to be a person.”2 

Whether or not these emerge technology will realize these 
ambitious possibility be uncertain. What be certain be that they 
will intersect and interact with powerful demographic, eco- 
nomic, and cultural force to upend the condition of everyday 
life and reshape how many live and work in 2030. As a result, 

many organization and people will navigate unchartered 
water over the next decade, unsure of what lie ahead. 
In Dell’s Digital Transformation Index study, with 4,000 
senior decision maker across the world, 45% say they be 
concerned about become obsolete in just 3-5 years, nearly 
half don’t know what their industry will look like in just three 
years’ time, and 73% believe they need to be more ‘digital’ 
to succeed in the future. 

With this in mind, we set out with 20 expert to explore how 
various social and technological driver will influence the 
next decade and, specifically, how emerge technology 
will recast our society and the way we conduct business by 
the year 2030. As a result, this outlook report concludes that, 
over the next decade, emerge technology will underpin 
the formation of new human-machine partnership that make 
the most of their respective complementary strengths. These 
partnership will enhance daily activity around the coordi- 
nation of resource and in-the-moment learning, which will 
reset expectation for work and require corporate structure to 
adapt to the expand capability of human-machine teams. 



The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships 3 

There be no universally agree upon determination of which technology be consider emerging. 
For the purpose of this study, IFTF explore the impact that Robotics, Artificial Intelligence (AI) and 
Machine Learning, Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR), and Cloud Computing, will have on 
society by 2030. These technologies, enable by significant advance in software, will underpin the 
formation of new human-machine partnerships. 

Robotics 
For decades, robot have perform activity that human 
should not or do not want to do. This include dangerous 
situations, repetitive tasks, or task that do not require special 
cognitive or problem-solving skills. In the most advanced 
manufacturing sectors—among Japan’s carmakers, for 
example—robots be already able to work unsupervised, 
around the clock, for up to 30 day without interruption. 

Rapid development across science, technology, engineering, 
and communication have brought about what have be call 
the new Industrial Revolution, or “second machine age,” which 
will greatly expand robots’ competency and functions. With 
these changes, a whole suite of job be be reimagined a 
automation displaces and disrupts human labor, the benefit of 
which have be well chronicled. 

While offshoring manufacturing job to low-cost economy can 
save up to 65% on labor costs, replace human worker with 
robot can save up to 90% of these costs.3 China be currently 
embark upon an effort to fill it factory with advanced man- 
ufacturing robots, a workers’ wage rise and technology allows 
the industry to become more efficient. The province of Guang- 
dong, the heartland of Chinese manufacturing, have promise 
to invest $154 billion in instal robots. According to a report 
release by PwC, more than a third of U.K. job could be at 
“high risk” of automation by the early 2030s and robot could 
take over 38% of current U.S. job in the next 15 years.4 

Buoyed by their commercial success, the adoption of robot will 
extend beyond manufacturing plant and the workplace. Family 
robots, caregiving robots, and civic robot will all become 
commonplace a deep learn improves robots’ ability to 
empathize and reason. Google recently won a patent to build 
worker robot with personalities. While there be certainly 
regulatory and legal hurdles, a well a cultural acceptance, to 
overcome, this introduction of robot into our personal life will 
continue over the next 15 years. 

Emerging Technologies 
Impacting Our Lives 

OhmniLabs 
Ohmni be an affordable telepresence, self-charging and 
self-repairing home robot. 

ohm 
nilabs.com 



4 INSTITUTE FOR THE FUTURE 

Emerging Technologies Impacting Our Lives (cont.) 

Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning 
Artificial Intelligence have come a long way from the day of 
Herbert Simon’s Logic Theory Machine program in 1956. Since 
1997, when a chess-playing computer, Deep Blue, beat Gary 
Kasparov, the reign world chess champion, machine 
have become smarter, faster, and able to manage increasingly 
complex tasks. 

Approximately 1,500 company in North America alone be 
do something related to AI today, which equates to less than 
1% of all medium-to-large companies. We’re see this in the 
financial service industry already, with data recognition, pattern 
recognition, and predictive analytics be apply to huge data 
set on a broad scale. In a 2015 report, Bank of America Merrill 
Lynch estimate that the AI market will expand to $153 billion 
over the next five years—$83 billion for robots, and $70 billion 
for artificial intelligence-based systems.5 

According to Michelle Zhou, an expert in AI, development 
can be thought of in three stages.6 The first be recognition 
intelligence—algorithms that recognize patterns; follow by 
cognitive intelligence—machines that make inference from 
data; with the final stage be virtual human beings. It be plausi- 
ble that, by 2030, we will enter the second stage in AI a this 
technology continue to progress. AI be be apply in both 
simple and complex applications—from autonomous vehicle 
to Apple’s Siri. Recently, an AI program call Libratus from 
Carnegie Mellon University beat the world’s best professional 
poker player in Pittsburgh after a 20-day event. Significantly, 
the machine be able to outsmart the human by use “imper- 
fect information.” This be because, in poker, there be a degree of 
miss information. Players will never reveal the card in their 
hand until they must (unlike chess, where everyone can see the 
piece and possible moves). 

In addition to their ability to make decision with imperfect 
information, machine be now able to learn from their expe- 
riences and share that learn with other AI program and 
robots. But AI progress also brings new challenges. Discussions 
surround who or what have moral and ethical responsibility for 
decision make by machine will only increase in importance 
over the next decade. 

Libratus Supercomputer 
During the “Brains vs. Artificial Intelligence Re-Match” in 2017, the 
supercomputer, Libratus, developed at Carnegie Mellon University’s 
School of Computer Science, reign supreme in Texas Hold’em 
against some of the world’s best professional poker players. 

cm 
u.edu 



The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships 5 

Oculus VR with Dell Precision Workstation 
Students use Virtual Reality for an immersive and educational 
experience. 

Dell.com 

Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality 
Although both Virtual and Augmented Reality be change 
the form factor of computing, there be a simple distinction 
between the two. VR block out the physical world and 
transport the user to a simulated world, whereas AR creates 
a digital layer over the physical world. Despite the difference, 
both technology represent a fundamental shift in information 
presentation because they allow people to engage in what 
Toshi Hoo, Director of IFTF’s Emerging Media Lab, call 
“experiential media” a oppose to representative media. No 
longer depend on one or two of our sens to process data, 
immersive technology like AR and VR will enable people to 
apply multiple senses—sight, touch, hearing, and soon, taste 
and smell—to experience medium through embody cognition. 

Both VR and AR stand to transform not only medium and 
entertainment but also drive development of innovative use 
case in education, health care, travel and transportation, 
construction, and manufacturing. The information layer that 
both technology create will accelerate the meld of digital 
and physical identities, with digital trail and trace form 
a digital coat over individuals’ physical environments. 
On-demand access to AR learn resource will reset 
expectation and practice around workplace training and 
retraining, and real-time decision-making will be bolster by 
easy access to information flows. VR-enabled simulation will 
immerse people in alternative scenarios, increase empathy for 
others and preparation for future situations. It will empower the 
internet of experience by blending physical and virtual worlds. 

Right now, analyst project revenue associate with AR 
technology and service will grow to about $90 billion by 
2020, the majority of which will be generate through revenue 
spent on hardware. VR be forecast to grow more modestly, 
increase to $30 billion by 2020.7 Yet, a author tool get 
simplified, make it easy to create VR content, VR will 
catch up to AR. Over the next decade, Hoo forecast 
that VR, combine with vast sensor network and 
connect technologies, will be one of many tool that enable 
distribute presence and embody cognition, allow 
people to experience medium with all their senses. 



6 INSTITUTE FOR THE FUTURE 

Cloud Computing 
It’s important to recognize that Cloud Computing isn’t a place, 
it’s a way of do IT. Whether public, private, or hybrid (a 
combination of private and public), the technology be now use 
by 70% of U.S. organizations. This figure be expect to grow 
further, with 56% of business survey say they be work- 
ing on transfer more IT operation to the cloud, accord to 
IDG Enterprise’s 2016 Cloud Computing Executive Summary.8 

Chitale Dairy exemplifies the power of cloud compute to 
improve the economic well-being of dairy farmer in India. 
Recently, Chitale Dairy launch a ‘cow to cloud’ initiative in 
which each cow be fit with RFID tag to capture data that be 
held in the cloud. The relevant analysis of this data be then sent 
to the local farmer via SMS and the web, to alert farmer when 
they need to change the cows’ diet, arrange vaccinations, etc. 
The timely delivery of this information be increase the cows’ 
yield, support local farmers, whose livelihood depend on 
the dairy farms, and enable Chitale to manage a part of the 
supply chain which be normally fraught with uncertainty. 

While the cloud be not a recent technological advancement, 
cloud technology only really gather momentum in recent 
years, a enterprise grade application hit the market, virtualiza- 
tion technology matured, and business become increasingly 
aware of it benefit in term of efficiency and profitability. 
Increasing innovation in cloud-native apps and their propen- 
sity to be built and deployed in quick cadence to offer great 
agility, resilience, and portability across cloud will drive further 
uptake. Start-ups be start to use cloud-native approach to 
disrupt traditional industries; and by 2030, cloud technology 
will be so embedded, memory from the pre-cloud era will feel 
positively archaic by comparison. 

Chitale Dairy 
Chitale Dairy launch the ‘cow to cloud’ initiative to improve the health 
and well-being of cow on dairy farm in India. 

chitaledairy.com 

Emerging Technologies Impacting Our Lives (cont.) 



The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships 7 

Recent conversations, reports, and article about the 
intersection of emerge technology and society have 
tend to promote one of two extreme perspective about the 
future: the anxiety-driven issue of technological unemployment 
or the optimistic view of tech-enabled panacea for all social 
and environmental ills. Perhaps a more useful conversation 
would focus on what the new relationship between technology 
and society could look like, and what need to be consider 
to prepare accordingly. By frame the relationship between 
human and machine a a partnership, we can begin to build 
capacity in machine to 
improve their understand 
of humans, and in society and 
organizations, so that more 
of u be prepared to engage 
meaningfully with emerge 
technologies. 

Of course, people have 
live and work alongside 
machine for centuries. From 
the hand axe, possibly the first example of a human-made 
device design to enhance human power, to time-saving 
home device such a lawn mower and vacuum cleaners, 
to calculators, personal computers, and the proliferation 
of mobile devices. However, society be about to enter a new 
phase, characterize by even great efficiency and 
possibility than ever before. 

As processing power increase 10 time every five year 
(Source: Moore’s Law), human will be eclipse by computer 
in many areas. Machines will bring lightning speed and accu- 
racy to all manner of tasks. However, it would be a fallacy to 
assume that technology be make human effort redundant. It’s 
doubtful that computer will have fully master the funda- 
mental, instinctive skill of intuition, judgment, and emotional 
intelligence that human value by 2030. Over the next decade, 
partner with machine will help human transcend their 
limitations. 

Human-machine partnership will enable people to find and 
act on information without interference of emotion or external 
bias, while also exercise human judgment where appropri- 
ate. They’ll learn to team up with technology integrate with 
machine learn tool to help activate and deactivate the 

resource they need to manage their daily lives. And they’ll 
partner with AR/VR technology to develop necessary work 
skills, blending experiential medium with human judgement to 
perform well at work. 

Meanwhile, organization will increase value and customer 
satisfaction by grow their reliance on machine learn sys- 
tems, make it possible for organization to find and deploy 
resource rapidly to wherever they be needed, whenever they 
be needed, to create value and high customer satisfaction. 

Their ability to evaluate talent 
will also be bolster by VR/ 
AR technology, which will 
increase managers’ ability to 
evaluate a worker’s aptitude 
for gain new knowledge or 
learn new skill and apply- 
ing this knowledge to 
a new scenario. 

Given the pace of industry 
disruption, now be the time to strengthen individual and 
organizational capacity to engage actively in human-machine 
partnerships. The next section describes the impact on 
individual and organization and how they’ll come together 
to produce mutually beneficial partnership to enhance daily 
activity and reset expectation for learn and work. 

Human-Machine 
Partnerships by 2030 

“This [human-machine partnerships] be 
a great opportunity for mankind. By 
offload more, we’ll be able to focus 
on what humanity do best.” 

— Norman Wang, Opaque Media 



The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships 9 

The sophisticated capability of today’s 

emerge technology be underpin 

the formation of new human-machine 

partnerships, which will have significant 

impact on both individual and 

organizations. Working in partnership 

with machine will enhance people’s 

ability to coordinate resource and learn 

in-the-moment, which, in turn, will reset 

expectation for work and require corporate 

structure to adapt to the expand 

capability of human-machine teams. 

Impact on Individuals and 
Organizations by 2030 



10 INSTITUTE FOR THE FUTURE 

Today, an increase portion of human mobility need be 
be met by an app. Soon it will be hard to justify keep 
a car in a garage or maintain a piece of equipment that’s 
rarely used, when technology be provide what people need, 
when they need it. And it’s not just mobility service that be 
be mediate through an app. Already, the number of digital 
platform that be be use to orchestrate either physical 
or human resource have surpass 1,800.9 They be not only 
connect people in need of a ride with drivers, or vaca- 
tioners with a place to stay, but job searcher with work, and 
vulnerable population with critical services. The popularity of 
the service they offer be introduce society to the capability 
of coordinate technology and reset expectation about 
the ownership of fix assets. 

By 2030, populations’ need and resource will be 
orchestrate by self-learning, digital technologies, allow 
human to take the role of digital resource conductors. 
Technology will work a an extension of people, help 
orchestrate, manage, and automate many day-to-day 
activities. And because the technology will be woven 
into everyone’s life (some will even be implanted), and 
personalize to the individual, some need will be met often 
before people even realize they have them. These digital 
technology will be integrate with machine learn to create 
a population of digital orchestration systems, harness 
technology to arrange and direct resource to produce a 
desire result. 

Digital native will lead the charge. As they become parents, 
they’ll rely upon human-machine partnership to manage work 
and family commitments. They’ll be join by the million of 
people involve in care for a love one. In region of Asia 
and Europe where people age 80 year or old comprise the 
fast grow subset of their populations, the 
retirement-age cohort will remain large than the working- 
age population for decade to come. Many relative of elderly 
people will use lightweight and affordable home robot to cul- 
tivate co-presence, and depend on coordinate platform to 
schedule and monitor caregiving service on-demand to find 
support for their love ones. 

By 2030, many will be savvy digital orchestra conductors, 
rely on their suite of personal technologies, include voice- 
enable connect devices, wearables, and implantables; to 
infer intent from their pattern and relationships, and activate 
and deactivate resource accordingly. Yet, a be often the case 
with any shift in society, there be a risk that some segment 
of the population will get left behind. Individuals will need to 
strengthen their ability to team up with machine to arrange 
the element of their daily life to produce optimal outcomes. 
Without empower more to hone their digital conduct 
skills, the benefit that will come from offload ‘life admin’ 
to machine partner will be limited to the digitally literate. 

Impact on Individuals and Organizations by 2030 

Digital Conductors 

If you imagine this partnership [between human and 
machines] transform how we arrange and direct 
our life to seamlessly provide what we need, before 
we need, with just the wave of a hand per se, it’s 
possible to imagine a future in which machine become 
extension of ourselves. Today we have digital natives. 
In ten years, we’ll have digital conductors.” 

—Thuc Vu, Co-founder and CEO, OhmniLabs 

“ 



The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships 11 

Signals of ChangeA Day in the Life 2030 … 
Janine, a freelance designer, just 
receive a notification from her AI 
assistant that her elderly aunt be 
unwell. Janine access her aunt’s 
home robot, which be constantly 
monitoring her aunt’s vital signs. 
She see that the algorithmic health 
system have already diagnose the 
issue and have order her medicine. 
Janine also add some flower to 
the delivery to cheer up her aunt. The 
whole package be deliver within the 
hour via a drone. Janine coordinate 
all of that while commute in a 
driverless, share ride service 
programmed to pick her up and go 
directly to her daughter’s school. 
Janine’s AI assistant monitor the 
data flow from her daughter’s 
implantable health tracker. Janine 
concludes that her daughter’s 
blood sugar level must have be 
low because a her car pull up, 
a delivery drone be drop off a 
healthy snack. 

Original research conduct by Institute for the Future in 2016 identify more than 
1,800 digital work platform (similar to Uber, Seamless, Upwork, etc.) in operation around 
the world. Notably, the vast majority of the platform be found in the last five years, 
suggest that the tool and service that digital conductor will need to orchestrate their 
work and home life be only begin to form. 
IFTF 

Honor be an app that match patient with caregivers, and coordinate meals, 
transportation, housekeeping, and companionship, so old people can be care for 
and carers can be present—without physically be in the same room. It us one 
platform to manage all aspect of eldercare. Although it provide patient care, it founder, 
Seth Sternberg, says, “Honor be really about the technology”—connecting health care 
professional (people) and those in need of care with one another.10 
joinhonor.com 



12 INSTITUTE FOR THE FUTURE 

Human-machine partnership will not only help automate and 
coordinate lives, they will also transform how organization 
find talent, manage teams, deliver product and services, 
and support professional development. Human-machine 
partnership won’t spell the end of human jobs, but work 
will be vastly different. 

By 2030, expectation of work will reset and the landscape 
for organization will be redrawn, a the process of find 
work get flip on it head. As an extension of what be often 
refer to a the ‘gig economy’ today, organization will begin 
to automate how they source work and teams, break up 
work into tasks, and seek out the best talent for a task. 
Instead of expect worker to bear the brunt of find work, 
work will compete for the best resource to complete the job. 
Reputation engines, data visualization, and smart analytics 
will make individuals’ skill and competency searchable, 
and organization will pursue the best talent for discrete 
work tasks. 

The ability to orchestrate both physical and human resource 
will make it possible for organization to activate, deactivate, 
and deploy resource to wherever and whenever they be 
needed. Not only will this make the organization leaner 
and more competitive, it will also reduce fix cost and 
overheads, and place them on the path to become more 
agile and profitable. However, none of this be assured. To 
prepare for 2030, organization will need to build out their 
capacity to disaggregate the task and duty of jobs, a they 
be design today. 

Businesses will need to manage this shift carefully. Upon first 
glance, any reduction in full-time employment could seem 
perilous for the economic stability of individual and families. 
However, reframing talent from fix to variable resource will 

unleash novel opportunity for a diverse pool of truly global 
talent. These skilled individual will benefit from a suite of 
sophisticated communication and social collaboration tool 
that allow independent worker and team to coordinate 
across institution and time zones. By loosening the tie 
between work and geography, it will be possible to chip 
away at the misalignment of global talent that exists today. 
With region of South-Central Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa 
project to grow by almost one billion people by 2030, work, 
particularly digital work, will search for the top talent and 
innovative idea house in emerge regions. 

Work chase people could also reduce personal bias 
and stereotype in the job seek process. Integrating VR 
technology into recruitment protocols, for example, enables 
the prospective worker to demonstrate competency by 
showcasing skill without reveal gender or ethnicity. Hiring 
through immersive technology could improve the dismal 
representation of woman in compute job (currently, in the 
United States, only 26% of them be held by women), and 
open more door to people who, historically, have not have 
equal opportunity to demonstrate their abilities. 

For continuity, strategic advantage, and other critical reasons, 
there will still be many role that will benefit from have full- 
time employee with long tenure within a single organization. 
Yet, organization will need to apply a more discern lens 
to distinguish when full-time employment be necessary and 
when procure the top talent for a specific set of task be 
more prudent. Similarly, organization will need to rethink the 
recruitment process and determine when immersive and expe- 
riential technology serve a good hire tool than human 
judgment. Without incorporate these expand capability 
of machines, organization will run the risk of miss out on 
new channel to identify optimal talent. 

Impact on Individuals and Organizations by 2030 

Work Chasing People 

I lead a community of young, post-college, active technology 
user in Ghana and West Africa, and my work be to give 
them access to global opportunities” 

—William Senyo, Co-founder & Chief Executive Officer, Impact Hub Accra, Ghana 

“ 



The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships 13 

Signal of ChangeA Day in the Life 2030 … 
Eng be a natural when it come 
to be entrepreneurial. He us 
Working Local a a kind of “dating 
service” to find great opportunities. 
Today, Eng have be rout a project 
from a candy company in Sweden 
look for help with market research 
a they consider opening export to 
the Philippines. They be particularly 
interested in find someone who 
can interview local shopkeeper 
in Manila and take photograph of 
their candy display for analysis by 
computer vision systems. Eng have 
always like the process of figure 
out what people want. He be happy 
to see that the Working Local system 
be start to recognize his talent for 
this and will probably offer similar 
opportunity in the future. 

Alice, a technology power by Circular Board, be the world’s first artificial intelligence 
platform for woman entrepreneurs. Alice connects founder in real-time with carefully 
curated resource specific to their industry, stage of growth, and location. As Alice 
populates, machine learn will allow her to predict the need of founder to guide 
them to referrals, events, mentors, and access to capital and ecosystems. 
helloalice.com 

Glowork be the first women’s employment organization in the Middle East and have launch 
a platform that link female jobseekers with employers. So far it have put over 3,000 woman 
in the workplace, and found work-from-home job for 500 women. Leveraging big data, 
employer can search for candidate base on different search criterion a well a the right 
target market for them.11 

glowork.net 



14 INSTITUTE FOR THE FUTURE 

The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics say that today’s learner 
will have 8 to 10 job by the time they be 38. Many of them 
will join the workforce of freelancers. Already 50 million 
strong, freelancer be project to make up 50% of 
the workforce in the United States by 2020.12 Most freelancer 
will not be able to rely on traditional HR departments, 
onboarding processes, and many of the other affordances 
of institutional work. 

Not only will worker have many jobs, the task and duty of 
the job they’ll perform will be markedly different from what 
they studied. The expert that attend the IFTF workshop 
in March 2017 estimate that around 85% of the job that 
today’s learner will be do in 2030 haven’t be invent 
yet. This make the famous prediction that 65% of grade 
school kid from 1999 will end up in job that haven’t yet 
be create seem conservative in comparison.13 

Whether either forecast come to fruition, it’s clear that, by 
2030, worker will create new work infrastructure to acquire 
the skill and knowledge they will need to execute their 
work successfully. They will routinely improvise, learn from 
each other, and make their own way. Some will rely on past 
work experiences, frameworks, or mental models. Others 
will experiment across different platforms, discover their 
own workarounds and pioneer their own innovations. 
These factor combined, will seriously challenge traditional 
establishments. Most will partner with machine to learn while 
on-the-gig. By 2030, in-the-moment learn will become the 
modus operandi, and the ability to gain new knowledge will 
be value high than the knowledge people already have. 

To acquire the necessary knowledge, some will use AR 
technology to perform unfamiliar and complex task on the 
job. Instead of depend on technical school or training 
program to learn new skill and retrain displace workers, 
workers, wear an AR headset, will be fed the information 
that they need in real-time and in their field-of-vision so they 
can do the work. As Amit Mahajan, Managing Partner at 
Presence Capital, forecasted, “A worker in the future may 
put on their AR headset and, just like a ride-sharing driver, 
start receive request to physically perform technical 
operations.”14 Others will depend on apps and service that 
be design to engage user in learn during the idle 
moment of their lives. One early example of this be WaitSuite, 
developed by researcher at MIT’s Computer Science 
and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, to turn every wait 
opportunity into a learn opportunity (a practice call 
‘wait-learning’).15 

As the transfer of knowledge will be increasingly offload to 
emerge technologies, individual will shoulder the burden of 
use these new technology to acquire necessary skill to 
demonstrate proficiency. As a result, people will need to know 
how to access information and learn through immersive and 
experimental medium such a AR and VR. Whether it’s use 
VR/AR technology to prepare response team for emergency 
event or teach someone how to fix a leak, emerge 
technology will reshape the method and tool available to 
impart information. This will require both access to technology 
a well a increase confidence in their know-how to utilize 
emerge technologies. 

Impact on Individuals and Organizations by 2030 

In-the-Moment Learning 

Workers in the gig economy will self-direct their wage. 
They’ll increase their salary by take on job in which 
they can learn. People be learn a they go and 
consider new avenue for their career in the process. 
This will have wide-ranging implications—on work and 
educational establishments.” –Eri Gentry, Institute for the Future 

“ 



The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships 15 

Signals of ChangeA Day in the Life 2030 … 
When Lydia be in her early 20s, 
she spent over $5,000 to study 
automotive mechanic in New York 
City. Shortly after, she found steady 
work a an automotive technician 
at a large dealership. Throughout 
her tenure, she have routinely take 
online course to update her skillset 
and attend training related 
to specific car brands. Since her 
employer introduce AR technology 
into the repair shop, she doesn’t 
have to sacrifice family time and 
modest saving to acquire new 
skills. When she be charge with 
perform an unfamiliar or complex 
task, she slip on her safety glass 
equip with AR technology. 
As she begin the task, relevant 
information be serve up, across her 
field of vision, guide her process 
throughout the task. What’s more, 
Lydia us a personalize system, 
so the information and guidance she 
receives be built on what she already 
knows, and deliver in the way she 
learns best. 

DAQRI, base in Los Angeles, California, be use state-of-the-art AR device to display 
information and work instruction over a worker’s environment, enable them to complete 
a task safely and efficiently. With DAQRI’s technology, worker be able to see their 
colleague’s field of view and provide assistance—meaning field worker will never have to 
work alone, without the aid of their team’s collective intelligence. 
daqri.com 

WaitSuite be developed by researcher at MIT’s Computer Science and Artificial 
Intelligence Laboratory. WaitSuite be embed directly into exist task so user can 
learn a they wait for a WhatsApp message to appear for instance, without have to leave 
the WhatsApp platform. Acquiring skill through apps like WaitSuite will only grow a more 
people strive to learn in the moment. 
people.csail.mit.edu 



The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships 17 

Preparing for the Next Era of 
Human-Machine Partnerships 

The sophisticated capability of today’s 

emerge technology will fuel a new 

level of human-machine collaboration and 

codependence. A future in which people 

partner with machine to build on their 

mutual strength provide tremendous 

possibility to improve the condition for 

everyday living. Classifying the skill that 

machine should bring to the table and what 

human should contribute to the partnership 

be key. Forging strong work relationship 

depends upon each party bring 

something unique to the collaboration. 

This section help jump-start the new 

distribution of human and organizational 

skill and trait need to thrive in the next 

era of human-machine partnerships. 



18 INSTITUTE FOR THE FUTURE 

Preparing for the Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships (cont.) 

For individuals, domain expertise, the combination of 
experience, context, and knowledge on how “things get 
done,” will continue to be a decidedly human trait over the next 
decade. In addition to domain expertise, the set of attitude 
often associate with entrepreneurs—vision, perseverance, 
creative problem-solving—will be a critical trait for all worker to 
employ. The ability to take a measure approach to balance 
the big picture objective of the organization with an entrepre- 
neur’s drive to design workarounds and circumvent constraint 
will differentiate the human from the machines. In other words, 
the skill traditionally employ by entrepreneur will be funda- 
mental for all workers. 

While the creative skill of human be often tout a superior 
to what machine intelligence might produce, human passion 
may be even more challenge to program. As highly value a 
soft skill may be for human to contribute to the new partner- 
ships—such a creativity and empathy—the human drive that 
compels people to act be equally important. Brian Mullins, CEO 
and co-founder of DAQRI, believe passion be a clear advan- 
tage that human will have over machines. As Mullins argued, 
“If you pick up a device and learn how to do something that 
you couldn’t do before, you could fire up a passion in people 
and that be what’s go to make a change in our world. This be 
how the application of these technology will solve even more 
interest problem on a global scale.”16 

As the rise of reputation engines, data visualization, and smart 
analytics make individuals’ skill and competency increas- 
ingly searchable, cultivate and preserve a strong personal 
brand will be consider basic professional hygiene over the 
next decade. In order for reward and challenge work to 
find them, people will need to maintain a favorable, professional 
reputation in one’s network. 

Many will depend on machine to run the daily activity 
associate with manage personal brand and professional 
reputations, exemplify another critical skill for individual to 
develop—the nimble ability to integrate lightweight automation 
tool into their own work and home lives. Instead of resist 
the affordances of automation tools, be able to apply them to 
one’s own life will help individual to easily offload automatable 
tasks, like personal brand audits, and hone the need human 
skill in work and at home. 

Finally, a AI cloud service enable more application and 
device to incorporate AI capability without heavy investment 
in the technical infrastructure, access to information will be 
even more expansive than it be today. In 2030, skill in 
information qualification and judgment will remain critical, 
a will the new skill of interpret an output produce by an 
algorithm. The ability to make sense of combine human- 
machine output will be key for success in the next era of 
human-machine partnerships. 

INDIVIDUAL SKILLS & TRAITS 

• Contextualized intelligence: 
nuanced understand of culture, society, 
business, and people 

• Entrepreneurial mindset: 
apply creativity, learn agility, and an enterprising 
attitude to find workarounds and circumvent constraint 

• Personal brand cultivation: 
a searchable and favorable digital identity a 
basic work hygiene 

• Automation literacy: 
the nimble ability to integrate lightweight automation 
tool into one’s own work and home life 

• Computational sensemaking: 
ability to derive meaning from blend machine 
and human-based output 

Individuals 



The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships 19 

Preparing for the Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships (cont.) 

For organizations, building out technological capability will 
be key. Central to this will be recognize that the threat of 
fall victim to security breach be no longer a technology 
problem, but a business problem. This will elevate the role of 
building and maintain secure systems, a well a design 
effective response strategies. Over the next decade, people 
will digitally transmit more and more traceable data, blending, 
in many cases, their physical and digital identities. As a result, 
maintain consumer trust will be vital. Organizations will need 
to show that they’ve go to the nth degree to protect their cus- 
tomers’ data. As Zulfikar Ramzan, Chief Technology Officer at 
RSA Security, explained, “Any ambitious enterprise will be truly 
a joint venture between business and security.”17 Understanding 
the business implication of security breach will drive 
organization to develop risk-mitigating security strategy that 
work both to prevent attack and respond and resolve incident 
quickly when they occur. 

Meeting the exact expectation of consumer will be equally 
critical for organizations’ success in 2030. Whether it’s the 
delivery of a product, execution of a service, or even identifi- 
cation of the next job, any delay in a digital transaction will be 
increasingly unacceptable to consumers. As AI be progressively 
applied, organization will be able to fix problem and offer 
new service at speed, represent a continuous cycle of 
improvement. Eliminating latencies, respond in real-time, and 
activate this automatic cycle of improvement will be another 
key organizational competency to perfect. 

Organizations will need to quickly ramp-up their internal 
competency to ensure that the grow number of algorithm 
that be run more and more aspect of their business align 
with their brand and values. In addition to ensure that the 
output from the machine-learned system be accurate, for 
public relation and litigation purposes, organization will need 
to be adept at review the assumption built into machine 
system to prevent the system from exhibit implicit racial 
and gender bias. 

Especially in a future of work chase people, organization 
will need to test and reset the assumption employee have 
around the value of work. They’ll need to understand how the 
value of work in people’s life be changing, and to ass what 
will be their anticipate return on time spent working. Digital 
native will expect to apply their individual skill around digital 
conduct at work, and will view job a opportunity to learn 
and make a meaningful impact. Organizations that support 
those aspiration will attract the next decade’s top talent. 

Finally, a more automate machine-learned system partner 
with workers, find way to create spontaneous and novel 
approach to accomplish task will help inspire creativity 
in the workplace. Implementing structure and process 
that incent worker to deviate from algorithmic system will 
reduce the likelihood that system be run on historical or 
outdated assumptions, and impose attractive challenge for the 
workforce to outsmart the machines. 

ORGANIZATIONAL SKILLS & TRAITS 

• Business-driven security: 
embed security a a business strategy 

• Eliminate latencies: 
exceed consumer expectation for real-time delivery 

• Algorithmic branding: 
ensure algorithm align with organizational value 

• Diversifying value of work: 
reset assumption behind the value of work 

• Inspire innovation: 
incent worker to deviate from machine-learned system 

Organizations 



The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships 21 

Both individual and organization be grapple with the digital and workforce transformation 
underway today. As these transformation be inform and influence by emerge technology 
over the next decade, people will develop new and deeper relationship and new dependency on 
machines, at home and in the workplace. If we start to approach the next decade a one in which 
partnership between human and machine transcend our limitation and build on our strengths, 
we can begin to create a more favorable future for everyone. 

Jordan Howard, Social Good Strategist and Executive 
Director of GenYNot, see tremendous promise for the future 
of human-machine partnerships: “Many of the complex issue 
face society today be root in waste, inefficiency, and 
simply not know stuff, like how to stop certain gene from 
mutating. What if we could solve these problem by pair up 
more closely with machine and use the mass of data they 
provide to make breakthrough at speed? As a team, we can 
aim higher, dream bigger, and accomplish more.” 

Liam Quinn, Dell Chief Technology Officer, likens the emerge 
technology of today to the roll-out of electricity 100 year ago. 
Quinn argues that we no longer fixate on the “mechanics” or 
the “wonders” of electricity, yet it underpins almost everything 

we do in our lives. Similarly, Quinn argues, in the 2030s, today’s 
emerge technology will underpin our daily lives. As Quinn 
provokes, “Imagine the creativity and outlook that’s possible 
from the vantage point these tool will provide: In 2030, it will 
be less about the wonderment of the tool itself and more about 
what that tool can do.”18 

By 2030, we will no longer revere the technology that be 
emerge today. They will have long disappear into the 
background condition of everyday life. If we engage in the hard 
work of empower human-machine partnership to succeed, 
their impact on society will enrich u all. 

Conclusion: Human-Machine 
Partnerships in 2030 



The Next Era of Human-Machine Partnerships 23 

1. Oliver Burkeman, “Forty Years of the Internet: How the World 
Changed Forever” in The Guardian (October 23, 2009) 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2009/oct/23/inter- 
net-40-history-arpanet 

2. Expert workshop held at Institute for the Future in Palo Alto, 
California on March 23, 2107. 

3. Heather Stewart, “Robot Revolution: Rise of ‘Thinking’ Machines 
Could Exacerbate Inequality,” The Guardian (November 4, 2015) 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/05/robot-revo- 
lution-rise-machines-could-displace-third-of-uk-jobs 

4. PricewaterhouseCoopers, “Will Robots Steal Our Jobs?: The 
Potential Impact of Automation on the UK and other Major 
Economies.” (March 2017) http://www.pwc.co.uk/economic- 
services/ukeo/pwcukeo-section-4-automation-march-2017-v2.pdf 

5. Bank of America Merrill Lynch, “Thematic Investing: Robot 
Revolution—Global Robot & AI Primer.” (December 16, 2015) 
https://www.bofaml.com/content/dam/boamlimages/documents/ 
PDFs/robotics_and_ai_condensed_primer.pdf 

6. Om Malik, “The Hype-and Hope- of Artificial Intelligence” in The 
New Yorker (August 26, 2016) http://www.newyorker.com/business/ 
currency/the-hype-and-hope-of-artificial-intelligence 

7. Digi-Capital, “Augmented/Virtual Reality Revenue Forecast Revised 
to Hit $120B by 2020” (January 2016) http://www.digi-capital.com/ 
news/2016/01/augmentedvirtual-reality-revenue-forecast- 
revised-to-hit-120-billion-by-2020/#.WR3mDlPyub8 

8. IDG Enterprise, 2016 Cloud Computing Survey, (Nov 1, 2016) 
https://www.idgenterprise.com/resource/research/2016-idg- 
enterprise-cloud-computing-survey/ 

9. Original analysis conduct by IFTF Research Director Devin Fidler 
in March 2017. 

10. Tomio Geron, “Elder Care Gets an Upgrade,” in Wall Street Journal 
(February 20, 2017) https://www.wsj.com/articles/elder-care-gets- 
an-upgrade-1487646120 

11. Tamara Pupic, “Entrepreneur of the Week: Khalid Alkhudair, 
founder of Glowork” in arabianbusiness.com (February 28, 2016) 
http://www.arabianbusiness.com/entrepreneur-of-week-khalid- 
alkhudair-founder-of-glowork-623010.html 

12. Brian Rashid, “The Rise of the Freelancer Economy,” Forbes, 
(January 26, 2016) www.forbes.com/sites/brianrashid/2016/01/26/ 
the-rise-of-the-freelancer-economy/#6033ad94379a. Rashid notes, 
“This do not mean they be all full-time freelancers, but one of 
every two worker will be freelancer in some capacity.” 

13. U.S. Department of Labor, Futurework: Trends and Challenges for 
Work in the 21st Century. (September 1999) https://www.dol.gov/ 
oasam/programs/history/herman/reports/futurework/report.htm 

14. Amitt Mahajan, “How Augmented Reality Will Put People Back to 
Work,” Medium (April 5, 2017), https://medium.com/@amitt/how- 
augmented-reality-will-put-people-back-to-work-31f8bff10d53 

15. Carrie J. Cai, Philip J. Guo, James Glass, and Robert C. Miller. 
2014. Wait-learning: leverage conversational dead time for 
second language education. In CHI ‘14 Extended Abstracts on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ‘14). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 2239-2244. http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/90407 

16. Brian Mullins, Panel, “Emerging Tech Trends’ Impact on Future 
Society” at Dell EMC World (May 9, 2017). 

17. Ramzan, Zulfikar. Phone interview by IFTF. May 23, 2017. 

18. Quinn, Liam. Phone interview by IFTF. May 23, 2017. 

Endnotes 



201 Hamilton Avenue 
Palo Alto, CA 94301 
www.iftf.org 

Composite Graphics 

page 2 




