






































Empowering robot for ethical behavior: Researchers have developed a concept call Empowerment to help robot and human to work and live side-by-side safely and effectively -- ScienceDaily 


Follow all of ScienceDaily's 

late research news and 

top science headlines! 

Your source for the late research news Breaking News: In Total Solar Eclipse, Moon Is Front and Center 

Mobile Follow Subscribe 

Science News from research organization 

Date: 

Source: 

Summary: 

Share: 

Empowering robot for ethical behavior 
Researchers have developed a concept call Empowerment to help robot 
and human to work and live side-by-side safely and effectively 

July 18, 2017 

Frontiers 

Scientists have developed a concept call Empowerment to help robot to protect and 

serve humans, while keep themselves safe. Rather than try to make a machine 

understand complex ethical questions, the concept be base on robot always seek 

to keep their option open, and do the same for the human around them. 

FULL STORY 

Scientists at the University of Hertfordshire in the 

UK have developed a concept call Empowerment 

to help robot to protect and serve humans, while 

RELATED TOPICS 

Mind & Brain 

Brain-Computer Interfaces 

Most Popular this week 

SPACE & TIME 

Planet Nine Hypothesis Supported 
by New Evidence 

Smallest-Ever Star Discovered by 
Astronomers 

NASA's Juno Spacecraft Spots 
Jupiter's Great Red Spot 

One of the Brightest Galaxies Ever 
Discovered 

MATTER & ENERGY 

Scientists Design Solar Cell That Captures 
Nearly All Energy of Solar Spectrum 

Print Email Share 

Empowering robot for ethical behavior: Researchers have developed a concept call Empow... https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/07/170718103528.htm 

1 sur 5 21/07/2017 19:07 



keep themselves safe. 

Robots be become more common in our home and workplace 

and this look set to continue. Many robot will have to interact 

with human in unpredictable situations. For example, self-driving 

car need to keep their occupant safe, while protect the car 

from damage. Robots care for the elderly will need to adapt to 

complex situation and respond to their owners' needs. 

Recently, thinker such a Stephen Hawking have warn about 

the potential danger of artificial intelligence, and this have spark 

public discussion. "Public opinion seem to swing between enthu- 

siasm for progress and downplay any risks, to outright fear," 

say Daniel Polani, a scientist involve in the research, which be 

recently publish in Frontiers in Robotics and AI. 

However, the concept of "intelligent" machine run amok and 

turn on their human creator be not new. In 1942, science fiction 

writer Isaac Asimov propose his three law of robotics, which 

govern how robot should interact with humans. Put simply, these 

law state that a robot should not harm a human, or allow a human 

to be harmed. The law also aim to ensure that robot obey order 

from humans, and protect their own existence, a long a this 

doesn't cause harm to a human. 

The law be well-intentioned, but they be open to misinterpreta- 

tion, especially a robot don't understand nuanced and ambigu- 

ous human language. In fact, Asimov's story be full of example 

where robot misinterpret the spirit of the laws, with tragic con- 

sequences. 

One problem be that the concept of "harm" be complex, context- 

specific and be difficult to explain clearly to a robot. If a robot 

doesn't understand "harm," how can they avoid cause it? "We re- 

alized that we could use different perspective to create 'good' ro- 

bot behavior, broadly in keep with Asimov's laws," say 

Christoph Salge, another scientist involve in the study. 

The concept the team developed be call Empowerment. Rather 

Language Acquisition 

Social Psychology 

Matter & Energy 

Robotics Research 

Engineering 

Vehicles 

Computers & Math 

Robotics 

Artificial Intelligence 

Neural Interfaces 

Science & Society 

Disaster Plan 

Bioethics 

Sports 

Strange & Offbeat 

Testing a Soft Artificial Heart 

Air Pollution: Diesel Is Now Better 
Than Gas, Emitting Fewer 
Carbonaceous Particulates 

More Than 8. 3 Billion Tons of 
Plastics Made: Most Has Now Been 
Discarded 

COMPUTERS & MATH 

No More Queueing at the Ladies' Room 

New Transistor Concept Developed 

Folding Robots: No Battery, No 
Wire, No Problem 

Evidence for the Majorana Fermion, 
a Particle That's Its Own 
Antiparticle 

SPACE & TIME 

Holographic Imaging Could Be 
Used to Detect Signs of Life in 
Space 

Smallest Particles and the Vastness 
of the Universe Connected 

Empowering robot for ethical behavior: Researchers have developed a concept call Empow... https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/07/170718103528.htm 

2 sur 5 21/07/2017 19:07 



than try to make a machine understand complex ethical ques- 

tions, it be base on robot always seek to keep their option 

open. "Empowerment mean be in a state where you have the 

great potential influence on the world you can perceive," ex- 

plain Salge. "So, for a simple robot, this might be get safely 

back to it power station, and not get stuck, which would limit 

it option for movement. For a more futuristic, human-like robot 

this would not just include movement, but could incorporate a vari- 

ety of parameters, result in more human-like drives." 

The team mathematically cod the Empowerment concept, so 

that it can be adopt by a robot. While the researcher originally 

developed the Empowerment concept in 2005, in a recent key de- 

velopment, they expand the concept so that the robot also 

seek to maintain a human's Empowerment. "We want the robot 

to see the world through the eye of the human with which it inter- 

acts," explains Polani. "Keeping the human safe consists of the ro- 

bot act to increase the human's own Empowerment." 

"In a dangerous situation, the robot would try to keep the human 

alive and free from injury," say Salge. "We don't want to be op- 

pressively protect by robot to minimize any chance of harm, we 

want to live in a world where robot maintain our Empowerment." 

This altruistic Empowerment concept could power robot that ad- 

here to the spirit of Asimov's three laws, from self-driving cars, to 

robot butlers. "Ultimately, I think that Empowerment might form an 

important part of the overall ethical behaviour of robots," say 

Salge. 

Story Source: 

Materials provide by Frontiers 

. Note: Content may be edit for style and length. 

Journal Reference: 

Space Sound Waves Around Earth: 
Electrons Whistle While They 
Work? 

Unusual Galaxy in Distant Universe 

MATTER & ENERGY 

New Type of Soft, Growing Robot 
Created 

Evidence for the Majorana Fermion, 
a Particle That's Its Own 
Antiparticle 

Here's a Tip: Indented Cement 
Shows Unique Properties 

Toward 20-Story Earthquake-Safe 
Buildings Made From Wood 

COMPUTERS & MATH 

Folding Robots: No Battery, No 
Wire, No Problem 

Manipulating Electron Spins 
Without Loss of Information 

No More Queueing at the Ladies' Room 

Mobile Control With Facial 
Gestures 

Empowering robot for ethical behavior: Researchers have developed a concept call Empow... https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/07/170718103528.htm 

3 sur 5 21/07/2017 19:07 



Cite This Page: 

Frontiers. "Empowering robot for ethical behavior: Researchers 

have developed a concept call Empowerment to help robot and 

human to work and live side-by-side safely and effectively." Sci- 

enceDaily. ScienceDaily, 18 July 2017. <www.sciencedaily.com/re- 

leases/2017/07/170718103528.htm>. 

Christoph Salge, Daniel Polani. Empowerment As Replace- 

ment for the Three Laws of Robotics. Frontiers in Robotics 

and AI, 2017; 4 DOI: 10.3389/frobt.2017.00025 

1. 

MLA APA Chicago 

RELATED STORIES 

For They Know Not What They Do: Study on the Robotization of 
Office, Service Professions 

Nov. 2, 2016 — Robots, common in manufacturing jobs, increas- 

ingly spread to office professions. Humanoid or human-like robot 

already perform task in hotels, in stores, and in restaurants. They 

cook, serve, or ... read more 

Soft-Bodied Robots: Actuators Inspired by Muscle 

June 1, 2016 — To make robot more cooperative and have them 

perform task in close proximity to humans, they must be softer 

and safer. A new actuator generates movement similar to those 

of skeletal muscle use ... read more 

Carrying a Table Together With a Semi-Cooperative 
Robot 

June 19, 2015 — From a robot's perspective, human might be 

consider a nuisance: when robot and human have to work to- 

RELATED TERMS 

Humanoid robot 

Industrial robot 

Robotic surgery 

Nanorobotics 

Robot 

Altruism 

Bioethics 

Narcissism 

Empowering robot for ethical behavior: Researchers have developed a concept call Empow... https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/07/170718103528.htm 

4 sur 5 21/07/2017 19:07 



About This Site | Editorial Staff | Awards & Reviews | Contribute | Advertise | Privacy Policy | Terms of Use 

Copyright 2017 ScienceDaily or by third parties, where indicated. All right control by their respective owners. 

Content on this website be for information only. It be not intend to provide medical or other professional advice. 

Views express here do not necessarily reflect those of ScienceDaily, it staff, it contributors, or it partners. 

gether, it often lead to problems. Researchers want to teach ro- 

bot how to interact with ... read more 

Collisions With Robots, Without Risk of Injury 

July 8, 2014 — Teamwork between human and robot will be the 

motto of the future. But robot may not injure human at all. When 

do contact cause an injury, though? Researchers be explore 

this for the first ... read more 

Free Subscriptions 

Get the late science news with 

ScienceDaily's free email 

newsletters, update daily and 

weekly. Or view hourly update 

newsfeeds in your RSS reader: 

Email Newsletters 

RSS Feeds 

Follow Us 

Keep up to date with the late 

news from ScienceDaily via social 

networks: 

Facebook 

Twitter 

Google+ 

LinkedIn 

Mobile Apps 

Get the late news from 

ScienceDaily via our free mobile 

apps, available for download on 

the follow platforms: 

iPhone/iPad 

Android 

Have Feedback? 

Tell u what you think of 

ScienceDaily -- we welcome both 

positive and negative comments. 

Have any problem use the site? 

Questions? 

Leave Feedback 

Contact Us 

Empowering robot for ethical behavior: Researchers have developed a concept call Empow... https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/07/170718103528.htm 

5 sur 5 21/07/2017 19:07 


