






































Exabytes in a Test Tube: The Case for DNA Data Storage - IEEE Spectrum 


With the right coding, the double helix could archive our entire civilization 

Illustration: Anatomy Blue 

a man 

die in the Alps. It’s possible he die 

from a blow to the head, or he may 

have bleed to death after be shot in 

the shoulder with an arrow. There’s a 

lot we don’t know about 

(named for the Ötztal Alps, 

where he be discovered), despite the 

fact that researcher have spent almost 

30 year study him. 

Five thousand year ago, 

Ötzi 

(http://www.iceman.it/en/the- 

iceman/) 

On the other hand, we know rather a 

lot about Ötzi’s physiological trait and 

even his clothes. We know he have 

brown eye and a predisposition for 

cardiovascular diseases. He have type 

and be 

The coat he be wear 

be patch together use the leather of 

, and his hat be 

make from a brown bear’s hide. All of this information come from sequence the DNA of both Ötzi and the 

clothing he wore. 

O 

positive blood 

(https://www.nature.com 

/news/iceman-s-dna-reveals-health- 

risks-and-relations-1.10130) 

lactose intolerant. 

(https://www.nytimes.com/2012/03 

/06/science/iceman-had-brown-eyes-and-hair-and-was-lactose-intolerant.html) 

multiple sheep and goat (https://news.nationalgeographic.com 

/2016/08/otzi-iceman-european-alps-mummy-clothing-dna-leather-fur-archaeology/) 

Exabytes in a Test Tube: The Case for DNA Data Storage - IEEE Spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/semiconductors/devices/exabytes-in-a-test-tube... 

1 sur 9 18-05-18 à 19:24 



DNA can store remarkable amount of genetic information and, a Ötzi demonstrates, can do so for 

thousand of years. The DNA molecule be a double-helix staircase of billion of molecular blocks, call base 

pairs, whose arrangement determines much of what make each of u unique. Only recently have we 

contemplate use DNA to store electronic, digital data. And while DNA isn’t currently a viable alternative 

to memory stick or hard-disk drives, it might be one of our best option to cope with the increasingly vast 

quantity of data we’ll create a data mining, analytics, and other big-data application proliferate. 

It be back in 2003 when some researchers, notably a group at the University of Arizona, become intrigue 

with the idea of use DNA to store data. But there be plenty of skeptics: Conventional mass-storage 

system be do the job cheaply and reliably. There be no compelling reason to seek out new options. 

The situation have change drastically over the last 15 years. We face an unprecedented data deluge in 

medicine, physics, astronomy, biology, and other sciences. The Sloan Digital Sky Survey, for example, 

produce about 73,000 gigabyte of data annually. At the European Organization for Nuclear Research 

(CERN), the Large Hadron Collider generates 50 million GB of data per year a it record the result of 

experiment involving, typically, 600 million particle collision per second. These CERN result churn 

through a distribute compute grid comprise over 130,000 CPUs, 230 million GB of magnetic tape 

storage, and 300 million GB of online disk storage. 

Using primer to replicate DNA 

Illustration: Mark Montgomery 

Primers be short strand of base that match, base for base, the end of DNA strands. 

Primers kick-start the polymerase chain reaction in order to replicate a particular DNA 

strand, make it easy to pick out at random from a soup of DNA strands. 

In the life sciences, DNA sequence alone generates 

of data per year. Researchers predict that within a decade we will be swamp with 40 

(10 ) GB of genomic data. All of that data will have to be store for decade due to government regulation in 

the United States, Europe, and elsewhere. 

million of gigabyte (/biomedical/devices/the-dna- 

data-deluge) billion 
9 

Exabytes in a Test Tube: The Case for DNA Data Storage - IEEE Spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/semiconductors/devices/exabytes-in-a-test-tube... 

2 sur 9 18-05-18 à 19:24 



Yet even a our data storage need surge, traditional mass-storage technology be start to approach their 

limits. With hard-disk drives, we’re encounter a limit of 1 terabyte—1,000 GB—per square inch. Past that 

point, temperature fluctuation can induce the magnetically charge material of the disk to flip, corrupt 

the data it holds. We could try to use a more heat-resistant material, but we would have to drastically alter 

the technology we use to read and write on hard-disk drives, which would require huge new investments. The 

storage industry need to look elsewhere. 

have come a long way since the early 2000s, when the technology for reading DNA, 

let alone write it, be still in their infancy. In those days, the Human Genome Project have only recently 

complete a draft of the human genome, at a mind-boggling cost exceed US $2.7 billion, which work out 

to about $1 to read each base pair. 

DNA-based storage 

By the end of 2015, the cost for obtain a highly accurate readout of an entire human genome have fall 

below $1,500, accord to the National Human Genome Research Institute. And today, roughly $1,000 be 

enough for you to get your entire genome sequenced. The cost of DNA sequence be one three-millionth 

what it be 10 year ago. 

Our ability to sequence, synthesize, and edit DNA have advanced at a previously inconceivable speed. Far from 

be expensive and impractical, these DNA technology be the most disruptive in all of biotechnology. It’s 

now possible to write custom DNA strand for penny per base pair, at least for short strands. Two 

companies, GenScript Biotech Corp. and Integrated DNA Technologies, provide DNA synthesis for 11 and 37 

cent per base pair, respectively, for strand no longer than several hundred base pairs. Biotech startup 

company buy their service and use the synthesize DNA to 

or create yeast that produce unusual 

beer. 

repair organ (/video/biomedical/devices 

/repairing-organs-with-the-touch-of-a-nanochip) flavor to use in 

brewing (/the-human-os/biomedical/devices/launched-a-factory-for-making-weird-new-organisms) 

DNA-based storage 
system be new 
and uncharted 
territory for cod 
theorist 

For company purchasing synthetic DNA, the cost depends on the 

length of the sequence be synthesized, because it be usually much 

more difficult to create long DNA strands. There be a handful of 

specialized effort to synthesize longer strands—for example, an 

ongoing multilab effort be building an 

. Even so, 

commercially purchasing anything beyond 10,000 base pair be 

currently impossible. (For reference, your genome have about 3.08 

billion base pairs, a slightly small number than that of an African 

clawed frog.) 

entirely synthetic yeast genome 

(/the-human-os/biomedical/devices/with-synthetic-biology-software- 

geneticists-design-living-organisms-from-scratch) 

When reading DNA, sequence device produce fragment range in length from several hundred to ten of 

thousand of base pairs, which be then analyze fragment by fragment before be stitch back together 

for a full readout. The whole process of reading an entire human genome take less than a day. Researchers 

be now start to sequence large quantity of fragment use nanopore technologies, which feed DNA 

through pore a if they be spaghetti noodle slip through a large-holed strainer. As DNA pass 

through a pore, it can be read base by base. 

Exabytes in a Test Tube: The Case for DNA Data Storage - IEEE Spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/semiconductors/devices/exabytes-in-a-test-tube... 

3 sur 9 18-05-18 à 19:24 



In addition, DNA may be replicate exponentially at a low cost use the polymerase chain reaction, which 

duplicate a strand of DNA by splitting it apart and then building two identical strand by match up the 

correspond base pairs. These advance in reading DNA a well a in replicate it allow us, for the first 

time, to seriously consider DNA a a data-recording medium. 

It still may not match other data storage option for cost, but DNA have advantage that other option can’t 

match. Not only be it easily replicated, it also have an ultrahigh storage density—as much a 100 trillion (10 ) 

GB per gram. While the data represent a human genome, base pair by base pair, can be store digitally on 

a CD with room to spare, a cell nucleus store that same amount of data in a space about 1/24,000 a large. 

DNA do not have to be power by an external energy source to retain data, a long a it’s store in a 

control environment. And it can last for a long time: DNA can survive in less than ideal condition for 

hundred of thousand of years, although it often becomes highly degraded. After all, the Alps preserve 

Ötzi’s DNA for more than 5,000 years. Researchers once recover DNA from the 

that have be preserve in a glacier for about 700,000 years. 

12 

toe bone of a horse 

(https://www.csmonitor.com/Science/2013/0626/Straight-from-the-horse-s-toe-the-world-s-oldest- 

genome) 

Despite these appeal attributes, exploit DNA for digital storage involves significant challenges. When it 

come to building a storage system, the first task be to model the system’s structure and operation. To that 

end, two research groups—one at Harvard in 2012 and the other at the European Bioinformatics Institute, in 

the United Kingdom, in 2013—proposed conceptually simple design for DNA-based storage. 

Encoding text or binary code a DNA 

Illustration: Mark Montgomery 

We can take a simple phrase like “ ” (Persian for “in the name of 

God”) and encode it in base 3. We can then convert those number into DNA. Each 

base-3 digit will be encode a any of the base A, T, G, and C, depend on the letter in 

the strand that come before. For example, a 0 will be encode a G if the previous base 

be C. This method complicates the encode process, but it prevents create strand 

with several repetition of the same base, which can cause error when sequence the 

strand later. To recover the original text, the process can be do in reverse. 

Be nam khodavand 

Exabytes in a Test Tube: The Case for DNA Data Storage - IEEE Spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/semiconductors/devices/exabytes-in-a-test-tube... 

4 sur 9 18-05-18 à 19:24 



The basic idea be to convert the data into the DNA alphabet—adenine (A), thymine (T), cytosine (C), and 

guanine (G)—and store it in short string with large amount of overlap. The overlap would ensure that the 

data could be stitch back together accurately. For example, if the information be store in string that 

be 100 base pair long, the last 75 base pair from the previous string could be use a the first 75 base 

pair for the next, with the next 25 base pair tacked onto the end. With this strategy, the estimate cost of 

encode 1 megabyte of data be over $12,000 for synthesize the DNA and another $220 for retrieve it— 

rather prohibitively expensive at the moment. 

Encoding data into a single long strand of 

DNA be ask for trouble when it come time 

to recover the data. A safer process encodes 

the data in shorter strands. We then construct 

the first part of the next strand use the same 

data found at the end of the previous strand. 

This way we have multiple copy of the data 

for comparison. 

Damerau distance codes, which in natural- 

language processing be use to catch error 

like misspelling (for example, “smort” instead 

of “smart”), can identify the spot in binary 

code where 1 and 0 have likely be 

substitute by mistake during copying or 

transcription. 

Since then, research group have demonstrate the long- 

term reliability of DNA-based data storage, the feasibility of 

use some traditional cod techniques, and even store 

small amount of data within the genome of living 

bacteria. Our work, at the University of Illinois at Urbana- 

Champaign, in collaboration with the lab of Jian Ma and 

Huimin Zhao, pioneer random-access storage in DNA. 

We have be focus on solve the problem of random 

access, rewriting, and error-free data recovery for data that 

be read from DNA sequence devices. Random access (the 

ability to directly access any information you want) and 

address (which tell you where to find that information) 

be key to any effective data storage method. 

Our interest in DNA-based data storage emerge from our 

background in cod theory. Coding theory have make 

modern storage system possible by enable the proper 

data format for specific systems, the conversion of data 

from one format to another, and the correction of 

inevitable errors. 

DNA-based storage system be a tantalize challenge for 

cod theorists. We be initially drawn to the challenge 

of identify the source of error from both write and 

reading DNA, and of develop cod technique to 

correct or mitigate such errors. Coding improves the 

reliability of ultimately fallible storage device and the 

feasibility of use cheaper options. But DNA-based storage 

system be new and uncharted territory for cod 

theorists. 

Exabytes in a Test Tube: The Case for DNA Data Storage - IEEE Spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/semiconductors/devices/exabytes-in-a-test-tube... 

5 sur 9 18-05-18 à 19:24 



(/image/MzA0Nzc4Ng.jpeg) 
Damerau distance code can also be use to 

address the error that occur in DNA, even 

though they’re more complex than binary 

errors. Sometimes base be inadvertently 

deleted, and sometimes two will swap 

positions, error that do not often occur in 

binary code. 
Illustrations: Mark Montgomery 

challenge present by DNA, 

first consider a compact disc. The data be nicely organize 

into tracks, and we can easily access that data with the 

readily available hardware. DNA isn’t so simple. It’s 

inherently unordered; there be no track to follow to 

access the data. 

To understand the cod 

A complete storage system would encompass many DNA 

molecules, so how would you even locate and select the 

specific molecule carry the data you want? It would be 

like try to fish a specific noodle out of a bowl of chicken 

noodle soup. It’s highly unlikely you’d grab the right noodle 

at random, but if you could replicate that specific noodle 

again and again, until you fill the bowl, any noodle you 

nab would likely be the right one. 

Our idea for DNA data access be to synthesize each encode 

strand with an additional sequence that act a an address. 

Carefully design sequence of the bases, call primers, would match that address sequence and begin the 

process of replicate the DNA of interest. In this way, we could exponentially reproduce DNA strand 

carry the data of interest use the polymerase chain reaction, make it easy to find a copy of the right 

strand. 

Of course, with DNA, it’s not quite so simple a pluck the right noodle out of your soup. Think of a primer 

a a sticky tape that bind to a specific set of rungs, or “complements,” on the DNA “ladder.” A primer should 

bind only to the specific address sequence it’s look for. To make matter more difficult, not all primer be 

create equal: G and C base pair typically bind more tightly than A and T, meaning that a primer 

construct with too many A and T base may not bind a strongly. Poorly design primer can cause a lot 

of problems. 

“Shotgun-style” sequence break copy of 

the long, unwieldy DNA strand into fragment 

of vary lengths. After those shorter 

segment be read, they can be compare 

with different fragment to reconstruct the 

entire sequence, although this method can 

introduce uncertainty about the placement of 

individual fragments. 

We’re encounter intrigue cod question in figure 

out how to construct primer that will not only bind tightly 

but to the right targets. For example, because each primer 

will bind with it complement—A to T, G to C, and vice 

versa—how can we ensure that each address sequence 

doesn’t appear anywhere in the encode data except a the 

address of the DNA strand you’re look for? Otherwise, 

the primer may bind to the wrong location and replicate 

unwanted DNA. 

Exabytes in a Test Tube: The Case for DNA Data Storage - IEEE Spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/semiconductors/devices/exabytes-in-a-test-tube... 

6 sur 9 18-05-18 à 19:24 



Fortunately, cod theorist have be solve similar 

problem for traditional storage medium for decades. Other 

challenges, for example, like those that emerge in 

connection with reading the DNA, aren’t typically 

encounter in conventional mass-storage systems. There 

be plenty of device on the market that sequence DNA: 

Illumina’s HiSeq 2500 system, PacBio’s RS II and Sequel 

systems, and Oxford Nanopore Technologies’ MinION be 

just three examples. All such sequencer be prone to 

introduce different type of readout error a they 

determine the exact sequence of As, Cs, Gs, and Ts that 

make up a DNA sample. Illumina devices, for example, 

sometimes substitute the wrong base when reading the 

strand—say, an A instead of a C. These error become more 

frequent the further into the strand you get. The accidental 

deletion of entire block be also a concern, and nanopore 

sequencer often insert the wrong base pair into readout 

or omit base pair entirely. 

Different sequencer all require different code to 

compensate for their flaws. For Illumina sequencers, for 

example, we’ve propose a cod scheme that add 

redundancy to the sequence to eliminate the substitution 

error that arise from the devices’ “shotgun-style” approach 

to sequencing. It’s tricky to rebuild a genome after break 

it apart to read individual sequence without occasionally 

insert the wrong segment in the wrong location. 

Redundant sequence will improve the odds of recover 

data even if a segment be corrupt a a result of be 

reassemble incorrectly. 

For nanopore sequencers, we developed code to address 

different type of substitution error that arise from 

sequence the strand too quickly. In traditional data 

storage, it’s just a likely that a 0 could be change to a 1 a 

it be that a 1 could be change to a 0. It’s not so simple with 

DNA, where an A could be rewrite a a T, C, or G, and the 

substitution don’t happen with equal frequency. We’ve 

write code to account for that fact, a well a code to 

handle the base-pair deletion and swap that naturally 

occur a DNA ages. 

Exabytes in a Test Tube: The Case for DNA Data Storage - IEEE Spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/semiconductors/devices/exabytes-in-a-test-tube... 

7 sur 9 18-05-18 à 19:24 



When reading binary data from a traditional 

storage medium, there’s always a small 

chance that a 1 could be read a a 0 by 

mistake, or that a 0 could be read a a 1. 

Because we’re deal with a simple two-state 

system, we can expect that each situation will 

occur with equal frequency. 
Illustrations: Mark Montgomery 

Nanopore-sequencer transcription error in DNA 

Illustration: Mark Montgomery 

Nanopore sequencer read long string of DNA base one by one, and because of the 

speed at which they do so, they will occasionally misread a particular base. Unlike the 

simple misread of 1 and 0s, however, the odds of base be mistaken for one 

another varies, due to their complex molecular structure and even the orientation the 

strand be in a it pass through the nanopore. 

DNA-based storage, like any other data storage system, 

require random access and efficient reading. But the 

big challenge be write data inexpensively. 

Synthesizing DNA be still expensive, partly because of the 

molecule’s sheer complexity and partly because the market 

be not drive the development of cheaper methods. One 

possible approach to reduce cost be to prevent error in the 

first place. By place redundancy in the DNA sequence 

that store data, you can skip expensive after-the-fact 

corrections. This be common practice in every data storage 

method, but synthesize company currently aren’t equip to pursue this—their production process be 

so automate it would be prohibitively expensive to adjust them to produce these type of redundant strands. 

Making DNA-based storage a practical reality will require cooperation among researcher on the frontier of 

synthetic biology and cod theory. We’ve make big stride toward realize a DNA-based storage system, 

but we need to develop system to efficiently access the information encode into DNA. We need to design 

cod scheme that guard against both synthesis and sequence errors. And we need to figure out how to 

do these thing cheaply. 

If we can solve these problems, nature’s incredible storage medium—DNA—might also store our music, our 

literature, and our scientific advances. The very same medium that literally specifies who we be a 

individual might also store our art, our culture, and our history a a species. 

Exabytes in a Test Tube: The Case for DNA Data Storage - IEEE Spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/semiconductors/devices/exabytes-in-a-test-tube... 

8 sur 9 18-05-18 à 19:24 



be a professor of electrical and computer 

engineering at the University of Illinois. be a 

scientist with the U.S. Navy’s 

in San Diego and a postdoc at Illinois. be a 

lecturer at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore and a former postdoc at Illinois. 

be a Ph.D. student work with 

Milenkovic. 

Olgica Milenkovic (http://publish.illinois.edu/milenkovic/) 

Ryan Gabrys (https://sites.google.com/view/ryangabrys/home) 

Spawar (http://www.public.navy.mil/spawar/Pacific/Pages/About-SSC- 

Pac.aspx) Han Mao Kiah (http://www.ntu.edu.sg/home/hmkiah/) 

S.M. Hossein 

Tabatabaei Yazdi (http://web.engr.illinois.edu/~tbtbyzd2/about.php) 

Exabytes in a Test Tube: The Case for DNA Data Storage - IEEE Spectrum https://spectrum.ieee.org/semiconductors/devices/exabytes-in-a-test-tube... 

9 sur 9 18-05-18 à 19:24 


