






































Exoskeletons debut at Ford factory 


Exoskeletons debut at Ford factory 

Charlie Osborne 

screen-shot-2018-08-07-at-09-54-41.jpg 
Ford 

Following successful trials, Ford will now offer employee the use of exoskeleton to reduce the strain of 
factory work. 

Despite the emergence of Industry 4.0, smart factories, sensors, and data analytics, much of the heavy-duty 
operation of today's industrial and manufacturing still rely heavily on human input. 

Over time, the physical demand of such work can cause injury, muscle stress, and accidents. 

However, Ford hope that by augment our bodies, exoskeleton may be able to reduce some of the strain. 

Last year, the US automaker begin trial at select factory that revolve around the use of the EskoVest, an 
exoskeleton design by Ekso Bionics. 

The company describes itself a a "leading developer of exoskeleton solution that amplify human potential 
by support or enhance strength, endurance, and mobility across medical, industrial and defense 
applications," and when it come to Ford, strength, and endurance be the top priorities. 

According to Ford, the firm's assembly line workforce lift their arm during overhead task roughly one 
million time per year -- which, at that rate, result in substantial risk for fatigue and upper-body injuries. 

Pursue New Career Heights with 65 Hours of Training in Salesforce, One of Today's Most In-Demand Skills. 

In order to combat the problem, Ford tasked Ekso Bionics with develop an exoskeleton to reduce the risk 
of work-related medical problems. 

The exoskeleton create for the task elevates worker's arm during overhead tasks, and while allow 
wearer to move their arm freely, also provide up to 15 pound of life assistance and support per arm. 

The high the wearer have to reach, the more support be offered. 

The exoskeleton can be adjust for user between 5 and 6.4 foot tall, and a the device be mechanical, no 
battery pack or heavy gear be required, keep the device lightweight. 

TechRepublic: 4 way wearable can benefit your workforce 

Ford pilot the EksoVest in two US plant successfully and now plan to launch the exoskeleton in facility 
worldwide. 

As report by Engadget, the EksoVest will be offer to employee at 15 factories. 

See also: Is there a market for this wearable robot for skiers? 

While it be only a total of 75 skeleton that be on offer, which will only impact a small part of the assembly 
line, this should reduce the physical strain felt by staff work on overhead tasks. 

A small project it may be, but it do show that Ford be keen to reduce worker injury -- and long term, this 
might only be the begin for the use of exoskeleton in factory globally. 

CNET: Brace yourself: SuitX industrial exoskeleton amplify human strength 

"Our goal have always be to keep the work environment safe and productive for the hardworking men and 
woman we rely on across the globe," say Bruce Hettle, Ford group vice president, Manufacturing, and Labor 
Affairs. "Investing in the late ergonomics research, assembly improvement and lift-assist technology have 
help u design efficient and safe assembly lines, while maintain high vehicle quality for our customers." 

Previous and related coverage 

Exoskeletons debut at Ford factory https://www.zdnet.com/article/ford-to-give-factory-employees-exoskeletons/ 

1 sur 2 13-08-18 à 18:51 



Sarcos form Exoskeleton Technical Advisory Group 
This be the smartest robotics company in the world (and soon to be one of the most important) 
Robotic suit now have Amazon Echo integration 

Exoskeletons debut at Ford factory https://www.zdnet.com/article/ford-to-give-factory-employees-exoskeletons/ 

2 sur 2 13-08-18 à 18:51 


