






































Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center 


NUMBERS, FACTS AND TRENDS SHAPING YOUR WORLD ABOUT | FOLLOW US 

Internet, Science & Tech 

MENU RESEARCH AREAS 

FEBRUARY 8, 2017 

Code-Dependent: Pros and Cons of the 
Algorithm Age 

BY LEE RAINIE (HTTP://WWW.PEWRESEARCH.ORG/STAFF/LEE-RAINIE/) AND JANNA ANDERSON (HTTP://WWW.PEWINTERNET.ORG 

/AUTHOR/JANDERSON/) 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

1 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



Algorithms be instruction for solve a problem (https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/jul/01/how-algorithms- 

rule-world-nsa) or complete a task. Recipes be algorithms, a be math equations. Computer code be algorithmic. 

The internet run on algorithm and all online search be accomplish through them. Email know where to go 

thanks to algorithms. Smartphone apps be nothing but algorithms. Computer and video game be algorithmic 

storytelling. Online date and book-recommendation and travel website would not function without algorithms. 

GPS mapping system get people from point A to point B via algorithms. Artificial intelligence (AI) be naught but 

algorithms. The material people see on social medium be brought to them by algorithms. In fact, everything people 

see and do on the web be a product of algorithms. Every time someone sort a column in a spreadsheet, algorithm 

be at play, and most financial transaction today be accomplish by algorithms. Algorithms help gadget 

respond to voice commands, recognize faces, sort photo and build and drive cars. Hacking, cyberattacks and 

cryptographic code-breaking exploit algorithms. Self-learning and self-programming algorithm 

(https://erc.europa.eu/projects-and-results/erc-stories/self-learning-ai-emulates-human-brain) be now emerging, so it be 

possible that in the future algorithm will write many if not most algorithms. 

Algorithms be often elegant and incredibly useful tool use to accomplish tasks. They be mostly invisible aids, 

augment human life in increasingly incredible ways. However, sometimes the application of algorithm 

create with good intention lead to unintended consequences. Recent news item tie to these concerns: 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

2 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



The British pound drop 6.1% in value in second on Oct. 7, 2016, partly because of currency trade 

trigger by algorithms. 

Microsoft engineer create a Twitter bot name “Tay” this past spring in an attempt to chat with 

Millennials by respond to their prompts, but within hour it be spout racist, sexist, Holocaust- 

deny tweet base on algorithm that have it “learning” how to respond to others base on what be 

tweet at it. 

Facebook try to create a feature to highlight Trending Topics from around the site in people’s feeds. First, 

it have a team of human edit the feature, but controversy erupt when some accuse the platform of be 

bias against conservatives. So, Facebook then turn the job over to algorithm only to find that they 

could not discern real news from fake news. 

Cathy O’Neil, author of Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens 

Democracy, point out that predictive analytics base on algorithm tend to punish the poor, use 

algorithmic hire practice a an example. 

Well-intentioned algorithm can be sabotage by bad actors. An internet slowdown swept the East Coast of 

the U.S. on Oct. 21, 2016, after hacker bombard Dyn DNS, an internet traffic handler, with information 

that overload it circuits, usher in a new era of internet attack power by internet-connected devices. 

This after internet security expert Bruce Schneier warn in September that “Someone Is Learning How to 

Take Down the Internet.” And the abuse of Facebook’s News Feed algorithm and general promulgation of 

fake news online become controversial a the 2016 U.S. presidential election proceeded. 

Researcher Andrew Tutt call for an “FDA for Algorithms,” noting, “The rise of increasingly complex 

algorithm call for critical thought about how to best prevent, deter and compensate for the harm that they 

cause …. Algorithmic regulation will require federal uniformity, expert judgment, political independence 

and pre-market review to prevent – without stifle innovation – the introduction of unacceptably 

dangerous algorithm into the market.” 

The White House release two report in October 2016 detail the advance of algorithm and artificial 

intelligence and plan to address issue tie to it, and it issue a December report outline some of the 

potential effect of AI-driven automation on the U.S. job market and economy. 

On January 17, 2017, the Future of Life Institute publish a list of 23 Principles for Beneficial Artificial 

Intelligence, create by a gathering of concerned researcher at a conference at Asimolar, in Pacific Grove, 

California. The more than 1,600 signatory include Steven Hawking, Elon Musk, Ray Kurzweil and 

hundred of the world’s foremost AI researchers. 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

3 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



The use of algorithm be spread (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_algorithms) a massive amount of data be 

be created, capture and analyze by business and governments. Some be call this the Age of Algorithms 

(https://newrepublic.com/article/133472/life-age-algorithms) and predict that the future of algorithm 

(http://news.stanford.edu/2016/09/01/ai-might-affect-urban-life-2030/) be tie to machine learn and deep learn 

(https://blogs.nvidia.com/blog/2016/07/29/whats-difference-artificial-intelligence-machine-learning-deep-learning-ai/) 

that will get good and good at an ever-faster pace. 

While many of the 2016 U.S. presidential election post-mortem note the revolutionary impact of web-based 

tool in influence it outcome, XPrize Foundation CEO Peter Diamandis predict that “five big tech trend will 

make this election look tame (http://singularityhub.com/2016/11/07/5-big-tech-trends-that-will-make-this-election- 

look-tame/) .” He say advance in quantum compute and the rapid evolution of AI and AI agent embed in 

system and device in the Internet of Things will lead to hyper-stalking, influence and shape of voters, and 

hyper-personalized ads, and will create new way to misrepresent reality and perpetuate falsehoods. 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

4 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



Analysts like Aneesh Aneesh of Stanford University foresee algorithm take over public and private activity in 

a new era of “algocratic governance” (http://web.stanford.edu/class/sts175/NewFiles/Algocratic%20Governance.pdf) 

that supplants “bureaucratic hierarchies.” Others, like Harvard’s Shoshana Zuboff, describe the emergence of 

“surveillance capitalism” (https://cryptome.org/2015/07/big-other.pdf) that organizes economic behavior in an 

“information civilization.” 

To illuminate current attitude about the potential impact of algorithm in the next decade, Pew Research Center 

and Elon University’s Imagining the Internet Center conduct a large-scale canvass of technology experts, 

scholars, corporate practitioner and government leaders. Some 1,302 respond to this question about what will 

happen in the next decade: 

Will the net overall effect of algorithm be positive for individual and society or negative for individual 

and society? 

The non-scientific canvass found that 38% of these particular respondent predict that the positive impact 

of algorithm will outweigh negative for individual and society in general, while 37% say negative will 

outweigh positives; 25% say the overall impact of algorithm will be about 50-50, positive-negative. [See “About 

this canvass of expert (http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/algorithms-about-this-canvassing-of-experts/) ” for 

further detail about the limit of this sample.] 

Participants be ask to explain their answers, and most write detailed elaboration that provide insight 

about hopeful and concern trends. Respondents be allow to respond anonymously; these constitute a 

slight majority of the write elaborations. These finding do not represent all the point of view that be possible 

to a question like this, but they do reveal a wide range of valuable observation base on current trends. 

In the next section we offer a brief outline of seven key theme found among the write elaborations. Following 

that introductory section there be a much more in-depth look at respondents’ thought (http://www.pewinternet.org 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

5 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



/2017/02/08/theme-1-algorithms-will-continue-to-spread-everywhere/) tie to each of the themes. All response be 

lightly edit for style. 

Theme 1: Algorithms will continue to spread everywhere 

There be fairly uniform agreement among these respondent that algorithm be generally invisible to the public 

and there will be an exponential rise in their influence in the next decade. 

A representative statement of this view come from Barry Chudakov, founder and principal at Sertain Research 

and StreamFuzion Corp. He replied: 

“‘If every algorithm suddenly stop working, it would be the end of the world a we know it.’ (Pedro 

Domingo’s The Master Algorithm (https://www.amazon.com/Master-Algorithm-Ultimate-Learning-Machine 

/dp/0465065708) ). Fact: We have already turn our world over to machine learn and algorithms. The 

question now is, how to good understand and manage what we have done? 

“Algorithms be a useful artifact to begin discuss the large issue of the effect of technology-enabled 

assist in our lives. Namely, how can we see them at work? Consider and ass their assumptions? And 

most importantly for those who don’t create algorithm for a living – how do we educate ourselves about the 

way they work, where they be in operation, what assumption and bias be inherent in them, and how to 

keep them transparent? Like fish in a tank, we can see them swim around and keep an eye on them. 

“Algorithms be the new arbiter of human 

decision-making in almost any area we can 

imagine, from watch a movie (Affectiva 

emotion recognition) to buying a house 

(Zillow.com) to self-driving car (Google). 

Deloitte Global predict more than 80 of the 

world’s 100 large enterprise software 

company will have cognitive technology – 

mediate by algorithm – integrate into their 

product by the end of 2016. As Brian Christian 

and Tom Griffiths write in Algorithms to Live 

By, (https://www.amazon.com/Algorithms- 

Live-Computer-Science-Decisions/dp/1627790365/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1476814852&sr=1-1& 

keywords=algorithms+to+live+by) algorithm provide ‘a good standard against which to compare human 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

6 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



cognition itself.’ They be also a goad to consider that same cognition: How be we think and what do it 

mean to think through algorithm to mediate our world? 

“The main positive result of this be good understand of how to make rational decisions, and in this 

measure a good understand of ourselves. After all, algorithm be generate by trial and error, by 

testing, by observing, and come to certain mathematical formula regard choice that have be make 

again and again – and this can be use for difficult choice and problems, especially when intuitively we 

cannot readily see an answer or a way to resolve the problem. The 37% Rule (https://en.wikipedia.org 

/wiki/Secretary_problem) , optimal stop and other algorithmic conclusion be evidence-based guide 

that enable u to use wisdom and mathematically verify step to make good decisions. 

“The secondary positive result be connectivity. In a technological recapitulation of what spiritual teacher 

have be say for centuries, our thing be demonstrate that everything be – or can be – connect to 

everything else. Algorithms with the persistence and ubiquity of insect will automate process that use to 

require human manipulation and thinking. These can now manage basic process of monitoring, 

measuring, counting or even seeing. Our car can tell u to slow down. Our television can suggest movie to 

watch. A grocery can suggest a healthy combination of meat and vegetable for dinner. Siri reminds you it’s 

your anniversary. 

“The main negative change come down to a simple but now quite difficult question: How can we see, and 

fully understand the implication of, the algorithm programmed into everyday action and decisions? The 

rub be this: Whose intelligence be it, anyway? … Our system do not have, and we need to build in, what 

David Gelernter call ‘topsight,’ (http://www.peachpit.com/articles/article.aspx?p=29658&seqNum=3) the ability 

to not only create technological solution but also see and explore their consequence before we build 

business models, company and market on their strengths, and especially on their limitations.” 

Chudakov add that this be especially necessary because in the next decade and beyond, “By expand 

collection and analysis of data and the result application of this information, a layer of intelligence or 

think manipulation be add to process and object that previously do not have that layer. So 

prediction possibility follow u around like a pet. The result: As information tool and predictive dynamic 

be more widely adopted, our life will be increasingly affected by their inherent conclusion and the 

narrative they spawn.” 

“The overall impact of ubiquitous algorithm be presently incalculable because the presence of algorithm in 

everyday process and transaction be now so great, and be mostly hidden from public view. All of our 

extend think system (algorithms fuel the software and connectivity that create extend think 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

7 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



systems) demand more think – not less – and a more global perspective than we have previously 

managed. The expand collection and analysis of data and the result application of this information 

can cure diseases, decrease poverty, bring timely solution to people and place where need be greatest, and 

dispel millennium of prejudice, ill-founded conclusions, inhumane practice and ignorance of all kinds. Our 

algorithm be now redefine what we think, how we think and what we know. We need to ask them to 

think about their think – to look out for pitfall and inherent bias before those be bake in and harder 

to remove. 

“To create oversight that would ass the impact of algorithms, first we need to see and understand them in 

the context for which they be developed. That, by itself, be a tall order that require impartial expert 

backtracking through the technology development process to find the model and formula that originate 

the algorithms. Then, keep all that learn at hand, the expert need to soberly ass the benefit and 

deficit or risk the algorithm create. Who be prepared to do this? Who have the time, the budget and 

resource to investigate and recommend useful course of action? This be a 21st-century job description – 

and market niche – in search of real people and companies. In order to make algorithm more transparent, 

product and product information circular might include an outline of algorithmic assumptions, akin to the 

nutritional sidebar now found on many package food products, that would inform user of how algorithm 

drive intelligence in a give product and a reasonable outline of the implication inherent in those 

assumptions.” 

Theme 2: Good thing lie ahead 

A number of respondent note the many way in which algorithm will help make sense of massive amount of 

data, note that this will spark breakthrough in science, new convenience and human capacity in everyday 

life, and an ever-better capacity to link people to the information that will help them. They perform seemingly 

miraculous task human cannot and they will continue to greatly augment human intelligence and assist in 

accomplish great things. A representative proponent of this view be Stephen Downes, a researcher at the 

National Research Council of Canada, who list the follow a positive changes: 

“Some examples: 

Banks. Today bank provide loan base on very incomplete data. It be true that many people who today 

qualify for loan would not get them in the future. However, many people – and arguably many more people 

– will be able to obtain loan in the future, a bank turn away from use such factor a race, socio- 

economic background, postal code and the like to ass fit. Moreover, with more data (and with a more 

interactive relationship between bank and client) bank can reduce their risk, thus provide more loans, 

while at the same time provide a range of service individually direct to actually help a person’s 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

8 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



financial state. 

“Health care providers. Health care be a significant and grow expense not because people be become 

less healthy (in fact, society-wide, the opposite be true) but because of the significant overhead require to 

support increasingly complex systems, include prescriptions, insurance, facility and more. New 

technology will enable health provider to shift a significant percentage of that load to the individual, who 

will (with the aid of personal support systems) manage their health better, coordinate and manage their own 

care, and create less of a burden on the system. As the overall cost of health care declines, it becomes 

increasingly feasible to provide single-payer health insurance for the entire population, which have know 

beneficial health outcome and efficiencies. 

“Governments. A significant proportion of government be base on regulation and monitoring, which will no 

longer be require with the deployment of automate production and transportation systems, along with 

sensor networks. This include many of the daily (and often unpleasant) interaction we have with 

government today, from traffic offenses, manifestation of civil discontent, unfair treatment in commercial 

and legal processes, and the like. A simple example: One of the most persistent political problem in the 

United States be the gerrymander of political boundary to benefit incumbents. Electoral division 

create by an algorithm to a large degree eliminate gerrymander (and when open and debatable, can be 

modify to improve on that result).” 

A sample of additional answers, from anonymous respondents: 

“Algorithms find knowledge in an automate 

way much faster than traditionally feasible.” 

“Algorithms can crunch database quickly 

enough to alleviate some of the red tape and 

bureaucracy that currently slows progress 

down.” 

“We will see less pollution, improve human health, less economic waste.” 

“Algorithms have the potential to equalize access to information.” 

“The efficiency of algorithm will lead to more creativity and self-expression.” 

“Algorithms can diminish transportation issues; they can identify congestion and alternative time and 

paths.” 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

9 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



“Self-driving car could dramatically reduce the number of accident we have per year, a well a improve 

quality of life for most people.” 

“Better-targeted delivery of news, service and advertising.” 

“More evidence-based social science use algorithm to collect data from social medium and click trails.” 

“Improved and more proactive police work, target area where crime can be prevented.” 

“Fewer underdeveloped area and more international commercial exchanges.” 

“Algorithms ease the friction in decision-making, purchasing, transportation and a large number of other 

behaviors.” 

“Bots will follow order to buy your stocks. Digital agent will find the material you need.” 

“Any error could be corrected. This will mean the algorithm only become more efficient to humanity’s 

desire a time progresses.” 

Themes illuminate concern and challenge 

Participants in this study be in substantial agreement that the abundant positive of accelerate 

code-dependency will continue to drive the spread of algorithms; however, a with all great technological 

revolutions, this trend have a dark side. Most respondent point out concerns, chief among them the final five 

overarch theme of this report; all have subthemes. 

Theme 3: Humanity and human judgment be lose when data and predictive model become 

paramount 

Advances in algorithm be allow technology corporation and government to gather, store, sort and analyze 

massive data sets. Experts in this canvass note that these algorithm be primarily write to optimize 

efficiency and profitability without much thought about the possible societal impact of the data model and 

analysis. These respondent argue that human be consider to be an “input” to the process and they be not 

see a real, thinking, feeling, change beings. They say this be create a flawed, logic-driven society and that a 

the process evolves – that is, a algorithm begin to write the algorithm – human may get left out of the loop, 

let “the robot decide.” Representative of this view: 

Bart Knijnenburg, assistant professor in human-centered compute at Clemson University, replied, 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

10 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



“Algorithms will capitalize on convenience and profit, thereby discriminate [against] certain populations, but 

also erode the experience of everyone else. The goal of algorithm be to fit some of our preferences, but not 

necessarily all of them: They essentially present a caricature of our taste and preferences. My big fear be that, 

unless we tune our algorithm for self-actualization, it will be simply too convenient for people to follow the 

advice of an algorithm (or, too difficult to go beyond such advice), turn these algorithm into self-fulfilling 

prophecies, and user into zombie who exclusively consume easy-to-consume items.” 

An anonymous futurist said, “This have be go on since the begin of the industrial revolution. Every time 

you design a human system optimize for efficiency or profitability you dehumanize the workforce. That 

dehumanization have now spread to our health care and social services. When you remove the humanity from a 

system where people be included, they become victims.” 

Another anonymous respondent wrote, “We simply can’t capture every data element that represent the vastness 

of a person and that person’s needs, wants, hopes, desires. Who be collect what data points? Do the human 

being the data point reflect even know or do they just agree to the term of service because they have no real 

choice? Who be make money from the data? How be anyone to know how his/her data be be massage and for 

what purpose to justify what ends? There be no transparency, and oversight be a farce. It’s all hidden from view. I 

will always remain convince the data will be use to enrich and/or protect others and not the individual. It’s the 

basic nature of the economic system in which we live.” 

A sample of excerpt tie to this theme from other respondent (for details, read the fuller version 

(http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/theme-1-algorithms-will-continue-to-spread-everywhere/) in the full report): 

“The potential for good be huge, but the potential 

for misuse and abuse – intentional, and 

inadvertent – may be greater.” 

“Companies seek to maximize profit, not 

maximize societal good. Worse, they repackage 

profit-seeking a a societal good. We be near 

the crest of a wave, the trough side of which be a 

new ethic of manipulation, marketing, nearly 

complete lack of privacy.” 

“What we see already today be that, in practice, stuff like ‘differential pricing’ do not help the consumer; it 

help the company that be sell things, etc.” 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

11 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



“Individual human being will be herd around like cattle, with predictably destructive result on rule of 

law, social justice and economics.” 

“There be an incentive only to further obfuscate the presence and operation of algorithmic shape of 

communication processes.” 

“Algorithms be … amplify the negative impact of data gap and exclusions.” 

“Algorithms have the capability to shape individuals’ decision without them even know it, give those 

who have control of the algorithm an unfair position of power.” 

“The fact the internet can, through algorithms, be use to almost read our mind mean [that] those who 

have access to the algorithm and their database have a vast opportunity to manipulate large population 

groups.” 

“The lack of accountability and complete opacity be frightening.” 

“By utilitarian metrics, algorithmic decision-making have no downside; the fact that it result in perpetual 

injustice toward the very minority class it creates will be ignored. The Common Good have become a 

discredited, obsolete relic of The Past.” 

“In an economy increasingly dominate by a tiny, very privileged and insulate portion of the population, it 

will largely reproduce inequality for their benefit. Criticism will be belittle and dismiss because of the 

veneer of digital ‘logic’ over the process.” 

“Algorithms be the new gold, and it’s hard to explain why the average ‘good’ be at odds with the individual 

‘good.’” 

“We will interpret the negative individual impact a the necessary collateral damage of ‘progress.’” 

“This will kill local intelligence, local skills, minority languages, local entrepreneurship because most of the 

available resource will be drain out by the global competitors.” 

“Algorithms in the past have be create by a programmer. In the future they will likely be evolve by 

intelligent/learning machine …. Humans will lose their agency in the world.” 

“It will only get bad because there’s no ‘crisis’ to respond to, and hence, not only no motivation to change, 

but every reason to keep it go – especially by the powerful interest involved. We be head for a 

nightmare.” 

“Web 2.0 provide more convenience for citizen who need to get a ride home, but at the same time – and 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

12 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



it’s naive to think this be a coincidence – it’s also a monetized, corporatized, disempowering, cannibalize 

harbinger of the End Times. (I exaggerate for effect. But not by much.)” 

Theme 4: Biases exist in algorithmically-organized system 

Two strand of think tie together here. One be that the algorithm creator (code writers), even if they strive for 

inclusiveness, objectivity and neutrality, build into their creation their own perspective and values. The other be 

that the datasets to which algorithm be apply have their own limit and deficiencies. Even datasets with 

billion of piece of information do not capture the fullness of people’s life and the diversity of their experiences. 

Moreover, the datasets themselves be imperfect because they do not contain input from everyone or a 

representative sample of everyone. The two theme be advanced in these answers: 

Justin Reich, executive director at the MIT Teaching Systems Lab, observed, “The algorithm will be primarily 

design by white and Asian men – with data select by these same privileged actor – for the benefit of 

consumer like themselves. Most people in position of privilege will find these new tool convenient, safe and 

useful. The harm of new technology will be most experienced by those already disadvantage in society, where 

advertising algorithm offer bail bondsman ad that assume reader be criminals, loan application that penalize 

people for proxy so correlate with race that they effectively penalize people base on race, and similar issues.” 

Dudley Irish, a software engineer, observed, “All, let me repeat that, all of the training data contains biases. 

Much of it either racial- or class-related, with a fair sprinkle of simply punish people for not use a standard 

dialect of English. To paraphrase Immanuel Kant, out of the crooked timber of these datasets no straight thing 

be ever made.” 

A sample of quote excerpt tie to this theme from other respondent (for details, read the fuller version 

(http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/theme-1-algorithms-will-continue-to-spread-everywhere/) in the full report): 

“Algorithms are, by definition, impersonal and 

base on gross data and generalize 

assumptions. The people write algorithms, 

even those ground in data, be a 

non-representative subset of the population.” 

“If you start at a place of inequality and you use 

algorithm to decide what be a likely outcome for 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

13 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



a person/system, you inevitably reinforce 

inequalities.” 

“We will all be mistreat a more homogenous 

than we are.” 

“The result could be the institutionalization of bias and damage decision with the excuse of, ‘The 

computer make the decision, so we have to accept it.’” 

“The algorithm will reflect the bias think of people. Garbage in, garbage out. Many dimension of life 

will be affected, but few will be helped. Oversight will be very difficult or impossible.” 

“Algorithms value efficiency over correctness or fairness, and over time their evolution will continue the 

same priority that initially formulate them.” 

“One of the great challenge of the next era will be balance protection of intellectual property in 

algorithm with protect the subject of those algorithm from unfair discrimination and social 

engineering.” 

“Algorithms purport to be fair, rational and unbiased but just enforce prejudice with no recourse.” 

“Unless the algorithm be essentially open source and a such can be modify by user feedback in some 

fair fashion, the power that likely algorithm-producers (corporations and governments) have to make 

choice favorable to themselves, whether in internet term of service or adhesion contract or political 

biases, will inject both conscious and unconscious bias into algorithms.” 

Theme 5: Algorithmic categorization deepen divide 

Two connect idea about societal division be evident in many respondents’ answers. First, they predict 

that an algorithm-assisted future will widen the gap between the digitally savvy (predominantly the most well-off, 

who be the most desire demographic in the new information ecosystem) and those who be not nearly a 

connect or able to participate. Second, they say social and political division will be abet by algorithms, a 

algorithm-driven categorization and classification steer people into echo chamber of repeat and reinforce 

medium and political content. Two illustrative answers: 

Ryan Hayes, owner of Fit to Tweet, commented, “Twenty year ago we talk about the ‘digital divide’ be 

people who have access to a computer at home vs. those that didn’t, or those who have access to the internet vs. 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

14 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



those who didn’t …. Ten year from now, though, the life of someone whose capability and perception of the 

world be augment by sensor and process with powerful AI and connect to vast amount of data be go to 

be vastly different from that of those who don’t have access to those tool or knowledge of how to utilize them. 

And that divide will be self-perpetuating, where those with few capability will be more vulnerable in many 

way to those with more.” 

Adam Gismondi, a visit scholar at Boston College, wrote, “I be fearful that a user be quarantine into 

distinct ideological areas, human capacity for empathy may suffer. Brushing up against contrast viewpoint 

challenge us, and if we be able to (actively or passively) avoid others with different perspectives, it will 

negatively impact our society. It will be tell to see what feature our major social medium company add in 

come years, a they will have tremendous power over the structure of information flow.” 

A sample of quote excerpt tie to this theme from other respondent (for details, read the fuller version 

(http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/theme-1-algorithms-will-continue-to-spread-everywhere/) in the full report): 

“If the current economic order remains in place, 

then I do not see the growth of data-driven 

algorithm provide much benefit to anyone 

outside of the richest in society.” 

“Social inequality will presumably become 

reified.” 

“The major risk be that less-regular users, 

especially those who cluster on one or two site 

or platforms, won’t develop that navigational 

and selection facility and will be at a 

disadvantage.” 

“Algorithms make discrimination more efficient and sanitized. Positive impact will be increase profit for 

organization able to avoid risk and costs. Negative impact will be carry by all deem by algorithm to be 

risky or less profitable.” 

“Society will be stratify by which trust/identity provider one can afford/qualify to go with. The level of 

privacy and protection will vary. Lois McMaster [Bujold]’s Jackson’s Whole suddenly seem a little more 

chillingly realistic.” 

“We have radically divergent set of values, political and other, and algos be always root in the value 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

15 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



system of their creators. So the scenario be one of a vast opening of opportunity – economic and otherwise – 

under the control of either the like of Zuckerberg or the grey-haired mover of global capital or ….” 

“The overall effect will be positive for some individuals. It will be negative for the poor and the uneducated. 

As a result, the digital divide and wealth disparity will grow. It will be a net negative for society.” 

“Racial exclusion in consumer targeting. Gendered exclusion in consumer targeting. Class exclusion in 

consumer target …. Nationalistic exclusion in consumer targeting.” 

“If the algorithm direct news flow suppress contradictory information – information that challenge the 

assumption and value of individual – we may see increase extreme of separation in worldviews among 

rapidly diverge subpopulations.” 

“We may be head for lowest-common-denominator information flows.” 

“Efficiency and the pleasantness and serotonin that come from prescriptive order be highly overrated. 

Keeping some chaos in our life be important.” 

A number of participant in this canvass express concern over the change in the public’s information diets, 

the “atomization of media,” an over-emphasis of the extreme, ugly, weird news, and the favor of “truthiness” 

over more-factual material that may be vital to understand how to be a responsible citizen of the world. 

Theme 6: Unemployment will rise 

The spread of artificial intelligence (AI) have the potential to create major unemployment and all the fallout from 

that. 

An anonymous CEO said, “If a task can be effectively represent by an algorithm, then it can be easily perform 

by a machine. The negative trend I see here be that – with the rise of the algorithm – human will be replace by 

machines/computers for many jobs/tasks. What will then be the fate of Man?” 

A sample of quote excerpt tie to this theme from other respondent (for details, read the fuller version 

(http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/theme-1-algorithms-will-continue-to-spread-everywhere/) in the full report): 

“AI and robot be likely to disrupt the 

workforce to a potential 100% human 

unemployment. They will be smarter more 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

16 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



efficient and productive and cost less, so it 

make sense for corporation and business to 

move in this direction.” 

“The massive boost in productivity due to automation will increase the disparity between worker and 

owner of capital.” 

“Modern Western society be built on a societal model whereby Capital be exchange for Labour to provide 

economic growth. If Labour be no longer part of that exchange, the ramification will be immense.” 

“No jobs, grow population and less need for the average person to function autonomously. Which part of 

this be warm and fuzzy?” 

“I foresee algorithm replace almost all worker with no real option for the replace humans.” 

“In the long run, it could be a good thing for individual by do away with low-value repetitive task and 

motivate them to perform one that create high value.” 

“Hopefully, country will have respond by implement form of minimal guaranteed living wage and 

free education past K-12; otherwise the brightest will use online resource to rapidly surpass average 

individual and the wealthy will use their economic power to gain more political advantages.” 

Theme 7: The need grows for algorithmic literacy, transparency and oversight 

The respondent to this canvass offer a variety of idea about how individual and the broader culture might 

respond to the algorithm-ization of life. They argue for public education to instill literacy about how algorithm 

function in the general public. They also note that those who create and evolve algorithm be not held 

accountable to society and argue there should be some method by which they are. Representative comments: 

Susan Etlinger, industry analyst at Altimeter Group, said, “Much like the way we increasingly wish to know the 

place and under what condition our food and clothing be made, we should question how our data and decision 

be make a well. What be the supply chain for that information? Is there clear stewardship and an audit trail? 

Were the assumption base on partial information, flaw source or irrelevant benchmarks? Did we train our 

data sufficiently? Were the right stakeholder involved, and do we learn from our mistakes? The upshot of all of 

this be that our entire way of manage organization will be upended in the next decade. The power to create and 

change reality will reside in technology that only a few truly understand. So to ensure that we use algorithm 

successfully, whether for financial or human benefit or both, we need to have governance and accountability 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

17 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



structure in place. Easier say than done, but if there be ever a time to bring the smartest mind in industry 

together with the smartest mind in academia to solve this problem, this be the time.” 

Chris Kutarna, author of Age of Discovery and fellow at the Oxford Martin School, wrote, “Algorithms be an 

explicit form of heuristic, a way of routinizing certain choice and decision so that we be not constantly drinking 

from a fire hydrant of sensory inputs. That cop strategy have always be co-evolving with humanity, and with 

the complexity of our social system and data environments. Becoming explicitly aware of our simplify 

assumption and heuristic be an important site at which our intellect and influence mature. What be different 

now be the increase power to program these heuristic explicitly, to perform the simplification outside of the 

human mind and within the machine and platform that deliver data to billion of individual lives. It will take u 

some time to develop the wisdom and the ethic to understand and direct this power. In the meantime, we 

honestly don’t know how well or safely it be be applied. The first and most important step be to develop good 

social awareness of who, how, and where it be be applied.” 

A sample of quote excerpt tie to this theme from other respondent (for details, read the fuller version 

(http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/theme-1-algorithms-will-continue-to-spread-everywhere/) in the full report): 

“Who guard the guardians? And, in particular, 

which ‘guardians’ be do what, to whom, 

use the vast collection of information?” 

“There be no incentive in capitalism to fight 

filter bubbles, profiling, and the negative effects, 

and governmental/international governance be 

virtually powerless.” 

“Oversight mechanism might include stricter access protocols; sign off on ethical code for digital 

management and name steward of information; online track of an individual’s reuse of information; 

opt-out functions; set timeline on access; no third-party sale without consent.” 

“Unless there be an increase effort to make true information literacy a part of basic education, there will be 

a class of people who can use algorithm and a class use by algorithms.” 

“Consumers have to be informed, educated, and, indeed, activist in their orientation toward something 

subtle. This be what computer literacy be about in the 21st century.” 

“Finding a framework to allow for transparency and ass outcome will be crucial. Also a need to have a 

broad understand of the algorithmic ‘value chain’ and that data be the key driver and a valuable a the 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

18 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



algorithm which it trains.” 

“Algorithmic accountability be a big-tent project, require the skill of theorist and practitioners, lawyers, 

social scientists, journalists, and others. It’s an urgent, global cause with commit and mobilize expert 

look for support.” 

“Eventually, software liability law will be recognize to be in need of reform, since right now, literally, coder 

can get away with murder.” 

“The Law of Unintended Consequences indicates that the increase layer of societal and technical 

complexity encode in algorithm ensure that unforeseen catastrophic event will occur – probably not the 

one we be worry about.” 

“Eventually we will evolve mechanism to give consumer great control that should result in great 

understand and trust …. The pushback will be inevitable but necessary and will, in the long run, result in 

balance that be more beneficial for all of us.” 

“We need some kind of rainbow coalition to come up with rule to avoid allow inbuilt bias and 

groupthink to effect the outcomes.” 

“Algorithms be too complicate to ever be transparent or to ever be completely safe. These factor will 

continue to influence the direction of our culture.” 

“I expect meta-algorithms will be developed to try to counter the negative of algorithms.” 

Anonymous respondent share these one-liner on the topic: 

“The golden rule: He who own the gold make the rules.” 

“The bad guy appear to be way ahead of the good guys.” 

“Resistance be futile.” 

“Algorithms be define by people who want to sell you something (goods, services, ideologies) and will 

twist the result to favor do so.” 

“Algorithms be surely helpful but likely insufficient unless combine with human knowledge and political 

will.” 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

19 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



Finally, this prediction from an anonymous participant who see the likely endpoint to be one of two extremes: 

“The overall impact will be utopia or the end of the human race; there be no middle ground foreseeable. I suspect 

utopia give that we have survive at least one existential crisis (nuclear) in the past and that our track record 

toward peace, although slow, be solid.” 

Key experts’ think about the future impact of algorithm 

Following be a brief collection of comment by several of the many top analyst who participate in this 

canvassing: 

‘Steering people to useful information’ 

Vinton Cerf, Internet Hall of Fame member and vice president and chief internet evangelist at Google: 

“Algorithms be mostly intend to steer people to useful information and I see this a a net positive.” 

Beware ‘unverified, untracked, unrefined models’ 

Cory Doctorow, writer, computer science activist-in-residence at MIT Media Lab and co-owner of Boing Boing, 

responded, “The choice in this question be too limited. The right answer is, ‘If we use machine learn model 

rigorously, they will make thing better; if we use them to paper over injustice with the veneer of machine 

empiricism, it will be worse.’ Amazon us machine learn to optimize it sale strategies. When they make a 

change, they make a prediction about it likely outcome on sales, then they use sale data from that prediction to 

refine the model. Predictive sentence score contractor to America’s prison system use machine learn to 

optimize sentence recommendation. Their model also make prediction about likely outcome (on 

reoffending), but there be no track of whether their model make good predictions, and no refinement. This 

free them to make terrible prediction without consequence. This characteristic of unverified, untracked, 

unrefined model be present in many places: terrorist watchlists; drone-killing profile models; modern 

redlining/Jim Crow system that limit credit; predictive police algorithms; etc. If we mandate, or establish 

normative limits, on practice that correct this sleazy conduct, then we can use empiricism to correct for bias and 

improve the fairness and impartiality of firm and the state (and public/private partnerships). If, on the other 

hand, the practice continue a is, it terminates with a kind of Kafkaesque nightmare where we do thing ‘because 

the computer say so’ and we call them fair ‘because the computer say so.’” 

‘A general trend toward positive outcome will prevail’ 

Jonathan Grudin, principal researcher at Microsoft, said, “We be finally reach a state of symbiosis or 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

20 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



partnership with technology. The algorithm be not in control; people create and adjust them. However, positive 

effect for one person can be negative for another, and trace cause and effect can be difficult, so we will have 

to continually work to understand and adjust the balance. Ultimately, most key decision will be political, and I’m 

optimistic that a general trend toward positive outcome will prevail, give the tremendous potential upside to 

technology use. I’m less worried about bad actor prevail than I be about unintended and unnoticed negative 

consequence sneak up on us.” 

‘Faceless system more interested in surveillance and advertising than actual service’ 

Doc Searls, journalist, speaker and director of Project VRM at Harvard University’s Berkman Center, wrote, “The 

big issue with algorithm today be the black-box nature of some of the large and most consequential ones. 

An example be the one use by Dun & Bradstreet to decide credit worthiness. The method behind the decision it 

make be completely opaque, not only to those whose credit be judged, but to most of the people run the 

algorithm a well. Only the programmer be in a position to know for sure what the algorithm does, and even 

they might not be clear about what’s go on. In some case there be no way to tell exactly why or how a decision 

by an algorithm be reached. And even if the responsible party do know exactly how the algorithm works, they 

will call it a trade secret and keep it hidden. There be already pushback against the opacity of algorithms, and the 

sometimes vast system behind them. Many lawmaker and regulator also want to see, for example, Google’s and 

Facebook’s vast server farm more deeply know and understood. These thing have the size, scale, and in some 

way the importance of nuclear power plant and oil refineries, yet enjoy almost no regulatory oversight. This will 

change. At the same time, so will the size of the entity use algorithms. They will get small and more 

numerous, a more responsibility over individual life move away from faceless system more interested in 

surveillance and advertising than actual service.” 

A call for #AlgorithmicTransparency 

Marc Rotenberg, executive director of the Electronic Privacy Information Center, observed, “The core problem 

with algorithmic-based decision-making be the lack of accountability. Machines have literally become black box 

– even the developer and operator do not fully understand how output be produced. The problem be further 

exacerbate by ‘digital scientism’ (my phrase) – an unwavering faith in the reliability of big data. ‘Algorithmic 

transparency’ should be establish a a fundamental requirement for all AI-based decision-making. There be a 

large problem with the increase of algorithm-based outcome beyond the risk of error or discrimination – the 

increase opacity of decision-making and the grow lack of human accountability. We need to confront the 

reality that power and authority be move from people to machines. That be why #AlgorithmicTransparency be 

one of the great challenge of our era.” 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

21 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



The data ‘will be misuse in various ways’ 

Richard Stallman, Internet Hall of Fame member and president of the Free Software Foundation, said, “People 

will be pressure to hand over all the personal data that the algorithm would judge. The data, once accumulated, 

will be misuse in various way – by the company that collect them, by rogue employees, by cracker that steal 

the data from the company’s site, and by the state via National Security Letters. I have heard that people who 

refuse to be use by Facebook be discriminate against in some ways. Perhaps soon they will be deny entry to 

the U.S., for instance. Even if the U.S. doesn’t actually do that, people will fear that it will. Compare this with 

China’s social obedience score for internet users.” 

People must live with outcome of algorithm ‘even though they be fearful of the risks’ 

David Clark, Internet Hall of Fame member and senior research scientist at MIT, replied, “I see the positive 

outcome outweigh the negative, but the issue will be that certain people will suffer negative consequences, 

perhaps very serious, and society will have to decide how to deal with these outcomes. These outcome will 

probably differ in character, and in our ability to understand why they happened, and this reality will make some 

people fearful. But a we see today, people feel that they must use the internet to be a part of society. Even if they 

be fearful of the consequences, people will accept that they must live with the outcome of these algorithms, even 

though they be fearful of the risks.” 

‘EVERY area of life will be affected. Every. Single. One.’ 

Baratunde Thurston, Director’s Fellow at MIT Media Lab, Fast Company columnist, and former digital director 

of The Onion, wrote: “Main positive changes: 1) The excuse of not know thing will be reduce greatly a 

information becomes even more connect and complete. 2) Mistakes that result from error in human 

judgment, ‘knowledge,’ or reaction time will be greatly reduced. Let’s call this the ‘robots drive good than people’ 

principle. Today’s driver will whine, but in 50 year no one will want to drive when they can use that 

transportation time to experience a reality-indistinguishable immersive virtual environment fill with a bunch of 

Beyoncé bots. 

“3) Corruption that exists today a a result of human deception will decline significantly—bribes, graft, 

nepotism. If the algorithm be built well and robustly, the opportunity to insert this inefficiency (e.g., hire 

some idiot because he’s your cousin) should go down. 4) In general, we should achieve a much more 

efficient distribution of resources, include expensive (in dollar or environmental cost) resource like 

fossil fuels. Basically, algorithmic insight will start to affect the design of our homes, cities, transportation 

networks, manufacturing levels, waste management processing, and more. There’s a lot of redundancy in a 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

22 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



world where every American have a car she never uses. We should become far more energy efficient once we 

reduce the redundancy of human-drafted processes. 

“But there will be negative changes: 1) There will be an increase speed of interaction and volume of 

information processed—everything will get faster. None of the efficiency gain brought about by technology 

have ever lead to more leisure or rest or happiness. We will simply shop more, work more, decide more thing 

because our capacity to do all those will have increased. It’s like add lane to the highway a a traffic 

management solution. When you do that, you just encourage more people to drive. The real trick be to not 

add more car lane but build a world in which few people need or want to drive. 

“2) There will be algorithmic and data-centric oppression. Given that these system will be design by 

demonstrably imperfect and bias human beings, we be likely to create new and far less visible form of 

discrimination and oppression. The maker of these algorithm and the collector of the data use to test 

and prime them have nowhere near a comprehensive understand of culture, values, and diversity. They 

will forget to test their image recognition on dark skin or their medical diagnostic tool on Asian woman or 

their transport model during major sport event under heavy fog. We will assume the machine be 

smarter, but we will realize they be just a dumb a we be but good at hiding it. 

“3) Entire group of people will be exclude and they most likely won’t know about the parallel reality they 

don’t experience. Every area of life will be affected. Every. Single. One.” 

A call for ‘industry reform’ and ‘more savvy regulatory regimes’ 

Technologist Anil Dash said, “The best part of algorithmic influence will make life good for many people, but 

the bad excess will truly harm the most marginalize in unpredictable ways. We’ll need both industry reform 

within the technology company create these system and far more savvy regulatory regime to handle the 

complex challenge that arise.” 

‘We be a society that take it life direction from the palm of our hands’ 

John Markoff, author of Machines of Loving Grace: The Quest for Common Ground Between Humans and 

Robots and senior writer at The New York Times, observed, “I be most concerned about the lack of algorithmic 

transparency. Increasingly we be a society that take it life direction from the palm of our hand – our 

smartphones. Guidance on everything from what be the best Korean BBQ to who to pick for a spouse be 

algorithmically generated. There be little insight, however, into the value and motif of the designer of these 

systems.” 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

23 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



Fix the ‘organizational, societal and political climate we’ve constructed’ 

danah boyd, founder of Data & Society, commented, “An algorithm mean nothing by itself. What’s at stake be 

how a ‘model’ be create and used. A model be comprise of a set of data (e.g., training data in a machine learn 

system) alongside an algorithm. The algorithm be nothing without the data. But the model be also nothing without 

the use case. The same technology can be use to empower people (e.g., identify people at risk) or harm them. It 

all depends on who be use the information to what end (e.g., social service vs. police). Because of unhealthy 

power dynamic in our society, I sadly suspect that the outcome will be far more problematic – mechanism to 

limit people’s opportunities, segment and segregate people into unequal buckets, and leverage surveillance to 

force people into more oppressive situations. But it doesn’t have to be that way. What’s at stake have little to do 

with the technology; it have everything to do with the organizational, societal and political climate we’ve 

constructed.” 

We have an algorithmic problem already: Credit score 

Henning Schulzrinne, Internet Hall of Fame member and professor at Columbia University, noted, “We already 

have have early indicator of the difficulty with algorithmic decision-making, namely credit scores. Their 

computation be opaque and they be then use for all kind of purpose far remove from make loans, such a 

employment decision or segment customer for different treatment. They leak lot of private information and 

be disclosed, by intent or negligence, to entity that do not act in the best interest of the consumer. Correcting 

data be difficult and time-consuming, and thus unlikely to be available to individual with limited resources. It be 

unclear how the propose algorithm address these well-known problems, give that they be often subject to no 

regulation whatsoever. In many areas, the input variable be either crude (and often proxy for race), such a 

home ZIP code, or extremely invasive, such a monitoring drive behavior minute-by-minute. Given the absence 

of privacy laws, in general, there be every incentive for entity that can observe our behavior, such a advertising 

brokers, to monetize behavioral information. At minimum, institution that have broad societal impact would 

need to disclose the input variable used, how they influence the outcome and be subject to review, not just 

individual record corrections. An honest, verifiable cost-benefit analysis, measure improve efficiency or good 

outcome against the loss of privacy or inadvertent discrimination, would avoid the ‘trust us, it will be wonderful 

and it’s AI!’ decision-making.” 

Algorithms ‘create value and cut costs’ and will be improve 

Robert Atkinson, president of the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, said, “Like virtually all 

past technologies, algorithm will create value and cut costs, far in excess of any costs. Moreover, a organization 

and society get more experience with use of algorithm there will be natural force toward improvement and 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

24 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



limit any potential problems.” 

‘The goal should be to help people question authority’ 

Judith Donath of Harvard Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society, replied, “Data can be incomplete, or 

wrong, and algorithm can embed false assumptions. The danger in increase reliance on algorithm be that be 

that the decision-making process becomes oracular: opaque yet unarguable. The solution be design. The process 

should not be a black box into which we feed data and out come an answer, but a transparent process design 

not just to produce a result, but to explain how it come up with that result. The system should be able to produce 

clear, legible text and graphic that help the user – readers, editors, doctors, patients, loan applicants, voters, 

etc. – understand how the decision be made. The system should be interactive, so that people can examine how 

change data, assumptions, rule would change outcomes. The algorithm should not be the new authority; the 

goal should be to help people question authority.” 

Do more to train coder with diverse world view 

Amy Webb, futurist and CEO at the Future Today Institute, wrote, “In order to make our machine think, we 

human need to help them learn. Along with other pre-programmed training datasets, our personal data be be 

use to help machine make decisions. However, there be no standard ethical requirement or mandate for 

diversity, and a a result we’re already start to see a more dystopian future unfold in the present. There be too 

many example to cite, but I’ll list a few: would-be borrower turn away from banks, individual with black- 

identify name see themselves in advertisement for criminal background searches, people be deny 

insurance and health care. Most of the time, these problem arise from a limited worldview, not because coder 

be inherently racist. Algorithms have a nasty habit of do exactly what we tell them to do. Now, what happens 

when we’ve instruct our machine to learn from us? And to begin make decision on their own? The only way 

to address algorithmic discrimination in the future be to invest in the present. The overwhelm majority of 

coder be white and male. Corporations must do more than publish transparency report about their staff – they 

must actively invest in woman and people of color, who will soon be the next generation of workers. And when the 

day comes, they must choose new hire both for their skill and their worldview. Universities must redouble their 

effort not only to recruit a diverse body of student –administrators and faculty must support them through to 

graduation. And not just students. Universities must diversify their faculties, to ensure that student see 

themselves reflect in their teachers.” 

The impact in the short term will be negative; in the longer term it will be positive 

Jamais Cascio, distinguish fellow at the Institute for the Future, observed, “The impact of algorithm in the 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

25 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 



early transition era will be overall negative, a we (humans, human society and economy) attempt to learn how to 

integrate these technologies. Bias, error, corruption and more will make the implementation of algorithmic 

system brittle, and make exploit those failure for malice, political power or lulz (http://knowyourmeme.com 

/memes/i-did-it-for-the-lulz) comparatively easy. By the time the transition take hold – probably a good 20 years, 

maybe a bit less – many of those problem will be overcome, and the ancillary adaptation (e.g., potential rise of 

universal basic income) will start to have an overall benefit. In other words, shorter term (this decade) negative, 

longer term (next decade) positive.” 

The story will keep shift 

Mike Liebhold, senior researcher and distinguish fellow at the Institute for the Future, commented, “The 

future effect of algorithm in our life will shift over time a we master new competencies. The rate of adoption 

and diffusion will be highly uneven, base on natural variable of geographies, the environment, economies, 

infrastructure, policies, sociologies, psychology, and – most importantly – education. The growth of human 

benefit of machine intelligence will be most constrain by our collective competency to design and interact 

effectively with machines. At an absolute minimum, we need to learn to form effective question and task for 

machines, how to interpret response and how to simply detect and repair a machine mistake.” 

Make algorithm ‘comprehensible, predictable and controllable’ 

Ben Shneiderman, professor of computer science at the University of Maryland, wrote, “When well-designed, 

algorithm amplify human abilities, but they must be comprehensible, predictable and controllable. This mean 

they must be design to be transparent so that user can understand the impact of their use and they must be 

subject to continue evaluation so that critic can ass bias and errors. Every system need a responsible 

contact person/organization that maintains/updates the algorithm and a social structure so that the community 

of user can discus their experiences.” 

In key cases, give the user control 

David Weinberger, senior researcher at the Harvard Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society, said, 

“Algorithmic analysis at scale can turn up relationship that be predictive and helpful even if they be beyond the 

human capacity to understand them. This be fine where the stake be low, such a a book recommendation. 

Where the stake be high, such a algorithmically filter a news feed, we need to be far more careful, especially 

when the incentive for the creator be not align with the interest of the individual or of the broader social 

goods. In those latter cases, give more control to the user seem highly advisable.” 

Experts on the Pros and Cons of Algorithms | Pew Research Center http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/02/08/code-dependent-pros-and-cons-of-the-algorithm-age/ 

26 sur 26 15-02-17 19:12 


