






































Explainable Artificial Intelligence 


Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency Program Information 

Dramatic success in machine learn have lead to a torrent of Artificial Intelligence (AI) applications. Continued advance promise to produce 

autonomous system that will perceive, learn, decide, and act on their own. However, the effectiveness of these system be limited by the machine’s 

current inability to explain their decision and action to human users. The Department of Defense be face challenge that demand more intelligent, 

/ / / / / 

Explainable Artificial Intelligence http://www.darpa.mil/program/explainable-artificial-intelligence 

1 sur 4 18/05/17 20:35 



autonomous, and symbiotic systems. Explainable AI—especially explainable machine learning—will be essential if future warfighters be to understand, 

appropriately trust, and effectively manage an emerge generation of artificially intelligent machine partners. 

The Explainable AI (XAI) program aim to create a suite of machine learn technique that: 

Produce more explainable models, while maintain a high level of learn performance (prediction accuracy); and 

Enable human user to understand, appropriately trust, and effectively manage the emerge generation of artificially intelligent partners. 

New machine-learning system will have the ability to explain their rationale, characterize their strength and weaknesses, and convey an 

understand of how they will behave in the future. The strategy for achieve that goal be to develop new or modify machine-learning technique that 

will produce more explainable models. These model will be combine with state-of-the-art human-computer interface technique capable of translate 

model into understandable and useful explanation dialogue for the end user. Our strategy be to pursue a variety of technique in order to generate a 

portfolio of method that will provide future developer with a range of design option cover the performance-versus-explainability trade space. 

Figure 1: XAI Concept 

The XAI program will focus the development of multiple system on address challenge problem in two areas: (1) machine learn problem to 

classify event of interest in heterogeneous, multimedia data; and (2) machine learn problem to construct decision policy for an autonomous 

Explainable Artificial Intelligence http://www.darpa.mil/program/explainable-artificial-intelligence 

2 sur 4 18/05/17 20:35 



system to perform a variety of simulated missions. These two challenge problem area be chosen to represent the intersection of two important 

machine learn approach (classification and reinforcement learning) and two important operational problem area for the Department of Defense 

(intelligence analysis and autonomous systems). 

XAI research prototype will be test and continually evaluate throughout the course of the program. At the end of the program, the final delivery will 

be a toolkit library consist of machine learn and human-computer interface software module that could be use to develop future explainable AI 

systems. After the program be complete, these toolkits would be available for further refinement and transition into defense or commercial applications. 

| AI | Data | Interface | Programming | 

TRAnsformative DESign (TRADES) Proposers Day 

New Tools for Human-Machine Collaborative Design 

DARPA Seeks to Remove Communication Barrier Between Humans and Computers 

Big Mechanism Seeks the “Whys” Hidden in Big Data 

DARPA Envisions the Future of Machine Learning 

Explainable Artificial Intelligence http://www.darpa.mil/program/explainable-artificial-intelligence 

3 sur 4 18/05/17 20:35 



Explainable AI (XAI) 

Explainable Artificial Intelligence http://www.darpa.mil/program/explainable-artificial-intelligence 

4 sur 4 18/05/17 20:35 


