






































Facebook could help stop disease outbreak 


Facebook could help stop disease 
outbreak 

By AFP More by this Author 

Facebook, phone record could help stop disease 

outbreak 

Wednesday January 3 2018 

Facebook account and telephone record can be use to pinpoint the 

best individual to vaccinate to stop a disease outbreak in it tracks, 

researcher say Wednesday. FILE PHOTO | NATION MEDIA GROUP 

In Summary 

The study tracked the digital and physical contact of more than 500 

university students. 

It conclude that people who be central in their digital network be 

also central in their real-life human networks. 

The goal of vaccination be to reduce the size of the population at risk of 

Facebook could help stop disease outbreak http://www.nation.co.ke/lifestyle/Facebook-could-stop-disease-outbreak... 

1 sur 3 06-01-18 à 13:20 



infection. 

Advertisement 

PARIS 

Facebook account and telephone record can be use to pinpoint the 

best individual to vaccinate to stop a disease outbreak in it tracks, 

researcher say Wednesday. 

Such people would be "central" in their social networks, and thus 

likelier to spread disease-causing germ from one group to another. 

Assuming there be an outbreak, and not enough vaccine for every 

person in the world, immunise these well-connected individual 

would remove social "bridges" by which germ can spread, expert 

write in the Journal of the Royal Society Interface. 

The study, which tracked the digital and physical contact of more than 

500 university students, conclude that people who be central in their 

digital network be also central in their real-life human networks. 

BRIDGE 

"If you be a hub for your friend in the sense that you have many 

contact via phone call or on Facebook, make you a bridge between 

diverse communities, chance be high that you be also likely to be a 

bridge to connect those community in case of an epidemic, such a 

influenza," study co-author Enys Mones of the Technical University of 

Denmark told AFP. 

"By understand the online contacts, we can find individual who be 

such central member of the population and focus target counter- 

measure on them when there be limited resource for vaccination." 

Using computer modelling, the research then calculate that 

vaccinate these "central" individual would be "almost a efficient a 

the most optimal (existing) vaccination strategies". 

It be also cheaper, a digital activity be easy to trace. 

The goal of vaccination be to reduce the size of the population at risk of 

infection. 

It achieves something call "herd immunity", whereby unvaccinated 

people be increasingly unlikely to come into contact with an infectious 

Facebook could help stop disease outbreak http://www.nation.co.ke/lifestyle/Facebook-could-stop-disease-outbreak... 

2 sur 3 06-01-18 à 13:20 



individual. 

Facebook could help stop disease outbreak http://www.nation.co.ke/lifestyle/Facebook-could-stop-disease-outbreak... 

3 sur 3 06-01-18 à 13:20 


