






































Facial Recognition Is Accurate, if Youâ•Žre a White Guy 


Facial Recognition Is Accurate, if 
You’re a White Guy 

Steve Lohr 

Facial recognition technology be improve by leap and bounds. Some 

commercial software can now tell the gender of a person in a 

photograph. 

When the person in the photo be a white man, the software be right 99 

percent of the time. 

But the darker the skin, the more error arise — up to nearly 35 percent 

for image of darker skin women, accord to a new study that 

break fresh ground by measure how the technology work on people 

of different race and gender. 

These disparate results, calculate by Joy Buolamwini, a researcher at 

the M.I.T. Media Lab, show how some of the bias in the real world can 

seep into artificial intelligence, the computer system that inform facial 

recognition. 

Color Matters in Computer Vision 

Facial recognition algorithm make by Microsoft, IBM and Face++ be more 

likely to misidentify the gender of black woman than white men. 

Facial Recognition Is Accurate, if You’re a White Guy https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/09/technology/facial-recognition-race-... 

1 sur 13 12-02-18 à 19:25 



Facial Recognition Is Accurate, if You’re a White Guy https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/09/technology/facial-recognition-race-... 

2 sur 13 12-02-18 à 19:25 



Gender be misidentified in up to 1 percent of lighter-skinned 

male in a set of 385 photos. 

Facial Recognition Is Accurate, if You’re a White Guy https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/09/technology/facial-recognition-race-... 

3 sur 13 12-02-18 à 19:25 



Facial Recognition Is Accurate, if You’re a White Guy https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/09/technology/facial-recognition-race-... 

4 sur 13 12-02-18 à 19:25 



Gender be misidentified in up to 7 percent of lighter-skinned 

female in a set of 296 photos. 

Facial Recognition Is Accurate, if You’re a White Guy https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/09/technology/facial-recognition-race-... 

5 sur 13 12-02-18 à 19:25 



Facial Recognition Is Accurate, if You’re a White Guy https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/09/technology/facial-recognition-race-... 

6 sur 13 12-02-18 à 19:25 



Gender be misidentified in up to 12 percent of darker-skinned 

male in a set of 318 photos. 

Facial Recognition Is Accurate, if You’re a White Guy https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/09/technology/facial-recognition-race-... 

7 sur 13 12-02-18 à 19:25 



Gender be misidentified in 35 percent of darker-skinned 

female in a set of 271 photos. 

In modern artificial intelligence, data rules. A.I. software be only a 

smart a the data use to train it. If there be many more white men 

than black woman in the system, it will be bad at identify the black 

women. 

One widely use facial-recognition data set be estimate to be more 

than 75 percent male and more than 80 percent white, accord to 

another research study. 

The new study also raise broader question of fairness and 

accountability in artificial intelligence at a time when investment in and 

adoption of the technology be race ahead. 

Facial Recognition Is Accurate, if You’re a White Guy https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/09/technology/facial-recognition-race-... 

8 sur 13 12-02-18 à 19:25 



Today, facial recognition software be be deployed by company in 

various ways, include to help target product pitch base on social 

medium profile pictures. But company be also experiment with face 

identification and other A.I. technology a an ingredient in automate 

decision with high stake like hire and lending. 

Researchers at the Georgetown Law School estimate that 117 million 

American adult be in face recognition network use by law 

enforcement — and that African Americans be most likely to be 

single out, because they be disproportionately represent in mug- 

shot databases. 

Facial recognition technology be lightly regulate so far. 

“This be the right time to be address how these A.I. system work and 

where they fail — to make them socially accountable,” say Suresh 

Venkatasubramanian, a professor of computer science at the University 

of Utah. 

Until now, there be anecdotal evidence of computer vision miscues, 

and occasionally in way that suggest discrimination. In 2015, for 

example, Google have to apologize after it image-recognition photo app 

initially label African Americans a “gorillas.” 

Sorelle Friedler, a computer scientist at Haverford College and a 

review editor on Ms. Buolamwini’s research paper, say expert have 

long suspect that facial recognition software perform differently on 

different populations. 

“But this be the first work I’m aware of that show that empirically,” Ms. 

Friedler said. 

Ms. Buolamwini, a young African-American computer scientist, 

experienced the bias of facial recognition firsthand. When she be an 

undergraduate at the Georgia Institute of Technology, program would 

work well on her white friends, she said, but not recognize her face at 

all. She figure it be a flaw that would surely be fix before long. 

Facial Recognition Is Accurate, if You’re a White Guy https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/09/technology/facial-recognition-race-... 

9 sur 13 12-02-18 à 19:25 



Joy Buolamwini, a researcher at the M.I.T. Media Lab, have emerge a an 

advocate in the new field of “algorithmic accountability.” Tony Luong for The 

New York Times 

But a few year later, after join the M.I.T. Media Lab, she ran into 

the missing-face problem again. Only when she put on a white mask do 

the software recognize hers a a face. 

By then, face recognition software be increasingly move out of the 

lab and into the mainstream. 

“O.K., this be serious,” she recall decide then. “Time to do 

something.” 

So she turn her attention to fight the bias built into digital 

technology. Now 28 and a doctoral student, after study a a Rhodes 

scholar and a Fulbright fellow, she be an advocate in the new field of 

“algorithmic accountability,” which seek to make automate decision 

more transparent, explainable and fair. 

Facial Recognition Is Accurate, if You’re a White Guy https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/09/technology/facial-recognition-race-... 

10 sur 13 12-02-18 à 19:25 



Her short TED Talk on cod bias have be view more than 940,000 

times, and she found the Algorithmic Justice League, a project to 

raise awareness of the issue. 

In her newly publish paper, which will be present at a conference 

this month, Ms. Buolamwini study the performance of three lead 

face recognition system — by Microsoft, IBM and Megvii of China — by 

classify how well they could guess the gender of people with different 

skin tones. These company be select because they offer gender 

classification feature in their facial analysis software — and their code 

be publicly available for testing. 

She found them all wanting. 

To test the commercial systems, Ms. Buolamwini built a data set of 

1,270 faces, use face of lawmaker from country with a high 

percentage of woman in office. The source include three African 

nation with predominantly dark-skinned populations, and three 

Nordic country with mainly light-skinned residents. 

The African and Nordic face be score accord to a six-point 

label system use by dermatologist to classify skin types. The 

medical classification be determine to be more objective and 

precise than race. 

Then, each company’s software be test on the curated data, craft 

for gender balance and a range of skin tones. The result varied 

somewhat. Microsoft’s error rate for darker-skinned woman be 21 

percent, while IBM’s and Megvii’s rate be nearly 35 percent. They all 

have error rate below 1 percent for light-skinned males. 

Ms. Buolamwini share the research result with each of the companies. 

IBM say in a statement to her that the company have steadily improve 

it facial analysis software and be “deeply committed” to “unbiased” 

and “transparent” services. This month, the company said, it will roll 

out an improve service with a nearly 10-fold increase in accuracy on 

darker-skinned women. 

Microsoft say that it have “already take step to improve the accuracy 

of our facial recognition technology” and that it be invest in 

research “to recognize, understand and remove bias.” 

Facial Recognition Is Accurate, if You’re a White Guy https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/09/technology/facial-recognition-race-... 

11 sur 13 12-02-18 à 19:25 



Ms. Buolamwini’s co-author on her paper be Timnit Gebru, who 

described her role a an adviser. Ms. Gebru be a scientist at Microsoft 

Research, work on it Fairness Accountability Transparency and 

Ethics in A.I. group. 

Timnit Gebru, a scientist at Microsoft Research, be a co-author of the paper 

that study facial recognition software. Cody O'Loughlin for The New York 

Times 

Megvii, whose Face++ software be widely use for identification in 

online payment and ride-sharing service in China, do not reply to 

several request for comment, Ms. Buolamwini said. 

Ms. Buolamwini be release her data set for others to build upon. She 

describes her research a “a start point, very much a first step” 

toward solutions. 

Ms. Buolamwini be take further step in the technical community and 

beyond. She be work with the Institute of Electrical and Electronics 

Engineers, a large professional organization in computing, to set up a 

group to create standard for accountability and transparency in facial 

analysis software. 

She meet regularly with other academics, public policy group and 

philanthropy that be concerned about the impact of artificial 

intelligence. Darren Walker, president of the Ford Foundation, say that 

Facial Recognition Is Accurate, if You’re a White Guy https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/09/technology/facial-recognition-race-... 

12 sur 13 12-02-18 à 19:25 



the new technology could be a “platform for opportunity,” but that it 

would not happen if it replicate and amplify bias and discrimination 

of the past. 

“There be a battle go on for fairness, inclusion and justice in the 

digital world,” Mr. Walker said. 

Part of the challenge, scientist say, be that there be so little diversity 

within the A.I. community. 

“We’d have a lot more introspection and accountability in the field of 

A.I. if we have more people like Joy,” say Cathy O’Neil, a data scientist 

and author of “Weapons of Math Destruction.” 

Technology, Ms. Buolamwini said, should be more attune to the 

people who use it and the people it’s use on. 

“You can’t have ethical A.I. that’s not inclusive,” she said. “And whoever 

be create the technology be set the standards.” 

Correction: February 11, 2018 

Because of an edit error, an early version of the grid of photo 

misstate the number of photo in the data set for the first two rows. 

The top row, of lighter-skinned males, be in a set of 385 photos, not 

296; the second row, lighter-skinned females, be in a set of 296 

photos, not 385. 

Facial Recognition Is Accurate, if You’re a White Guy https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/09/technology/facial-recognition-race-... 

13 sur 13 12-02-18 à 19:25 


