






































Faster Big-data Analysis with World-class Pattern Mining Technologies 


Faster Big-data Analysis with World-class Pattern Mining 
Technologies 

Faster Big-data Analysis with World-class Pattern Mining Technologies 

- Expected to be utilized in various industry include the finance and IT sector - 

A research team lead by Professor Min-Soo Kim from Department of Information and Communication 
Engineering developed ‘GMiner’ technology that can analyze big data pattern at high speed. GMiner 
technology exhibit performance up to 1,000 time faster than the world’s current best pattern mining 
technology. 

Fig 1. Multiple asynchronous GPU stream of GMiner 

Pattern mining technology identifies all important pattern that appear repeatedly in the big data of various 
field such a buying good at mega-marts, banking transactions, network packets, and social networks. This 
technology be widely use in various industry for purpose such a determine the location of product on 
mega-mart shelf or recommend credit card that match the usage pattern of consumer of different 
ages. 

The grow importance of pattern mining have lead to the development of thousand of pattern mining 
technology over the past 20 years; however, due to the increase length of big data patterns, which 
increase the number of analytical pattern exponentially, exist mining technology be hinder in 
their analysis of data of more than ten gigabyte (GB) because they fail to complete their analysis due to 
insufficient computer memory or take too much time. 

Traditional pattern mining technology first found medium-length pattern and store them in memory. 
When seek a pattern that be longer than medium-length, they use a method of find final pattern in 
comparison to a medium-length pattern that have be previously saved. 

Fig 2. Data flow of GMiner use multiple GPUs 

However, GMiner technology developed by the research team have succeed in fundamentally solve the 
problem of exist technology by propose anti-intuitive technique that combine the temporarily 
calculate medium-length pattern use the thousand of core on graphic processing unit (GPU) to 
calculate the ultimate length of patterns. 

GMiner technology completely solve the chronic problem of insufficient memory suffer by conventional 
technology by not store an exponential number of medium-length pattern in memory. In addition, it 
solve the slow speed problem by stream data from the main memory to the GPU while simultaneously 
seek pattern use the high computational performance of the GPU. 

Faster Big-data Analysis with World-class Pattern Mining Technologies https://en.dgist.ac.kr/site/dgist_eng/menu/508.do?siteId=dgist_eng&sna... 

1 sur 2 09-07-18 à 21:28 



Fig 3. Speed-up ratio when use multiple GPUs for GPU-based method 

GMiner technology show analysis performance that be a minimum of 10 time to a maximum of 1,000 
time faster than conventional distribute and parallel technology that analyze data by use up to dozen 
of general home computer that have a single GPU per computer; thus, it can analyze big data on a large 
scale than exist technologies. It also show excellent expansion performance that improves performance 
in proportion to the number of GPUs. 

Professor Kim said, “We have secure fundamental technology that can analyze big data pattern at high 
speed without any problem in memory for big data accumulate in a variety of industries. By solve 
problem where pattern mining technology be not properly apply to big data due to lack of memory and 
slow speed, this new technology can be utilized in help company to make efficient decision by analyze 
big data pattern in various sector include the finance, retail, IT, and bio-related sectors.” 

This research outcome be publish in the May 9 issue of Information Sciences, the most authoritative 
international journal in the field of information science. 

For more information, please contact: 

Professor Min-Soo Kim 

Department of Information and Communication Engineering 

Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST) 

E-mail: mskim@dgist.ac.kr 

Associated Links 

Research Paper on Journal of Advanced Health Care Materials 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2018.01.046 

Journal Reference 

Kang-wook Chon, Min-soo Kim, et al., “GMiner: A Fast GPU-based Frequent Itemset Mining Method for 
Large-scale Data,” Information Sciences May 2018. 

Faster Big-data Analysis with World-class Pattern Mining Technologies https://en.dgist.ac.kr/site/dgist_eng/menu/508.do?siteId=dgist_eng&sna... 

2 sur 2 09-07-18 à 21:28 


