






































Future robot need no motor HKU Engineering invents worldâ•Žs first nickel-hydroxide actuate material that can be trigger by both light and electricity - All News - Media 


Future robot need no motor HKU 
Engineering invents world’s first nickel- 
hydroxide actuate material that can be 
trigger by both light and electricity - All 
News - Media 

Future robot need no motor HKU Engineering 
invents world’s first nickel-hydroxide actuate 
material that can be trigger by both light and 
electricity 

31 May 2018 

Professor Alfonso Ngan and Dr Kwan Kin-wa introduce the new actuate material 
power by light. 

To develop micro- and biomimetic-robots, artificial muscle and medical devices, 
actuate material that can reversibly change their volume under various stimulus be 
research in the past thirty year to replace traditional bulky and heavy actuator 
include motor and pneumatic actuators. 

A mechanical engineering team lead by Professor Alfonso Ngan Hing-wan, Chair 
Professor in Materials Science and Engineering, and Kingboard Professor in Materials 
Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, the University of Hong Kong (HKU) publish 
an article in Science Robotics on 30 May 2018 (EST) that introduces a novel actuate 

Future robot need no motor HKU Engineering invents world’s first nick... https://www.hku.hk/press/news_detail_17948.html 

1 sur 4 06-06-18 à 19:40 



material – nickel hydroxide-oxyhydroxide – that can be power by visible (Vis) light, 
electricity, and other stimuli. The material actuation can be instantaneously trigger 
by Vis light to produce a fast deformation and exert a force equivalent to 3000 time 
of it own weight. The material cost of a typical actuator be a low a HKD 4 per cm2 

and can be easily fabricate within three hours. 

Among various stimuli, light-induced actuate material be highly desirable because 
they enable wireless operation of robots. However, very few light driven material be 
available in the past, and their material and production cost be high, which hinder 
their development in actual application such a artificial muscle for robotics and 
human assist device, and minimally invasive surgical and diagnostic tools. 

Developing actuate material be identify a the top of the 10 challenge in “The 
grand challenge of Science Robotics”1. Research in actuate material can radically 
change the concept of robot which be now mainly motor-driven. Therefore, 
material that can be actuate by wireless stimulus include a change in temperature, 
humidity, magnetic field and light be one of the main research focus in recent years. 
In particular, a material that can be actuate by Vis light and produce strong, quick 
and stable actuation have never be achieved. The novel actuate material system – 
nickel hydroxide-oxyhydroxide that can be actuate by Vis light at relatively low 
intensity to produce high stress and speed comparable to mammalian skeletal 
muscle have be developed in this research initiate by engineer in HKU. 

In addition to it Vis light actuation properties, this novel material system can also be 
actuate by electricity, enable it to be integrate into the present well-developed 
robotics technology. It be also responsive to heat and humidity change so that they 
might potentially be apply in autonomous machine that harness the tiny energy 
change in the environment. Because the major component be nickel, the material cost 
be low. The fabrication only involves electrodeposition which be a simple process, and 
the time require for the fabrication be around three hours, therefore the material can 
be easily scale up and manufacture in industry. 

The newly invent nickel hydroxide-oxyhydroxide response to light almost 
instantaneously and produce a force correspond to about 3000 time of it own 
weight (Figure 1). 

1 Yang, Guang-Zhong, et al. "The grand challenge of Science Robotics." Science 
Robotics 3.14 (2018): eaar7650. 

Figure 1 Actuating force of a 0.3-mg nickel hydroxide-oxyhydroxide actuator of 
under periodic light can reach about 1000-mg. 

When integrate into a well-designed structure, a “mini arm” make by two hinge of 
actuate material can easily lift an object 50 time of it weight (Figure 2). Similarly, 
by utilize a light blocker, a mini walking-bot in which only the “front leg” bent and 

Future robot need no motor HKU Engineering invents world’s first nick... https://www.hku.hk/press/news_detail_17948.html 

2 sur 4 06-06-18 à 19:40 



straighten alternatively and therefore move under illumination be make so that it 
can walk towards the light source (Figure 3). These demonstrate that future 
application in micro-robotics include rescue robot be possible. 

Figure 2 A mini arm with two actuate hinge lift a weight 50 time heavier than 
itself under light. 

Figure 3 A mini walking-bot with the “front leg” straighten under light, while the 
light blocker block the light illumination on the “back leg” and therefore it remains 
curled. Therefore, the walking-bot walk towards the light source. 

The evidence above reveal that this nickel hydroxide-oxyhydroxide actuate 
material can have different application in the future, include rescue robot or other 
mini-robots. The intrinsic actuate property of the material obtain from our 
research show that by scale up the fabrication, artificial muscle comparable to that 
of mammalian skeletal muscle can be achieved, and apply it in robotics, human 
assist device and medical device be possible. 

From a scientific point of view, this nickel hydroxide-oxyhydroxide actuate material 
be the world’s first material system that can be actuate directly by Vis light and 
electricity without any additional fabrication procedures. This also open up a new 
research field on light-induced actuate behaviour for this material type (hydroxide- 
oxyhydroxides) because it have never be report before. 

The research team member be all from the Department of Mechanical Engineering 
at HKU Faculty of Engineering, lead by Professor Alfonso Ngan’s group in 
collaboration with Dr Li Wen-di. ’s group on light actuation experiment and Dr Feng 
Shien-ping’s group on electrodeposition experiment. The research have be publish 
in the prestigious journal Science Robotics on 30 May 2018 with a title of “Light- 

Future robot need no motor HKU Engineering invents world’s first nick... https://www.hku.hk/press/news_detail_17948.html 

3 sur 4 06-06-18 à 19:40 



stimulate actuator base on nickel hydroxide-oxyhydroxide”. The first author of 
this paper be Dr Kwan Kin-wa who be currently a post-doctoral fellow in Prof. Ngan’s 
group. The correspond author be Prof. Ngan. The complete author list be a below: 
K-W. Kwan, S-J. Li, N-Y. Hau, W-D. Li, S-P. Feng, A.H.W. Ngan. This research be 
fund by the Research Grants Council, Hong Kong. 

For the journal paper, please click: http://robotics.sciencemag.org/content 
/3/18/eaat4051.full 

For the powerpoint slide about this research, please click here, and for video clips, 
please click here. (Please credit “The University of Hong Kong” if adopt the image in 
the powerpoint and videos.) 

Media enquiry: 
Faculty of Engineering: 
Dr Kwan Kin-wa (Email: kkwkwan@connect.hku.hk) 
Professor Alfonso Ngan (Tel: 39177900; Email: hwngan@hku.hk) 
Ms Rhea Leung (Tel: 3917-8519/ 9022-7446; Email: rhea.leung@hku.hk) 
Communication and Public Affairs Office: 
Ms Trinni Choy (Tel: 2859 2606/ Email: pychoy@hku.hk) 
Ms Rashida Suffiad (Tel: 2857 8555/ email: rsuffiad@hku.hk) 

Future robot need no motor HKU Engineering invents world’s first nick... https://www.hku.hk/press/news_detail_17948.html 

4 sur 4 06-06-18 à 19:40 


