






















































GameSpace: An Explorable Visualization of the Videogame Medium 


See discussions, stats, and author profile for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318505669 

GameSpace: An Explorable Visualization of the 
Videogame Medium 

Technical Report · July 2017 

DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.33425.94565 

CITATIONS 

0 

READS 

15 

6 authors, including: 

Some of the author of this publication be also work on these related projects: 

Situated and Pragmatic Story Generation View project 

James Ryan 

University of California, Santa Cruz 

36 PUBLICATIONS 116 CITATIONS 

SEE PROFILE 

All content follow this page be uploaded by James Ryan on 18 July 2017. 

The user have request enhancement of the download file. 

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318505669_GameSpace_An_Explorable_Visualization_of_the_Videogame_Medium?enrichId=rgreq-1f9d665b187b2868153916393d796a2e-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODUwNTY2OTtBUzo1MTc1MjE4MzkwNTg5NDRAMTUwMDM5ODIyOTM1Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_2&_esc=publicationCoverPdf 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318505669_GameSpace_An_Explorable_Visualization_of_the_Videogame_Medium?enrichId=rgreq-1f9d665b187b2868153916393d796a2e-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODUwNTY2OTtBUzo1MTc1MjE4MzkwNTg5NDRAMTUwMDM5ODIyOTM1Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_3&_esc=publicationCoverPdf 
https://www.researchgate.net/project/Situated-and-Pragmatic-Story-Generation?enrichId=rgreq-1f9d665b187b2868153916393d796a2e-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODUwNTY2OTtBUzo1MTc1MjE4MzkwNTg5NDRAMTUwMDM5ODIyOTM1Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_9&_esc=publicationCoverPdf 
https://www.researchgate.net/?enrichId=rgreq-1f9d665b187b2868153916393d796a2e-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODUwNTY2OTtBUzo1MTc1MjE4MzkwNTg5NDRAMTUwMDM5ODIyOTM1Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_1&_esc=publicationCoverPdf 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/James_Ryan32?enrichId=rgreq-1f9d665b187b2868153916393d796a2e-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODUwNTY2OTtBUzo1MTc1MjE4MzkwNTg5NDRAMTUwMDM5ODIyOTM1Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_4&_esc=publicationCoverPdf 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/James_Ryan32?enrichId=rgreq-1f9d665b187b2868153916393d796a2e-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODUwNTY2OTtBUzo1MTc1MjE4MzkwNTg5NDRAMTUwMDM5ODIyOTM1Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_5&_esc=publicationCoverPdf 
https://www.researchgate.net/institution/University_of_California_Santa_Cruz?enrichId=rgreq-1f9d665b187b2868153916393d796a2e-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODUwNTY2OTtBUzo1MTc1MjE4MzkwNTg5NDRAMTUwMDM5ODIyOTM1Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_6&_esc=publicationCoverPdf 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/James_Ryan32?enrichId=rgreq-1f9d665b187b2868153916393d796a2e-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODUwNTY2OTtBUzo1MTc1MjE4MzkwNTg5NDRAMTUwMDM5ODIyOTM1Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_7&_esc=publicationCoverPdf 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/James_Ryan32?enrichId=rgreq-1f9d665b187b2868153916393d796a2e-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODUwNTY2OTtBUzo1MTc1MjE4MzkwNTg5NDRAMTUwMDM5ODIyOTM1Nw%3D%3D&el=1_x_10&_esc=publicationCoverPdf 


GameSpace: An Explorable Visualization of the Videogame Medium 

JAMES RYAN, Expressive Intelligence Studio, University of California, Santa Cruz 

ERIC KALTMAN, Expressive Intelligence Studio, University of California, Santa Cruz 

ANDREW MAX FISHER, Games and Playable Media, University of California, Santa Cruz 

TAYLOR OWEN-MILNER, 2K Games, Novato, California 

MICHAEL MATEAS, Expressive Intelligence Studio, University of California, Santa Cruz 

NOAH WARDRIP-FRUIN, Expressive Intelligence Studio, University of California, Santa Cruz 

We present GameSpace, a visualization of the videogame medium a a 3D explorable space. GameSpace take the 

form of a galaxy of 15,000 stars, where each star represent an exist game and star be position such that related 

game be nearer to one another. Users may fly around the space, use conventional game controls, to explore the 

medium and serendipitously discover new games. This application be make possible by a combination of technique 

from natural language processing and machine learning, namely latent semantic analysis and multidimensional scaling, 

and build upon our early work in produce tool for videogame discovery. Beyond demonstrate an increase 

in user engagement relative to our primary exist tool, in this paper we outline our design goals, describe our 

development process, and discus the project along various dimension of intrigue. GameSpace be available online at 

http://gamespace.io. 

Additional Key Words and Phrases: visualization, game discovery, game genre, machine learn 

ACM Reference format: 

James Ryan, Eric Kaltman, Andrew Max Fisher, Taylor Owen-Milner, Michael Mateas, and Noah Wardrip-Fruin. 

2017. GameSpace: An Explorable Visualization of the Videogame Medium. 1, 1, Article 1 (January 2017), 18 pages. 

DOI: 

1 INTRODUCTION 

The Internet be replete with text about videogames. From in-depth reviews, to walkthroughs and FAQS, to 

general description like those found on Wikipedia and MobyGames, community member and professional 

constitute a perpetual wellspring of corpus that be ripe for larger, structural analysis techniques. What if 

we could harness the information embed in that text for game study analysis? What conclusion could 

we reach and what way could we find to illustrate new conclusion about the game community and about 

the videogame medium itself? 

As we outline in Section 3, there be an emerge area that do harness videogame text corpora, through 

technique from natural language processing (NLP) and other areas. In [45], we review this body of work 

and characterize it approach to game study a a bottom-up one that can generate novel insight that 

cannot be obtain through more conventional top-down methods. Additionally, however, we note a critical 

deficit in the exist work take this new approach: none of the model report in that literature can be 

2017. Technical Report UCSC-SOE-17-14 

Technical Report UCSC-SOE-17-14 1 

http://gamespace.io 


2 J. Ryan et al. 

engage beyond the publication describe them, which be troublesome give the complexity of machine 

learn model and the result difficulty of adequately describe them. As such, we call for future 

work in this area to make it model more understandable through visualization and interactivity. 

In the spirit of this call, we have release a suite of tool and visualization that make the model that we 

have built by processing videogame text corpus interactive.1 The primary application in this suite be 

GameNet, an explorable network of nearly 12,000 game that be link to one another accord to how 

related they are, and GameSage, an interface to GameNet that generates a new node in the network by 

processing a user’s idea for a game. 

Elsewhere, we have demonstrate a number of strength present in our tool suite: GameNet’s relatedness 

judgment be sound [45], GameNet and GameSage expose user to relevant game that be unfamiliar to 

them [40, 45], GameNet be a useful tool for game scholar [45], and GameSage be a useful one for game 

designer [40]. We have also learned, however, of opportunity to raise the level of engagement in these tools. 

In a user study evaluate GameNet and GameSage, for instance, 51% of respondent indicate that they 

would not be likely to use the tool again [40]. 

In the interest of maintain these benefit of our model while provide an interface to it that be more 

engage for users, we present GameSpace, an explorable visualization of the videogame medium built use 

NLP and machine learning. GameSpace take the form of a 3D galaxy of stars, where each star represent 

an exist game and star be place in the space such that related game be nearer to one another. Users 

can fly around the space, use conventional game controls, to explore and learn about the medium. Each 

game have data attach to it—its Wikipedia article and a YouTube video demonstrate gameplay—that 

may be engage without leave the space. This application be make possible through a combination of 

technique from NLP and machine learning, which we apply to a corpus of over 15,000 videogame article 

extract from Wikipedia. Further, GameSpace be notable a a living, publicly (if indirectly) modifiable 

visualization—we have set up a system that will automatically rederive GameSpace’s underlie model 

periodically, a new descriptive videogame content be add to Wikipedia, to add new game into the space. 

This mean that users, by describe new game on Wikipedia, may cause the set of game include in 

GameSpace to expand accordingly. As we articulate again in the next section, our primary goal in develop 

GameSpace have be to make a GameNet-like tool that be more engage to users. In Section 6.2, we test 

whether this goal have be achieve by compare user metric automatically collect by both systems. 

Generally, we hope that this project will encourage new exploration of the potential of use machine 

learn and interactive visualization to engender exploration and understand of the videogame medium. 

2 DESIGN GOALS 

Our development of GameSpace be structure accord to a number of design goals: 

(1) Produce a more engage interface to our underlie NLP model (i.e., one that be more engage 

than GameNet); this be our core design goal and the subject of our evaluation in Section 6.2. 

(2) Maintain the spontaneous and serendipitous sense of discovery available in our early tools. 

(3) Present a fun and soothe experience that be visually and aurally appealing. 

1These tool be host online at http://gamecip-projects.soe.ucsc.edu. 

Technical Report UCSC-SOE-17-14 

http://gamecip-projects.soe.ucsc.edu 


GameSpace: An Explorable Visualization of the Videogame Medium 3 

Fig. 1. A wide view of the entire 3D space. Each star represent an exist videogame, and star be position such that 
related game be nearby one another. As a result, noticeable constellation of related game appear. 

(4) Directly integrate outside data sources, such a Wiki- pedia article and YouTube videos, into the 

tool (whereas GameNet force user to leave the system to engage these sources); this promotes a 

more contain and cohesive experience. 

(5) Encourage user to share and discus game that they discover in the space. 

(6) Engage the Wikipedia community to provide a mechanism for mutual improvement of both our 

model and coverage of videogames on Wikipedia. 

Throughout the paper, we cite these goal when discuss specific design decision that we make in pursuit 

of them. 

Technical Report UCSC-SOE-17-14 



4 J. Ryan et al. 

Fig. 2. A view toward the interior of GameSpace. We sought to evoke the aesthetic of stargazing. 

3 RELATED WORK 

Our project here extends the grow body of work in which technique from machine learn and NLP 

be utilized to generate new insight about videogame phenomena. This approach be establish by José 

Zagal and Noriko Tomuro, who apply cluster analysis and readability metric to a corpus of 400,000 

game review [52, 54]. Later work by others at DePaul University submit the same corpus to sentiment 

analysis [37], and use the result model to fuel a videogame recommender system [30]. In a follow-up to 

the latter project, we built a game recommender system to test the intuitive notion that people tend to like 

related game [43]. Other work in game study have apply lexicometry—investigation into the frequency 

of lexical item in a corpus—to game review [49, 53, 55], forum post [3, 22], developer description [19], 

walkthroughs [41], and academic publication [31]. Another recent study also process text from academic 

publication about games, but use a topic model approach [8]. 

In the spirit of this new approach, we have release a series of tool and visualization that be fuel 

by NLP techniques. The first, GameNet, be an explorable network in which nearly 12,000 game be link 

to the game to which they be most related [44, 45]. Each game’s node in the network also contains a 

summary extract from Wikipedia, a well a link to the game’s Wikipedia article and image and video 

of gameplay. An add-on tool, GameSage, allows user to freely describe an idea for a game, which it process 

to automatically generate a node in GameNet that link the abstract idea to related exist game [40, 44]. 

GameNet and GameSage be make possible by a latent semantic analysis (LSA) model train on a corpus 

of Wikipedia article about games; GameSpace be fuel by a revision to this model whose derivation we 

describe in Section 4. A third tool, GameGlobs, visualizes various clustering of the 12,000 game in our 

original LSA model, with integration into GameNet [42]. An additional tool in this suite, GameTree, have not 

yet be released—it visualizes a hierarchical taxonomy of the videogame medium in the form of a radial 

tree built by hierarchical agglomerative cluster [42]. Other than our own effort in produce these tool 

and visualizations, we be aware of only one other project with similar aims: Vizmo, a “videogame browser” 

that us a stack area chart to index 600 game accord to visual style and mood [24]. Released just 

before GameNet, it approach be driven by handcraft metadata attribution rather than machine learn 

(hence it small database of games). 

At the broader intersection of data visualization and video- games, we find project that visualize: content 

pools, a design support for author [16, 47]; player behavior, to provide for player model [11]; broader 

Technical Report UCSC-SOE-17-14 



GameSpace: An Explorable Visualization of the Videogame Medium 5 

gameplay activity, for purpose of game analytics [13, 28, 33]; the expressive range or possibility space of 

procedural content generator [21, 48]; and even the field of game research itself [31]. Our project diverges 

from these effort in that we do not visualize videogame phenomenon so much a the medium itself. 

While the area we just outline visualizes videogame data, an emerge body of work be explore the 

generation of game from open data [4, 7, 14, 15]. First articulate in [14], a data game “allows the player(s) 

to explore data that be derive from outside the game, by transform the data into something that can be 

played with” (p. 1). In a sense, GameSpace be a data game that transforms our LSA model into something 

playable, though it be not especially gameful. As we discus in Section 7.5, we be interested in the idea of 

make data playable, and we have idea for inject more gameful element into the application. Relatedly, 

we would like to reference Game Studies [27], a game that provide a playable interface to the history of the 

academic study of game (rather than the medium itself). 

In expressive visualization more broadly, we find that the journalistic repertoire have expand to include 

rhetorical visualization call data story [46], and other creative practitioner be produce explorable 

explanation of real-world phenomenon [50]. Though our project be less rhetorical and simulationist, GameSpace 

be in a sense an explorable explanation of the videogame medium. 

Finally, we would like to connect our current project to study of game genre (e.g., [1, 3, 18, 26]). Whereas 

naturally most genre typology partition the space of game top-down, accord to gameplay concerns, we 

proffer an alternative bottom-up approach in which genre be a continuous notion and game be deem alike 

to the degree that they be described similarly. GameSpace instantiates this notion by position game 

that be described more similarly nearer to one another in a continuous 3D space. In Section 7.1, we discus 

this notion more deeply. 

4 METHOD 

In this section, we describe our full processing pipeline, which proceeds from the extraction of a collection 

of Wikipedia article about game to the derivation of a three-dimensional space contain those games. 

Additionally, we include some detail related to the implementation of a game engine for explore the 

derive space. Broadly, our approach can be thought of a work from a simple premise: game that be 

described similarly be likely, in fact, similar. 

4.1 Corpus Extraction 

Our process begin with the extraction of 21,456 Wikipedia article that each pertain to an individual 

game. We found these by scrap Wikipedia category page for each year in the history of the medium—e.g., 

Category:1977 video games—each of which contain link to all the exist article for game release 

that year. Of this full batch, 5,534 game be remove for be less than 250 word in length; in early 

work, we found that very short article be not robust to our method [45]. Additionally, we detect and 

remove 663 duplicate articles. In the end, our corpus comprise 15,259 articles, each range between 250 

and 10,436 words, with an average length of 1,118 words.2 In May 2014, we carry out a similar procedure 

to extract 11,829 usable article [45]; this mean that approximately 3,500 more usable videogame article 

have appear in the last three years. Later, in Section 4.6, we discus our plan to automatically extract 

2The long article be for Overwatch (2016). 

Technical Report UCSC-SOE-17-14 



6 J. Ryan et al. 

and process new article a they appear. Finally, we will note that our entire corpus comprises some 17M 

total words. 

4.2 Preprocessing 

Our method of corpus preprocessing roughly follow the approach outline in more detail in [45]: we 

convert all text to lowercase, remove punctuation and miscellaneous Wikipedia artifacts, tokenized 

videogame title and platform names, remove stop words, carry out lemmatization, and remove word that 

appear in only a single document. Additionally, this time around we utilized an additional preprocessing 

step (prior to stopword removal): use the phrase-recognition algorithm of [32] (as implement in the 

Phrases module of the Python library gensim [38]), we automatically detect and tokenized multiword 

phrase that appear in our corpus. This step caused, for example, all occurrence of the common videogame 

phrase ‘first person shooter’ to be aggregate into the single token first person shooter. This be critical 

because latent semantic analysis, which we discus next, us a bag of word approach, which mean that the 

occurrence of a phrase like ‘first person shooter’ would be insufficiently capture a discrete, independent 

occurrence of it three component words. From informal exploration, this algorithm appear to have work 

very well at automatically recognize common videogame phrases, and it be very easy to use. We encourage 

scholar in game study to try it a a cheap way of investigate how people talk about games. 

4.3 Latent Semantic Analysis 

After preprocessing the corpus, we built a co-occurrence matrix of it term and documents, normalize the 

frequency count in that matrix use tf–idf weighting, and then submit the normalize matrix to latent 

semantic analysis (LSA); for more information on these steps, see [45]. LSA be a classical natural language 

processing method that be often use for automatically determine semantic relatedness between text 

document [10]. Rather than measure direct overlap between the collection of word appear in each 

document, LSA work by factor a co-occurrence matrix (by perform a singular value decomposition 

[17]). One of the byproduct of this procedure be a new matrix that have few dimensions, each specify a 

weight bundling of term that have similar distribution in the corpus. Remarkably, this reduce matrix 

encodes information that may not be present in the original full matrix. For example, LSA may be able to 

infer that two term that do not appear together in any document—perhaps dialectal variant that denote 

the same thing, like ‘gas’ and ‘petrol’—are in fact highly semantically related [23]. By the same token, it 

may infer the semantic relatedness of two document that have no term in common. This ability to learn 

global association from local co-occurrence be the hallmark of LSA and the reason for it prolong success. 

Once the reduce matrix have be derived, semantic relatedness between document can be automatically 

calculated. This be typically do by take the cosine between the documents’ k-dimensional LSA vectors, 

where k be the number of dimension in the reduce matrix and ‘LSA vectors’ simply denotes the row in 

that matrix.3 If this be not intuitive, try conceive of an LSA model a a k-dimensional space in which 

each document be place at the k-dimensional coordinate specify by it LSA vector. In this space, the 

semantic relatedness of two document be reify a the distance between the documents’ position in the 

space—this distance be what the cosine represents. In corpus in which each document pertains to a specific 

3Following an empirical investigation carry out in early work [45], we select a k value of 207 for our LSA model. 

Technical Report UCSC-SOE-17-14 



GameSpace: An Explorable Visualization of the Videogame Medium 7 

Fig. 3. GameSpace’s nebula of race games, annotate for it various component clusters. The variant of multidimensional 
scale that we utilize, t-SNE, build tight cluster of related object and then attempt to position those cluster accord 
to how related they be to one another. 

individual concept, such a a corpus comprise encyclopedia entries, these relatedness score can reasonably 

be utilized a a measure of the relatedness of the concept themselves. In our project, we utilize this notion 

to operationalize the relatedness of document describe game a the relatedness of the game themselves. 

As such, once LSA have completed, we may take any pair of game in our corpus and automatically compute 

a score indicate how related the game are. 

In our early work, the processing stop there and we make our high-dimensional LSA model explorable 

through GameNet [45] and GameSage [40]. As we describe next, the current project take thing a step 

further by derive a lower-dimensional approximation of our LSA model, for the purpose of produce a 

more engage visualization. 

4.4 Multidimensional Scaling 

After use LSA to derive a 207-dimensional space, we use a variant of multidimensional scale to produce 

a three-dimensional approximation of that space. Whereas dimensionality reduction in technique like LSA be 

about harness underlie structure that may be hidden in native data, multidimensional scale aim to 

produce lower-dimensional approximation of high-dimensional space purely for the purpose of visualization 

[9]. As such, it be not uncommon to first submit data to a technique like LSA before then apply a variant 

of multidimensional scaling. At a high-level, multidimensional scale tends to work something like this. 

First, a set of object (in our case, the game in our corpus) be randomly distribute in a k-dimensional 

space (in our case, k = 3). The space then evolves over a series of step where, on each step, each object be 

able to move in the direction that will take it closest to the object it be related to (in our case, in term of 

cosine similarity in our LSA space) and farthest from the object it be not related to. The last step occurs 

when no object wish to move anymore. 

Technical Report UCSC-SOE-17-14 



8 J. Ryan et al. 

Fig. 4. A GameSpace user locates and selects the Chris Crawford game Gossip (A). This allows her to view it Wikipedia 
article (B) or watch a gameplay video (C), in place, without leave the space. Additionally, she may tweet out a special 
link that provide a portal to the game’s position in the space (D). 

Specifically, we use a variant of multidimensional scale call t-distributed stochastic neighbor embed 

(t-SNE) [29], which have found widespread use since it introduction in 2008 [51]; the particular implementation 

that we use be include in the Python scikit-learn library [35]. We submit a matrix of pairwise affinity 

(cosine similarity between game in our LSA space) to the technique use the follow hyperparameter 

values: perplexity=30.0, learn rate=200.0, early exaggeration=4.0. Our model converge after 364 

iterations, with an error of 4.55. Later, in Section 6.1, we discus how we validate our eventual three- 

dimensional space by compare it against one derive through various technique and hyperparameter 

configurations. 

4.5 App Implementation 

After derive our 3D space, we built a web application that allows user to explore it—this be GameSpace. 

For rendering, we use three.js, a JavaScript library for 3D graphic [6]. The application itself be deployed 

use the Python web framework Flask [20]. Additionally, in pursuit of the third design goal in Section 2, 

we devote hundred of person hour to sound design and visual polish. 

Technical Report UCSC-SOE-17-14 



GameSpace: An Explorable Visualization of the Videogame Medium 9 

4.6 Recurring Updates 

New game will be add into GameSpace automatically (and periodically) a new content appear on 

Wikipedia. We have set up a process that will scrape Wikipedia at recur interval in search of new 

videogame articles—i.e., altogether new articles, or article that have be expand beyond 250 words— 

which will then be automatically process and add into the 3D space. Specifically, newly extract 

article be add into the corpus, which trigger derivation of an update LSA model, which be use to add 

new game into the application. As an ad hoc method, game will be place in the 3D space next to their 

near neighbor in the high-dimensional LSA space. At less frequent intervals, we may carry out MDS from 

scratch, though this could become disruptive to user who become familiar with the space’s topology.4 In 

Section 7.4, we discus how this recur process make GameSpace a living visualization, which we hope 

will encourage authorship of new videogame article on Wikipedia. 

5 GAMESPACE 

GameSpace visualizes the videogame medium a a 3D space that user can explore use conventional game 

controls. It have a space theming: the medium be a galaxy of stars—shown in Figures 1 and 2—each of which 

represent an exist videogame. As described in Section 4.4, game be position in the space such that 

related game be near one another. A byproduct of this, when render a a galaxy, be that cluster of 

related game form constellation-like structures, which themselves may combine to compose large nebula 

correspond to conventonal notion of game genre or subgenre. To illustrate this, Figure 3 show the 

race nebula, with it various component cluster annotated. 

5.1 Affordances 

A user can freely move about the space by flying, and at any point she be near enough to a game, she can 

click on it to select it. This notion of unconstrained movement in the space be meant to support the second 

design goal that we list in Section 2, which be to encourage spontaneous and serendipitous discovery. Upon 

select a game, the camera lock into orbit around the star and display the game’s name and year of 

release (see Figure 4A). Additionally, the user may view the game’s Wikipedia article (Figure 4B) or watch 

a video of it gameplay (Figure 4C)—critically, she can do this in place, without have to leave the space, 

which satisfies the fourth design goal that we list in Section 2. Finally, an icon be provide that, when 

clicked, generates a draft of a Tweet contain a special link that may be use to transport directly to 

the select game upon start the application (Figure 4D). The latter affordance be meant to engender 

discussion around interest game that user may find in the space—the fifth design goal that we list in 

Section 2. 

6 VALIDATION AND EVALUATION 

In this section, we validate GameSpace in two ways. First, we describe the process by which we select a 

particular variant of multidimensional scale that produce a space with desirable characteristics. Second, 

4Rederiving an MDS model with a different random seed, let alone a new object and affinities, can produce an entirely 
different space. 

Technical Report UCSC-SOE-17-14 



10 J. Ryan et al. 

Fig. 5. Our eventual 3D space (C) along with some early experiments. Using metric MDS with a Euclidean distance metric 
produce a hollow sphere (A); this be an artifact of use Euclidean distance on certain datasets. Most MDS technique 
be susceptible to a dense cluster of object around the origin point, a see in the space derive use locally linear 
embed (B). Our final space be derive use t-stochastic neighbor embedding, which be know for avoid this 
shortcoming. 

we compare user metric automatically collect by both GameSpace and our early tool, GameNet, to 

support the notion that the new tool be more engage for user (which be our core design goal). 

6.1 Selecting a Space 

As explain in Section 4.4, GameSpace be critically enable by the use of multidimensional scale to reduce 

our 207-dimensional LSA model (described in Section 4.3) to a 3D space that may be visualized. In this 

section, we we will explain how we select our eventual space. 

6.1.1 Method. To explain how we settle on our derive space, we must first explain more about 

the purpose and practice of MDS. Whereas technique like LSA be meant to uncover hidden pattern 

in high-dimensional data, MDS be all about harness the innate sensemaking capacity of the human 

visual processing system—a good MDS model be simply one that make immediate sense to human when 

visualized. As such, the process of select an MDS configuration (i.e., the specific variant to use, and it 

hyperparameter values) be typically do through informal exploration [51]. Our particular method entail 

set up configurations, derive space use them, render those space in our game engine, fly 

around them, and informally validate the placement of game use our knowledge of the medium (and 

research unknown games, if necessary). 

6.1.2 Results. During our exploration period, we experiment with 3D space that have undesirable 

characteristic that be eventually eliminate in our final space. For instance, use metric MDS [2] with 

a Euclidean distance metric produce a hollow sphere, show in Figure 5A. One artifact of Euclidean 

distance be that it be sensitive to vector norms—for a give vector, this be characterize by it distance from 

the origin point (a vector with 0 for each dimension value). In our case, all the game in our model have 

LSA vector that be roughly equidistant from the model’s origin point, and this be what the result 3D 

space captured. But we do not care about distance from the origin so much a where exactly the game be 

Technical Report UCSC-SOE-17-14 



GameSpace: An Explorable Visualization of the Videogame Medium 11 

position in the high-dimensional space of our LSA model, and so cosine similarity (which capture the 

latter) prof to be the good distance metric for our purposes. After settle on cosine similarity a our 

distance metric, we try a number of MDS variants. Many of the classic technique in this area, however, 

be susceptible to a particular issue: object tend to cluster densely around the origin point of the derive 

space, a in the space derive by locally linear embed [39] show in Figure 5B.5 This be because most 

MDS variant attempt to simultaneously move object toward similar object and away from dissimilar 

ones—if this be not feasible for a give object (since there be only three ax for movement), all prospective 

movement of it in the space becomes equally (un)appealing, and the object stay relatively put near the 

origin point. A core appeal of t-SNE, the technique we end up using, be that it overcomes this deficiency 

by ignore dissimilarity to focus only on object similarity—i.e., it favor the preservation of local structure 

over global structure [29]. Specifically, it seek to maintain (in the low-dimensional space) neighborhood 

that exist in the high-dimensional space, and then work to position those neighborhood accord to how 

related they be to one another. The result, a see in Figure 5C, be that related object cluster together, 

and related cluster may themselves cluster together (as in the race nebula in in Figure 3), but with the 

unavoidable drawback that unrelated cluster may be position nearby one another. In the end, we care 

more about related game appear near one another than unrelated game appear far apart, and so 

t-SNE produce the most appeal space. As for the particular hyperparameter value that we chose, we 

again make decision through informal exploration, follow the suggestion of [51]. 

6.2 Assessing Engagement 

As note in Section 2, our primary goal in create GameSpace be to maintain the benefit of visualize 

model built by apply LSA to text about games—benefits that we have validate elsewhere in evaluation 

of GameNet and GameSage [40, 45]—while critically boost the level of user engagement. Specifically, we 

sought to create a new tool that would be more engage to user than our primary exist tool, GameNet 

[45].6 In this section, we compare GameNet and GameSpace in term of user engagement. 

6.2.1 Method. In the research community that build and develops web applications, there be a belief 

that evaluation instrument such a interview or questionnaire be too subjective to provide a reliable 

measure of user engagement [25, 36]. The idea be that user have trouble self-reporting engagement, and so 

two alternative objective approach be advocate [25]. The first approach utilizes biometric instrument 

such a eye track and heart-rate monitoring to discern signal that be know to be associate with 

engagement. While this approach can be effective, it be costly and only feasible for study with small samples. 

The second approach, which be more frequently taken, be to remotely track user behavior in the wild and then 

analyze the telemetry data use validate metric for measure user engagement. Here, common metric 

include session duration, user return rate, and number of click [25, 36]. Both GameNet and GameSpace 

track user behavior, but unfortunately only GameSpace log this behavior use a notion of user, which 

make a comparison of user return rate impossible. Moreover, the application be different enough in kind 

that it do not make sense to compare click behavior. As such, we be left with one metric—fortunately an 

5This space be use for an initial prototype of GameSpace that be report in [42]. 
6Note that we view GameSage a an alternative interface to GameNet, meaning both system integrate into a single tool 
call GameNet. Moreover, session with either tool be log into the same database. 

Technical Report UCSC-SOE-17-14 



12 J. Ryan et al. 

Application Sessions Session Duration 

mean (standard deviation) 

GameNet 32,077 73.4s* (290.7s) 

GameSpace 7,358 109.2s* (144.4s) 

Table 1. A comparison of user engagement between GameNet and GameSpace: GameSpace user session be significantly 
longer on average (p < 0.0001). 

important one, session duration—though compare this across the tool require u to first operationally 

define a notion of session duration in each application. A primary issue here be that GameNet do not detect 

when user exit the tool. Given this, we define a GameNet session a terminate on the last user event 

before five or more minute of inactivity. GameSpace do detect user exit it, but user may leave the 

application idle. To support a fair comparison, we define GameSpace session a also terminate on the 

last user event before five or more minute of inactivity (or upon exit of the application, naturally). Using 

these definition of session length, we compare mean across the application use a standard left-tailed 

z-test, since sample size be large for both tools. 

6.2.2 Results. Our result be show in Table 1. We found that GameSpace user session be on average 

significant longer than GameNet user session (M = 109.2 vs. 73.4 seconds; z = −1.64, p < 0.0001). As 
session duration be both intuitively and conventionally [25, 36] a metric for evaluate web application for 

their level of user engagement, these result indicate that GameSpace improves upon GameNet in this area. 

This suggests that our core design goal, articulate in Section 2, have be satisfied. 

7 DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 

In this section, we wrap up the paper with discussion of GameSpace and our large project in the context of 

various pertinent or interest concerns. Additionally, we forecast potential avenue for future work and 

collaboration. 

7.1 Similarity versus Relatedness 

Instead of use a notion of game likeness that be base purely on gameplay, we use one that take into account 

any aspect of broader videogame ontology that may show up in a Wikipedia article: designer, developer, 

publisher, platform, critical reception, theme, and so forth. In [43], we articulate this model of game likeness, 

which we call game relatedness, a a bottom-up alternative to commercial game genre. As we explain more 

deeply in that paper, our idea be influence by the distinction in computational linguistics between semantic 

similarity and semantic relatedness [5]. Concepts that be semantically similar be strongly alike in form or 

meaning—for instance, mouse and rat, hot and warm—whereas concept that be semantically related may 

be so due to any type of association—e.g., mouse and cheese, hot and volcano. As such, semantic similarity 

actually represent a special case of the more general notion of semantic relatedness, which be to say that 

all concept that be semantically similar be also semantically related, but not vice versa. Following this 

distinction (and terminology), we consider game whose gameplay be alike to be similar game (and thus also 

Technical Report UCSC-SOE-17-14 



GameSpace: An Explorable Visualization of the Videogame Medium 13 

Fig. 6. Game genre a a continuous space. Super 3D Noah’s Ark (1994) be place between Christian game and animal- 
keep games, for obvious reasons, and it be also near hunt games—as a Wolfenstein 3D clone, it be mechanically a 
first-person shooter, like most hunt examples. 

related games), whereas, a we have explained, related game be not necessarily alike in term of gameplay, 

but share other ontological features. We note that it be similar to Lindsay Grace’s posit model contain 

both game type (similar gameplay) and game genre (similar content and theme) [18], except that it extends 

to include all possible associative feature in a single heterogeneous, infinitely extensible set of dimensions. 

Semantic relatedness be sometimes talk about (and measured) in term of the likelihood that one concept 

will call to mind the other [34], and so another way of understand game relatedness be that it be a notion 

of how likely it be that one game will evoke the other in the mind of a player who be familiar with both. Thus, 

in GameSpace, game be position such that they may call their neighbor to mind. 

7.2 Game Genre a a Continuous Space 

Beyond associate game accord to any and all feature that may overlap, our approach be novel in 

that it represent game genre a a continuous space. In most typologies, genre be discrete, meaning game 

can only have binary association with one another: they have a genre in common, or they do not. In our 

approach, game be alike to the degree that they be described similarly. Because GameSpace translates 

such affinity between game a distance in 3D space, it literally render the notion of genre a a continuous 

space. A game’s genre identity, then, can be thought of in various ways: it exact coordinate in the space, 

it placement in any apparent constellations, or the result of triangulate between all the game that be 

nearby it. Figure 6 nicely illustrates these concern use the case of Super 3D Noah’s Ark (1994), which be 

position in GameSpace between Christian games, animal-keeping games, and hunt games.7 Further, 

when genre be a continuous space, physical isolation reifies conceptual obscurity, a illustrate in Figure 

7If the proximity of hunt game seem unfitting, consider that Super 3D Noah’s Ark be actually a Wolfenstein 3D clone, 
make it (mechanically) a first-person shooter (like most hunt games). 

Technical Report UCSC-SOE-17-14 



14 J. Ryan et al. 

Fig. 7. One of the most isolated game in GameSpace. In our approach, physical isolation reifies conceptual obscurity, and 
this sport game about cultural heritage, with playable halftime show and educational content, fit the bill. Its closest 
neighbor be other American football games, but it be off by itself. 

7. Relatedly, empty spot in the space might be see a constitute unexplored design space—one fun 

project that we have consider would enable the generation of synthetic Wikipedia article from arbitrary 

coordinate in GameSpace. 

7.3 Videogame Embeddings 

A hot area of research in the digital humanity and in computational linguistics more broadly utilizes 

word embeddings. This approach belongs to the large class of technique call distributional semantics, of 

which LSA be a classical example. With word embeddings, the meaning of individual word (or phrases) 

be represent a vector that be derive accord to the words’ distribution across a large corpus of 

text. Here, we represent game a vector that be derive accord to the how the game be described 

in a large corpus—this could be characterize a a videogame embeddings approach. In the area of word 

embeddings, the hottest technique be call word2vec [32]. In currently unpublished early exploration, we 

have encounter some impressive result from a word2vec model that we train on text about videogames, 

which allows for arithmetic query whose operand be videogame concepts. Our favorite example be a query 

super mario bros− bowser + legend of zelda, for which our model return gannon. We hope to eventually 
release a tool that make this model interactive, but in the meantime we encourage others to explore the 

application of word2vec to videogame text. 

7.4 A Living Visualization 

In Section 4.6, we outline our recur process that will automatically cause new game to be add 

into GameSpace a new descriptive content appear on Wikipedia—this will make GameSpace a living 

Technical Report UCSC-SOE-17-14 



GameSpace: An Explorable Visualization of the Videogame Medium 15 

visualization, specifically one that grows and evolves organically a the set of Wikipedia article describe 

videogames grows and evolves. While we generally find this notion to be intriguing, we specifically hope that 

this will help to encourage authorship of descriptive content about videogames on Wikipedia. For instance, 

if a user discovers that a particular game be not in GameSpace, she can author a Wikipedia article for it, 

which will cause the game to automatically be add into the space. This feedback loop would mutually 

improve both our model and Wikipedia coverage of videogames, which corresponds to the last design goal 

that we list in Section 2. 

7.5 Making Data Playable 

While GameSpace be clearly explorable, our goal for it be to be a playable visualization of the videogame 

medium. Toward this, we have bound user affordances to conventional game controls, adapt UI and 

UX pattern from game design (e.g., we devote energy to sound design), and generally try to make 

the experience feel like play a game. Still, however, GameSpace be not quite a game. Looking ahead 

to the future of the application, and to a potential future with related applications, we wonder what a 

truly playable visualization of the medium—a game about games—would look like. One idea for make 

GameSpace more gameful would be to introduce a progression system: achievement that unlock badge (e.g., 

one for find the old game in the model) or even new affordances (e.g., find the old game allows 

the user to filter the space by year of release). In Section 7.7, we outline some idea for new affordances that 

we hope to eventually implement in GameSpace, and these could potentially be integrate into a progression 

system. More broadly, we be interested in the idea of make data playable. In Section 3, we outline data 

games—games that be automatically generate from open data—and explorable explanations—rhetorical 

interactive visualization that explain real-world phenomena. When we say ‘making data playable’, we 

refer to a general area that include these approach and any others that make the act of explore and 

understand data (or complex models, more broadly) more playful.8 In particular, we would like to see 

more project in game study that produce explorable—or, good yet, playable—byproducts. 

7.6 Visualizing Physical Collections 

An interest extension of this project could visualize physical videogame collections, like library holding 

or extensive personal collections, a 3D explorable spaces. For example, a library patron could fly around her 

library’s holding to select the game that she will borrow next. In early work, we discuss the prospect 

of a version of GameNet whose model be restrict to include only game present in Stanford University’s 

Cabrinety Collection [12]. 

7.7 New Affordances 

We be currently consider whether to include a number of new affordances. An initial prototype of 

GameSpace include a search bar, which allow user to search through the game in the model to teleport 

directly to a select game’s location. We found that this do not encourage serendipitous exploration—one 

of our design goal list in Section 2—and so we remove it. Many user have request it recently, though, 

so we may choose to reimplement it. Instead of it trigger teleportation, however, we may instead have 

8We note that there be of course a subtle distinction between boost playfulness and gamefulness, but, give our current 
stage of exploration, we do not believe it be not worth dive into here. 

Technical Report UCSC-SOE-17-14 



16 J. Ryan et al. 

it trigger a flythrough of the space that end at the search result. That way, the user still receives some 

context for the location of the result, help support serendipitous exploration. As allude to in Section 

7.5, search could possibly be integrate into a progression system, meaning that the affordance would be 

unlocked through a gameplay achievement. Other possible affordances we have consider would utilize 

structure data that we have about the game in our model. For instance, a scrubber UI element could be 

use to filter the game in the space by their year of release, e.g., allow a user to explore only the space of 

game release through 1979. The same could be do for other feature such a release platform, developer, 

or publisher. A more ambitious new affordance would allow user to collaboratively label constellation of 

games, result in something that look like Figure 3. Here, we would need a mechanism for determine 

which label appear for whom, and where, but something like a friending system or voting system could 

potentially work. Whether these new addition (or one discuss in Section 7.8) be implement will 

depend on whether we (or new collaborators) can find the time and energy to return to development on this 

project. We would also like to note that we be open to idea for new affordances that reader may have. 

7.8 New Visualization Features 

We have also consider a number of possible new visualization features, which we may or may not implement 

in the future. While all game in the space be currently the same size, we could represent more important 

game use large stars—here, the open question be how to automatically determine the importance of a 

game. One possible solution be operationalizing importance a the length of a game’s Wikipedia article or 

a the number of article that link back to it article; of course, this would be prone to issue related to 

Wikipedia author practices, but it could potentially work well enough for our purposes. We have also 

consider the prospect of use color and hue semantically (e.g., to cue a game’s release platforms), but 

this could damage the game’s calm visual aesthetic. Beyond data about the game themselves, we could 

also visualize data about how user explore the space, since we be automatically collect coordinate 

at regular interval for all session with the application. For instance, we could capture the path that (a 

subset of) user have take through the space a vapor trail that be visualize in another user’s session. 

Beyond visualization, we be currently analyze this user data and be open to collaboration with anyone 

who would like to conduct their own analyses. 

7.9 Visualizing Other Domains 

Our method could easily be apply to other domains. We be currently conceive of a series of related 

visualizations, and we be interested in brainstorming with prospective collaborators. 

8 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This project be make possible in part by Institute of Museum and Library Services grant LG-06-13-0205-13. 

REFERENCES 

[1] Espen Aarseth, Solveig Marie Smedstad, and Lise Sunnan̊a. 2003. A multidimensional typology of games. In Proc. 

DIGRA. 

[2] Hervé Abdi. 2007. Metric multidimensional scale (MDS): Analyzing distance matrices. Encyclopedia of Measurement 

and Statistics (2007), 1–13. 

[3] Dominic Arsenault. 2009. Video game genre, evolution and innovation. Eludamos 3, 2 (2009), 149–176. 

Technical Report UCSC-SOE-17-14 



GameSpace: An Explorable Visualization of the Videogame Medium 17 

[4] Gabriella AB Barros, Antonios Liapis, and Julian Togelius. 2016. Playing with data: Procedural generation of adventure 

from open data. In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference of DiGRA and FDG. 

[5] Alexander Budanitsky and Graeme Hirst. 2006. Evaluating wordnet-based measure of lexical semantic relatedness. 

Computational Linguistics 32, 1 (2006). 

[6] Ricardo Cabello. 2010. Three.js. (2010). https://github.com/mrdoob/three.js. 

[7] Andrew Borg Cardona, Aske Walter Hansen, Julian Togelius, and Marie Gustafsson Friberger. 2014. Open trumps, a 

data game. In Proc. Foundations of Digital Games. 

[8] Samuel Coavoux, Manuel Boutet, and Vinciane Zabban. 2016. What We Know About Games: A Scientometric Approach 

to Game Studies in the 2000s. Games and Culture (2016). 

[9] Trevor F Cox and Michael AA Cox. 2000. Multidimensional scaling. CRC Press. 

[10] Scott C. Deerwester, Susan T Dumais, Thomas K. Landauer, George W. Furnas, and Richard A. Harshman. 1990. 

Indexing by latent semantic analysis. JASIS 41, 6 (1990). 

[11] Anders Drachen, Alessandro Canossa, and Georgios N Yannakakis. 2009. Player model use self-organization in 

Tomb Raider: Underworld. In Proc. Computational Intelligence and Games. IEEE, 1–8. 

[12] Glynn Edwards, Eric Kaltman, James Owen Ryan, Timothy Hong, and Noah Wardrip-Fruin. 2015. Augmented 

Exploration of Library Videogame Holdings by Techniques from Computational Linguistics. In Society of American 

Archivists Science, Technology, and Healthcare Roundtable. 

[13] M Seif El-Nasr, Anders Drachen, and Alessandro Canossa. 2013. Game analytics. New York, Sprint (2013). 

[14] Marie Gustafsson Friberger and Julian Togelius. 2012. Generating game content from open data. In Proc. Foundations 

of Digital Games. 

[15] M Gustafsson Friberger, Julian Togelius, A Borg Cardona, Michele Ermacora, Anders Mousten, M Møller Jensen, V 

Tanase, and Ulrik Brøndsted. 2013. Data games. In Proc. Procedural Content Generation. 

[16] Jacob Garbe, Aaron A Reed, Melanie Dickinson, Noah Wardrip-Fruin, and Michael Mateas. 2014. Author assistance 

visualization for Ice-Bound, a combinatorial narrative.. In Proc. Foundations of Digital Games. 

[17] Gene H Golub and Christian Reinsch. 1970. Singular value decomposition and least square solutions. Numer. Math. 

14, 5 (1970), 403–420. 

[18] Lindsay Grace. 2005. Game type and game genre. (2005). 

[19] Lindsay D Grace. 2014. A Linguistic Analysis of Mobile Games: Verbs and Nouns for Content Estimation. In Proc. 

Foundations of Digital Games. 

[20] Miguel Grinberg. 2014. Flask web development: develop web application with python. O’Reilly Media, Inc. 

[21] Britton Horn, Steve Dahlskog, Noor Shaker, Gillian Smith, and Julian Togelius. 2014. A comparative evaluation of 

procedural level generator in the Mario AI framework. In Proc. Foundations of Digital Games. 

[22] Magnus Johansson, Harko Verhagen, and Yubo Kou. 2015. I Am Being Watched By The Tribunal: Trust and Control in 

Multiplayer Online Battle Arena Games. (2015). 

[23] Thomas K Landauer and Susan T Dumais. 1997. A solution to Plato’s problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of 

acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge. Psychological Review 104, 2 (1997). 

[24] Jin Ha Lee, Sungsoo Ray Hong, Hyerim Cho, and Yea-Seul Kim. 2015. VIZMO Game Browser: Accessing Video Games 

by Visual Style and Mood. In Proc. CHI. 

[25] Janette Lehmann, Mounia Lalmas, Elad Yom-Tov, and Georges Dupret. 2012. Models of user engagement. In Proc. 

User Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization. Springer, 164–175. 

[26] Jonathan Lessard. 2014. Game Genres and High-Level Design Pattern Formations. In Proc. Foundations of Digital 

Games. 

[27] Jonathan Lessard and Pippin Barr. 2016. Game Studies. http://www.pippinbarr.com/games/press/sheet.php?p= 

Game Studies 

[28] Yun-En Liu, Erik Andersen, Richard Snider, Seth Cooper, and Zoran Popović. 2011. Feature-based projection for 

effective playtrace analysis. In Proc. Foundations of Digital Games. 

[29] Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. 2008. Visualizing data use t-SNE. Journal of Machine Learning 

Research 9, Nov (2008), 2579–2605. 

[30] Michael Meidl, Steven Lytinen, and Kevin Raison. 2014. Using game review to recommend games. Proc. Games and 

NLP (2014). 

[31] Edward Melcer, T Nguyen, Zhengxing Chen, Alessandro Canossa, Magy Seif El-Nasr, and Katherine Isbister. 2015. 

Games research today: Analyzing the academic landscape 2000-2014. Proc. Foundations of Digital Games (2015). 

[32] Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representation of word 

and phrase and their compositionality. In Proc. Neural Information Processing Systems. 3111–3119. 

Technical Report UCSC-SOE-17-14 

http://www.pippinbarr.com/games/press/sheet.php?p=Game_Studies 
http://www.pippinbarr.com/games/press/sheet.php?p=Game_Studies 


18 J. Ryan et al. 

[33] Truong-Huy D Nguyen, Magy Seif El-Nasr, and Alessandro Canossa. 2015. Glyph: Visualization Tool for Understanding 

Problem Solving Strategies in Puzzle Games.. In Proc. Foundations of Digital Games. 

[34] Serguei VS Pakhomov, Lynn Eberly, and David Knopman. 2016. Characterizing cognitive performance in a large 

longitudinal study of age with computerize semantic index of verbal fluency. Neuropsychologia 89 (2016), 42–56. 

[35] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, 

V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay. 2011. Scikit-learn: 

Machine Learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research 12 (2011), 2825–2830. 

[36] Eric T Peterson and Joseph Carrabis. 2008. Measuring the immeasurable: Visitor engagement. Web Analytics 

Demystified 14 (2008), 16. 

[37] Kevin Raison, Noriko Tomuro, Steve Lytinen, and José P Zagal. 2012. Extraction of User Opinions by Adjective-Context 

Co-clustering for Game Review Texts. In Proc. Advances in NLP. 

[38] Radim Řeh̊uřek, Petr Sojka, and others. 2010. Software framework for topic model with large corpora. (2010). 

[39] Sam T Roweis and Lawrence K Saul. 2000. Nonlinear dimensionality reduction by locally linear embedding. Science 

290, 5500 (2000), 2323–2326. 

[40] James Ryan, Eric Kaltman, Timothy Hong, Katherine Isbister, Michael Mateas, and Noah Wardrip-Fruin. 2016. GameNet 

and GameSage: Videogame Discovery a Design Insight. In Proc. DiGRA–FDG. 

[41] James Ryan and Sergiy Ravnyago. 2016. A Typology of Verbs Culled From 23,000 Videogame Walkthroughs. In Proc. 

DiGRA–FDG. 

[42] James Owen Ryan, Eric Kaltman, Andrew Max Fisher, Timothy Hong, Taylor Owen-Milner, Michael Mateas, and Noah 

Wardrip-Fruin. 2015. Large-Scale Interactive Visualizations of Nearly 12,000 Digital Games. In Proc. Foundations of 

Digital Games. 

[43] James Owen Ryan, Eric Kaltman, Timothy Hong, Michael Mateas, and Noah Wardrip-Fruin. 2015. People Tend to Like 

Related Games. In Proc. Foundations of Digital Games. 

[44] James Owen Ryan, Eric Kaltman, Michael Mateas, and Noah Wardrip-Fruin. 2015. Tools for videogame discovery built 

use latent semantic analysis. In Proc. Foundations of Digital Games. 

[45] James Owen Ryan, Eric Kaltman, Michael Mateas, and Noah Wardrip-Fruin. 2015. What We Talk About When We 

Talk About Games: Bottom-up Game Studies Using Natural Language Processing. In Proc. Foundations of Digital 

Games. 

[46] Edward Segel and Jeffrey Heer. 2010. Narrative visualization: Telling story with data. IEEE Transactions on 

Visualization and Computer Graphics 16, 6 (2010), 1139–1148. 

[47] Emily Short. 2016. Visualizing Procgen Text. https://emshort.blog/2016/06/13/visualizing-procgen-text/. (13 June 

2016). 

[48] Adam M Smith and Michael Mateas. 2011. Answer set program for procedural content generation: A design space 

approach. IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games 3, 3 (2011), 187–200. 

[49] Björn Str̊åat and Harko Verhagen. 2015. Top Versus Bottom: Game Evaluation from an Expert or Player Perspective.. 

In Proc. Foundations of Digital Games. 

[50] Bret Victor. 2011. Explorable explanations. https://emshort.blog/2016/06/13/visualizing-procgen-text/. (10 March 

2011). 

[51] Martin Wattenberg, Fernanda Viégas, and Ian Johnson. 2016. How to Use t-SNE Effectively. Distill (2016). 

http://distill.pub/2016/misread-tsne. 

[52] José P Zagal and Noriko Tomuro. 2010. The aesthetic of gameplay: A lexical approach. In Proc. Academic MindTrek 

Conference. 

[53] José Pablo Zagal and Noriko Tomuro. 2013. Cultural difference in game appreciation: A study of player game reviews.. 

In Proc. Foundations of Digital Games. 

[54] José P Zagal, Noriko Tomuro, and Andriy Shepitsen. 2011. Natural language processing in game study research: An 

overview. Simulation & Gaming (2011). 

[55] Miaoqi Zhu, Fan Zhao, Xiaowen Fang, and Christopher Moser. 2016. Developing Playability Heuristics Based on Nouns 

and Adjectives from Online Game Reviews. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction (2016), 1–13. 

Technical Report UCSC-SOE-17-14 

View publication statsView publication stats 

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318505669 

Abstract 
1 Introduction 
2 Design Goals 
3 Related Work 
4 Method 
4.1 Corpus Extraction 
4.2 Preprocessing 
4.3 Latent Semantic Analysis 
4.4 Multidimensional Scaling 
4.5 App Implementation 
4.6 Recurring Updates 

5 GameSpace 
5.1 Affordances 

6 Validation and Evaluation 
6.1 Selecting a Space 
6.2 Assessing Engagement 

7 Discussion and Future Work 
7.1 Similarity versus Relatedness 
7.2 Game Genre a a Continuous Space 
7.3 Videogame Embeddings 
7.4 A Living Visualization 
7.5 Making Data Playable 
7.6 Visualizing Physical Collections 
7.7 New Affordances 
7.8 New Visualization Features 
7.9 Visualizing Other Domains 

8 Acknowledgments 
References 

