












































5419/16 AV/NT/sr 
DGD 2 EN 





Council of the 
European Union 







Brussels, 6 April 2016 
(OR. en) 


5419/16 




DATAPROTECT 2 
JAI 38 
MI 25 
DIGIT 21 
DAPIX 9 
FREMP 4 
CODEC 52 





Interinstitutional File: 
2012/0011 (COD) 





LEGISLATIVE ACTS AND OTHER INSTRUMENTS 
Subject: Position of the Council at first reading with a view to the adoption of a 

REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE 
COUNCIL on the protection of natural person with regard to the 
processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and 
repeal Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation) 









5419/16 AV/NT/sr 1 
DGD 2 EN 


REGULATION (EU) 2016/… 

OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL 

of 

on the protection of natural person 

with regard to the processing of personal data 

and on the free movement of such data, 

and repeal Directive 95/46/EC 

(General Data Protection Regulation) 

(Text with EEA relevance) 

THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, 

Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 16 

thereof, 

Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, 

After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments, 

Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee1, 

Having regard to the opinion of the Committee of the Regions2, 

Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure3, 


1 OJ C 229, 31.7.2012, p. 90. 
2 OJ C 391, 18.12.2012, p. 127. 
3 Position of the European Parliament of 12 March 2014 (OJ …) and position of the Council 

of …. Position of the European Parliament of ... and decision of the Council of .... 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 2 
DGD 2 EN 


Whereas: 

(1) The protection of natural person in relation to the processing of personal data be a 

fundamental right. Article 8(1) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European 

Union (the 'Charter') and Article 16(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European 

Union (TFEU) provide that everyone have the right to the protection of personal data 

concern him or her. 

(2) The principle of, and rule on the protection of natural person with regard to the 

processing of their personal data should, whatever their nationality or residence, respect 

their fundamental right and freedoms, in particular their right to the protection of personal 

data. This Regulation be intend to contribute to the accomplishment of an area of 

freedom, security and justice and of an economic union, to economic and social progress, 

to the strengthen and the convergence of the economy within the internal market, and 

to the well-being of natural persons. 

(3) Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council1 seek to harmonise the 

protection of fundamental right and freedom of natural person in respect of processing 

activity and to ensure the free flow of personal data between Member States. 


1 Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on 

the protection of individual with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free 
movement of such data (OJ L 281, 23.11.1995, p. 31). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 3 
DGD 2 EN 


(4) The processing of personal data should be design to serve mankind. The right to the 

protection of personal data be not an absolute right; it must be consider in relation to it 

function in society and be balance against other fundamental rights, in accordance with 

the principle of proportionality. This Regulation respect all fundamental right and 

observes the freedom and principle recognise in the Charter a enshrine in the Treaties, 

in particular the respect for private and family life, home and communications,the 

protection of personal data, freedom of thought, conscience and religion, freedom of 

expression and information, freedom to conduct a business, the right to an effective 

remedy and to a fair trial, and cultural, religious and linguistic diversity. 

(5) The economic and social integration result from the function of the internal market 

have lead to a substantial increase in cross-border flow of personal data. The exchange of 

personal data between public and private actors, include natural persons, association 

and undertaking across the Union have increased. National authority in the 

Member States be be call upon by Union law to cooperate and exchange personal 

data so a to be able to perform their duty or carry out task on behalf of an authority in 

another Member State. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 4 
DGD 2 EN 


(6) Rapid technological development and globalisation have brought new challenge for the 

protection of personal data. The scale of the collection and share of personal data have 

increase significantly. Technology allows both private company and public authority 

to make use of personal data on an unprecedented scale in order to pursue their activities. 

Natural person increasingly make personal information available publicly and globally. 

Technology have transform both the economy and social life, and should further facilitate 

the free flow of personal data within the Union and the transfer to third country and 

international organisations, while ensure a high level of the protection of personal data. 

(7) Those development require a strong and more coherent data protection framework in the 

Union, back by strong enforcement, give the importance of create the trust that will 

allow the digital economy to develop across the internal market. Natural person should 

have control of their own personal data. Legal and practical certainty for natural persons, 

economic operator and public authority should be enhanced. 

(8) Where this Regulation provide for specification or restriction of it rule by 

Member State law, Member States may, a far a necessary for coherence and for make 

the national provision comprehensible to the person to whom they apply, incorporate 

element of this Regulation into their national law. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 5 
DGD 2 EN 


(9) The objective and principle of Directive 95/46/EC remain sound, but it have not prevent 

fragmentation in the implementation of data protection across the Union, legal uncertainty 

or a widespread public perception that there be significant risk to the protection of natural 

persons, in particular with regard to online activity. Differences in the level of protection of 

the right and freedom of natural persons, in particular the right to the protection of 

personal data, with regard to the processing of personal data in the Member States may 

prevent the free flow of personal data throughout the Union. Those difference may 

therefore constitute an obstacle to the pursuit of economic activity at the level of the 

Union, distort competition and impede authority in the discharge of their responsibility 

under Union law. Such a difference in level of protection be due to the existence of 

difference in the implementation and application of Directive 95/46/EC. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 6 
DGD 2 EN 


(10) In order to ensure a consistent and high level of protection of natural person and to 

remove the obstacle to flow of personal data within the Union, the level of protection of 

the right and freedom of natural person with regard to the processing of such data 

should be equivalent in all Member States. Consistent and homogenous application of the 

rule for the protection of the fundamental right and freedom of natural person with 

regard to the processing of personal data should be ensure throughout the Union. 

Regarding the processing of personal data for compliance with a legal obligation, for the 

performance of a task carry out in the public interest or in the exercise of official 

authority vested in the controller, Member States should be allow to maintain or 

introduce national provision to further specify the application of the rule of this 

Regulation. In conjunction with the general and horizontal law on data protection 

implement Directive 95/46/EC, Member States have several sector-specific law in 

area that need more specific provisions. This Regulation also provide a margin of 

manoeuvre for Member States to specify it rules, include for the processing of special 

category of personal data ('sensitive data'). To that extent, this Regulation do not 

exclude Member State law that set out the circumstance for specific processing 

situations, include determine more precisely the condition under which the processing 

of personal data be lawful. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 7 
DGD 2 EN 


(11) Effective protection of personal data throughout the Union require the strengthen and 

set out in detail of the right of data subject and the obligation of those who process 

and determine the processing of personal data, a well a equivalent power for monitoring 

and ensure compliance with the rule for the protection of personal data and equivalent 

sanction for infringement in the Member States. 

(12) Article 16(2) TFEU mandate the European Parliament and the Council to lay down the 

rule relate to the protection of natural person with regard to the processing of personal 

data and the rule relate to the free movement of personal data. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 8 
DGD 2 EN 


(13) In order to ensure a consistent level of protection for natural person throughout the Union 

and to prevent divergence hamper the free movement of personal data within the 

internal market, a Regulation be necessary to provide legal certainty and transparency for 

economic operators, include micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, and to provide 

natural person in all Member States with the same level of legally enforceable right and 

obligation and responsibility for controller and processors, to ensure consistent 

monitoring of the processing of personal data, and equivalent sanction in all 

Member States a well a effective cooperation between the supervisory authority of 

different Member States. The proper function of the internal market require that the 

free movement of personal data within the Union be not restrict or prohibit for reason 

connect with the protection of natural person with regard to the processing of personal 

data. To take account of the specific situation of micro, small and medium-sized 

enterprises, this Regulation include a derogation for organisation with few than 250 

employee with regard to record-keeping. In addition, the Union institution and bodies, 

and Member States and their supervisory authorities, be encourage to take account of the 

specific need of micro, small and medium-sized enterprise in the application of this 

Regulation. The notion of micro, small and medium-sized enterprise should draw from 

Article 2 of the Annex to Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC1. 


1 Commission Recommendation of 6 May 2003 concern the definition of micro, small and 

medium-sized enterprise (C(2003) 1422) (OJ L 124, 20.5.2003, p. 36). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 9 
DGD 2 EN 


(14) The protection afford by this Regulation should apply to natural persons, whatever their 

nationality or place of residence, in relation to the processing of their personal data. This 

Regulation do not cover the processing of personal data which concern legal person 

and in particular undertaking establish a legal persons, include the name and the 

form of the legal person and the contact detail of the legal person. 

(15) In order to prevent create a serious risk of circumvention, the protection of natural 

person should be technologically neutral and should not depend on the technique used. 

The protection of natural person should apply to the processing of personal data by 

automate means, a well a to manual processing, if the personal data be contain or be 

intend to be contain in a filing system. Files or set of files, a well a their cover 

pages, which be not structure accord to specific criterion should not fall within the 

scope of this Regulation. 

(16) This Regulation do not apply to issue of protection of fundamental right and freedom 

or the free flow of personal data related to activity which fall outside the scope of Union 

law, such a activity concern national security. This Regulation do not apply to the 

processing of personal data by the Member States when carry out activity in relation 

to the common foreign and security policy of the Union. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 10 
DGD 2 EN 


(17) Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council1 applies to the 

processing of personal data by the Union institutions, bodies, office and agencies. 

Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and other Union legal act applicable to such processing of 

personal data should be adapt to the principle and rule establish in this Regulation 

and apply in the light of this Regulation. In order to provide a strong and coherent data 

protection framework in the Union, the necessary adaptation of Regulation (EC) 

No 45/2001 should follow after the adoption of this Regulation, in order to allow 

application at the same time a this Regulation. 

(18) This Regulation do not apply to the processing of personal data by a natural person in the 

course of a purely personal or household activity and thus with no connection to a 

professional or commercial activity. Personal or household activity could include 

correspondence and the hold of addresses, or social networking and online activity 

undertaken within the context of such activities. However, this Regulation applies to 

controller or processor which provide the mean for processing personal data for such 

personal or household activities. 


1 Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 

18 December 2000 on the protection of individual with regard to the processing of personal 
data by the Community institution and body and on the free movement of such data 
(OJ L 8, 12.1.2001, p. 1). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 11 
DGD 2 EN 


(19) The protection of natural person with regard to the processing of personal data by 

competent authority for the purpose of the prevention, investigation, detection or 

prosecution of criminal offence or the execution of criminal penalties, include the 

safeguard against and the prevention of threat to public security and the free movement 

of such data, be the subject of a specific Union legal act. This Regulation should not, 

therefore, apply to processing activity for those purposes. However, personal data 

process by public authority under this Regulation should, when use for those 

purposes, be govern by a more specific Union legal act, namely Directive (EU) 2016/… 

of the European Parliament and of the Council1*. Member States may entrust competent 

authority within the meaning of Directive (EU) 2016/…** with task which be not 

necessarily carry out for the purpose of the prevention, investigation, detection or 

prosecution of criminal offence or the execution of criminal penalties, include the 

safeguard against and prevention of threat to public security, so that the processing of 

personal data for those other purposes, in so far a it be within the scope of Union law, fall 

within the scope of this Regulation. 


1 Directive (EU) 2016/… of the European Parliament and of the Council on the protection of 

natural person with regard to the processing of personal data by competent authority for 
the purpose of prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offence or 
the execution of criminal penalties, and the free movement of such data and repeal 
Council Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA (OJ L …). 

* OJ: Please insert the number of the Directive in doc. st 5418/16 and the publication 
reference. 

** OJ: Please insert the number of the Directive in doc. st 5418/16. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 12 
DGD 2 EN 


With regard to the processing of personal data by those competent authority for purpose 

fall within scope of this Regulation, Member States should be able to maintain or 

introduce more specific provision to adapt the application of the rule of this Regulation. 

Such provision may determine more precisely specific requirement for the processing of 

personal data by those competent authority for those other purposes, take into account 

the constitutional, organisational and administrative structure of the respective Member 

State. When the processing of personal data by private body fall within the scope of this 

Regulation, this Regulation should provide for the possibility for Member States under 

specific condition to restrict by law certain obligation and right when such a restriction 

constitutes a necessary and proportionate measure in a democratic society to safeguard 

specific important interest include public security and the prevention, investigation, 

detection or prosecution of criminal offence or the execution of criminal penalties, 

include the safeguard against and the prevention of threat to public security. This be 

relevant for instance in the framework of anti-money laundering or the activity of 

forensic laboratories. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 13 
DGD 2 EN 


(20) While this Regulation applies, inter alia, to the activity of court and other judicial 

authorities, Union or Member State law could specify the processing operation and 

processing procedure in relation to the processing of personal data by court and other 

judicial authorities. The competence of the supervisory authority should not cover the 

processing of personal data when court be act in their judicial capacity, in order to 

safeguard the independence of the judiciary in the performance of it judicial tasks, 

include decision-making. It should be possible to entrust supervision of such data 

processing operation to specific body within the judicial system of the Member State, 

which should, in particular ensure compliance with the rule of this Regulation, enhance 

awareness among member of the judiciary of their obligation under this Regulation and 

handle complaint in relation to such data processing operations. 

(21) This Regulation be without prejudice to the application of Directive 2000/31/EC of the 

European Parliament and of the Council1, in particular of the liability rule of intermediary 

service provider in Articles 12 to 15 of that Directive. That Directive seek to contribute 

to the proper function of the internal market by ensure the free movement of 

information society service between Member States. 


1 Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2000 on 

certain legal aspect of information society services, in particular electronic commerce, in 
the Internal Market ('Directive on electronic commerce') (OJ L 178, 17.7.2000, p. 1). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 14 
DGD 2 EN 


(22) Any processing of personal data in the context of the activity of an establishment of a 

controller or a processor in the Union should be carry out in accordance with this 

Regulation, regardless of whether the processing itself take place within the Union. 

Establishment implies the effective and real exercise of activity through stable 

arrangements. The legal form of such arrangements, whether through a branch or a 

subsidiary with a legal personality, be not the determine factor in that respect. 

(23) In order to ensure that natural person be not deprive of the protection to which they be 

entitle under this Regulation, the processing of personal data of data subject who be in 

the Union by a controller or a processor not establish in the Union should be subject to 

this Regulation where the processing activity be related to offering good or service to 

such data subject irrespective of whether connect to a payment. In order to determine 

whether such a controller or processor be offering good or service to data subject who 

be in the Union, it should be ascertain whether it be apparent that the controller or 

processor envisages offering service to data subject in one or more Member States in the 

Union. Whereas the mere accessibility of the controller's, processor's or an intermediary's 

website in the Union, of an email address or of other contact details, or the use of a 

language generally use in the third country where the controller be established, be 

insufficient to ascertain such intention, factor such a the use of a language or a currency 

generally use in one or more Member States with the possibility of order good and 

service in that other language, or the mention of customer or user who be in the 

Union, may make it apparent that the controller envisages offering good or service to 

data subject in the Union. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 15 
DGD 2 EN 


(24) The processing of personal data of data subject who be in the Union by a controller or 

processor not establish in the Union should also be subject to this Regulation when it be 

related to the monitoring of the behaviour of such data subject in so far a their behaviour 

take place within the Union. In order to determine whether a processing activity can be 

consider to monitor the behaviour of data subjects, it should be ascertain whether 

natural person be tracked on the internet include potential subsequent use of personal 

data processing technique which consist of profile a natural person, particularly in order 

to take decision concern her or him or for analyse or predict her or his personal 

preferences, behaviour and attitudes. 

(25) Where Member State law applies by virtue of public international law, this Regulation 

should also apply to a controller not establish in the Union, such a in a Member State's 

diplomatic mission or consular post. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 16 
DGD 2 EN 


(26) The principle of data protection should apply to any information concern an identify 

or identifiable natural person. Personal data which have undergone pseudonymisation, 

which could be attribute to a natural person by the use of additional information should be 

consider to be information on an identifiable natural person. To determine whether a 

natural person be identifiable, account should be take of all the mean reasonably likely to 

be used, such a single out, either by the controller or by another person to identify the 

natural person directly or indirectly. To ascertain whether mean be reasonably likely to 

be use to identify the natural person, account should be take of all objective factors, such 

a the cost of and the amount of time require for identification, take into consideration 

the available technology at the time of the processing and technological developments. The 

principle of data protection should therefore not apply to anonymous information, namely 

information which do not relate to an identify or identifiable natural person or to 

personal data render anonymous in such a manner that the data subject be not or no 

longer identifiable. This Regulation do not therefore concern the processing of such 

anonymous information, include for statistical or research purposes. 

(27) This Regulation do not apply to the personal data of decease persons. Member States 

may provide for rule regard the processing of personal data of decease persons. 

(28) The application of pseudonymisation to personal data can reduce the risk to the data 

subject concerned and help controller and processor to meet their data-protection 

obligations. The explicit introduction of 'pseudonymisation' in this Regulation be not 

intend to preclude any other measure of data protection. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 17 
DGD 2 EN 


(29) In order to create incentive to apply pseudonymisation when processing personal data, 

measure of pseudonymisation should, whilst allow general analysis, be possible within 

the same controller when that controller have take technical and organisational measure 

necessary to ensure, for the processing concerned, that this Regulation be implemented, and 

that additional information for attribute the personal data to a specific data subject be kept 

separately. The controller processing the personal data should indicate the authorise 

person within the same controller. 

(30) Natural person may be associate with online identifier provide by their devices, 

applications, tool and protocols, such a internet protocol addresses, cookie identifier or 

other identifier such a radio frequency identification tags. This may leave trace which, 

in particular when combine with unique identifier and other information receive by the 

servers, may be use to create profile of the natural person and identify them. 

(31) Public authority to which personal data be disclose in accordance with a legal 

obligation for the exercise of their official mission, such a tax and custom authorities, 

financial investigation units, independent administrative authorities, or financial market 

authority responsible for the regulation and supervision of security market should not 

be regard a recipient if they receive personal data which be necessary to carry out a 

particular inquiry in the general interest, in accordance with Union or Member State law. 

The request for disclosure sent by the public authority should always be in writing, 

reason and occasional and should not concern the entirety of a filing system or lead to 

the interconnection of filing systems. The processing of personal data by those public 

authority should comply with the applicable data-protection rule accord to the 

purpose of the processing. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 18 
DGD 2 EN 


(32) Consent should be give by a clear affirmative act establish a freely given, specific, 

inform and unambiguous indication of the data subject's agreement to the processing of 

personal data relate to him or her, such a by a write statement, include by electronic 

means, or an oral statement. This could include tick a box when visit an internet 

website, choose technical setting for information society service or another statement 

or conduct which clearly indicates in this context the data subject's acceptance of the 

propose processing of his or her personal data. Silence, pre-ticked box or inactivity 

should not therefore constitute consent. Consent should cover all processing activity 

carry out for the same purpose or purposes. When the processing have multiple purposes, 

consent should be give for all of them. If the data subject's consent be to be give 

follow a request by electronic means, the request must be clear, concise and not 

unnecessarily disruptive to the use of the service for which it be provided. 

(33) It be often not possible to fully identify the purpose of personal data processing for 

scientific research purpose at the time of data collection. Therefore, data subject should 

be allow to give their consent to certain area of scientific research when in keep with 

recognise ethical standard for scientific research. Data subject should have the 

opportunity to give their consent only to certain area of research or part of research 

project to the extent allow by the intend purpose. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 19 
DGD 2 EN 


(34) Genetic data should be define a personal data relate to the inherit or acquire genetic 

characteristic of a natural person which result from the analysis of a biological sample 

from the natural person in question, in particular chromosomal, deoxyribonucleic acid 

(DNA) or ribonucleic acid (RNA) analysis, or from the analysis of another element 

enable equivalent information to be obtained. 

(35) Personal data concern health should include all data pertain to the health status of a 

data subject which reveal information relate to the past, current or future physical or 

mental health status of the data subject. This include information about the natural person 

collect in the course of the registration for, or the provision of, health care service a 

refer to in Directive 2011/24/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council1 to that 

natural person; a number, symbol or particular assign to a natural person to uniquely 

identify the natural person for health purposes; information derive from the test or 

examination of a body part or bodily substance, include from genetic data and biological 

samples; and any information on, for example, a disease, disability, disease risk, medical 

history, clinical treatment or the physiological or biomedical state of the data subject 

independent of it source, for example from a physician or other health professional, a 

hospital, a medical device or an in vitro diagnostic test. 


1 Directive 2011/24/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2011 on 

the application of patients' right in cross-border healthcare (OJ L 88, 4.4.2011, p. 45). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 20 
DGD 2 EN 


(36) The main establishment of a controller in the Union should be the place of it central 

administration in the Union, unless the decision on the purpose and mean of the 

processing of personal data be take in another establishment of the controller in the 

Union, in which case that other establishment should be consider to be the main 

establishment. The main establishment of a controller in the Union should be determine 

accord to objective criterion and should imply the effective and real exercise of 

management activity determine the main decision a to the purpose and mean of 

processing through stable arrangements. That criterion should not depend on whether the 

processing of personal data be carry out at that location. The presence and use of technical 

mean and technology for processing personal data or processing activity do not, in 

themselves, constitute a main establishment and be therefore not determine criterion for a 

main establishment. The main establishment of the processor should be the place of it 

central administration in the Union or, if it have no central administration in the Union, the 

place where the main processing activity take place in the Union. In case involve both 

the controller and the processor, the competent lead supervisory authority should remain 

the supervisory authority of the Member State where the controller have it main 

establishment, but the supervisory authority of the processor should be consider to be a 

supervisory authority concerned and that supervisory authority should participate in the 

cooperation procedure provide for by this Regulation. In any case, the supervisory 

authority of the Member State or Member States where the processor have one or more 

establishment should not be consider to be supervisory authority concerned where the 

draft decision concern only the controller. Where the processing be carry out by a group 

of undertakings, the main establishment of the control undertaking should be 

consider to be the main establishment of the group of undertakings, except where the 

purpose and mean of processing be determine by another undertaking. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 21 
DGD 2 EN 


(37) A group of undertaking should cover a control undertaking and it control 

undertakings, whereby the control undertaking should be the undertaking which can 

exert a dominant influence over the other undertaking by virtue, for example, of 

ownership, financial participation or the rule which govern it or the power to have 

personal data protection rule implemented. An undertaking which control the processing 

of personal data in undertaking affiliate to it should be regarded, together with those 

undertakings, a a group of undertakings. 

(38) Children merit specific protection with regard to their personal data, a they may be less 

aware of the risks, consequence and safeguard concerned and their right in relation to 

the processing of personal data. Such specific protection should, in particular, apply to the 

use of personal data of child for the purpose of marketing or create personality or 

user profile and the collection of personal data with regard to child when use 

service offer directly to a child. The consent of the holder of parental responsibility 

should not be necessary in the context of preventive or counsel service offer 

directly to a child. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 22 
DGD 2 EN 


(39) Any processing of personal data should be lawful and fair. It should be transparent to 

natural person that personal data concern them be collected, used, consult or 

otherwise process and to what extent the personal data be or will be processed. The 

principle of transparency require that any information and communication relate to the 

processing of those personal data be easily accessible and easy to understand, and that 

clear and plain language be used. That principle concerns, in particular, information to the 

data subject on the identity of the controller and the purpose of the processing and further 

information to ensure fair and transparent processing in respect of the natural person 

concerned and their right to obtain confirmation and communication of personal data 

concern them which be be processed. Natural person should be make aware of 

risks, rules, safeguard and right in relation to the processing of personal data and how to 

exercise their right in relation to such processing. In particular, the specific purpose for 

which personal data be process should be explicit and legitimate and determine at the 

time of the collection of the personal data. The personal data should be adequate, relevant 

and limited to what be necessary for the purpose for which they be processed. This 

requires, in particular, ensure that the period for which the personal data be store be 

limited to a strict minimum. Personal data should be process only if the purpose of the 

processing could not reasonably be fulfil by other means. In order to ensure that the 

personal data be not kept longer than necessary, time limit should be establish by the 

controller for erasure or for a periodic review. Every reasonable step should be take to 

ensure that personal data which be inaccurate be rectify or deleted. Personal data should 

be process in a manner that ensures appropriate security and confidentiality of the 

personal data, include for prevent unauthorised access to or use of personal data and 

the equipment use for the processing. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 23 
DGD 2 EN 


(40) In order for processing to be lawful, personal data should be process on the basis of the 

consent of the data subject concerned or some other legitimate basis, laid down by law, 

either in this Regulation or in other Union or Member State law a refer to in this 

Regulation, include the necessity for compliance with the legal obligation to which the 

controller be subject or the necessity for the performance of a contract to which the data 

subject be party or in order to take step at the request of the data subject prior to enter 

into a contract. 

(41) Where this Regulation refers to a legal basis or a legislative measure , this do not 

necessarily require a legislative act adopt by a parliament, without prejudice to 

requirement pursuant to the constitutional order of the Member State concerned. 

However, such a legal basis or legislative measure should be clear and precise and it 

application should be foreseeable to person subject to it, in accordance with the case-law 

of the Court of Justice of the European Union ('Court of Justice') and the European Court 

of Human Rights. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 24 
DGD 2 EN 


(42) Where processing be base on the data subject's consent, the controller should be able to 

demonstrate that the data subject have give consent to the processing operation. In 

particular in the context of a write declaration on another matter, safeguard should 

ensure that the data subject be aware of the fact that and the extent to which consent be 

given. In accordance with Council Directive 93/13/EEC1 a declaration of consent 

pre-formulated by the controller should be provide in an intelligible and easily accessible 

form, use clear and plain language and it should not contain unfair terms. For consent to 

be informed, the data subject should be aware at least of the identity of the controller and 

the purpose of the processing for which the personal data be intended. Consent should 

not be regard a freely give if the data subject have no genuine or free choice or be unable 

to refuse or withdraw consent without detriment. 

(43) In order to ensure that consent be freely given, consent should not provide a valid legal 

ground for the processing of personal data in a specific case where there be a clear 

imbalance between the data subject and the controller, in particular where the controller be 

a public authority and it be therefore unlikely that consent be freely give in all the 

circumstance of that specific situation. Consent be presume not to be freely give if it 

do not allow separate consent to be give to different personal data processing operation 

despite it be appropriate in the individual case, or if the performance of a contract, 

include the provision of a service, be dependent on the consent despite such consent not 

be necessary for such performance. 


1 Council Directive 93/13/EEC of 5 April 1993 on unfair term in consumer contract 

(OJ L 95, 21.4.1993, p. 29). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 25 
DGD 2 EN 


(44) Processing should be lawful where it be necessary in the context of a contract or the 

intention to enter into a contract. 

(45) Where processing be carry out in accordance with a legal obligation to which the 

controller be subject or where processing be necessary for the performance of a task carry 

out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority, the processing should have 

a basis in Union or Member State law. This Regulation do not require a specific law for 

each individual processing. A law a a basis for several processing operation base on a 

legal obligation to which the controller be subject or where processing be necessary for the 

performance of a task carry out in the public interest or in the exercise of an official 

authority may be sufficient. It should also be for Union or Member State law to determine 

the purpose of processing. Furthermore, that law could specify the general condition of 

this Regulation govern the lawfulness of personal data processing, establish 

specification for determine the controller, the type of personal data which be subject to 

the processing, the data subject concerned, the entity to which the personal data may be 

disclosed, the purpose limitations, the storage period and other measure to ensure lawful 

and fair processing. It should also be for Union or Member State law to determine whether 

the controller perform a task carry out in the public interest or in the exercise of 

official authority should be a public authority or another natural or legal person govern 

by public law, or, where it be in the public interest to do so, include for health purpose 

such a public health and social protection and the management of health care services, by 

private law, such a a professional association. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 26 
DGD 2 EN 


(46) The processing of personal data should also be regard to be lawful where it be necessary 

to protect an interest which be essential for the life of the data subject or that of another 

natural person. Processing of personal data base on the vital interest of another natural 

person should in principle take place only where the processing cannot be manifestly base 

on another legal basis. Some type of processing may serve both important ground of 

public interest and the vital interest of the data subject a for instance when processing be 

necessary for humanitarian purposes, include for monitoring epidemic and their spread 

or in situation of humanitarian emergencies, in particular in situation of natural and 

man-made disasters. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 27 
DGD 2 EN 


(47) The legitimate interest of a controller, include those of a controller to which the 

personal data may be disclosed, or of a third party, may provide a legal basis for 

processing, provide that the interest or the fundamental right and freedom of the data 

subject be not overriding, take into consideration the reasonable expectation of data 

subject base on their relationship with the controller. Such legitimate interest could exist 

for example where there be a relevant and appropriate relationship between the data subject 

and the controller in situation such a where the data subject be a client or in the service of 

the controller. At any rate the existence of a legitimate interest would need careful 

assessment include whether a data subject can reasonably expect at the time and in the 

context of the collection of the personal data that processing for that purpose may take 

place. The interest and fundamental right of the data subject could in particular override 

the interest of the data controller where personal data be process in circumstance where 

data subject do not reasonably expect further processing. Given that it be for the legislator 

to provide by law for the legal basis for public authority to process personal data, that 

legal basis should not apply to the processing by public authority in the performance of 

their tasks. The processing of personal data strictly necessary for the purpose of 

prevent fraud also constitutes a legitimate interest of the data controller concerned. The 

processing of personal data for direct marketing purpose may be regard a carry out 

for a legitimate interest. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 28 
DGD 2 EN 


(48) Controllers that be part of a group of undertaking or institution affiliate to a central 

body may have a legitimate interest in transmit personal data within the group of 

undertaking for internal administrative purposes, include the processing of clients' or 

employees' personal data. The general principle for the transfer of personal data, within a 

group of undertakings, to an undertaking locate in a third country remain unaffected. 

(49) The processing of personal data to the extent strictly necessary and proportionate for the 

purpose of ensure network and information security, i.e. the ability of a network or an 

information system to resist, at a give level of confidence, accidental event or unlawful 

or malicious action that compromise the availability, authenticity, integrity and 

confidentiality of store or transmit personal data, and the security of the related 

service offer by, or accessible via, those network and systems, by public authorities, by 

computer emergency response team (CERTs), computer security incident response team 

(CSIRTs), by provider of electronic communication network and service and by 

provider of security technology and services, constitutes a legitimate interest of the data 

controller concerned. This could, for example, include prevent unauthorised access to 

electronic communication network and malicious code distribution and stop 'denial 

of service' attack and damage to computer and electronic communication systems. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 29 
DGD 2 EN 


(50) The processing of personal data for purpose other than those for which the personal data 

be initially collect should be allow only where the processing be compatible with the 

purpose for which the personal data be initially collected. In such a case, no legal basis 

separate from that which allow the collection of the personal data be required. If the 

processing be necessary for the performance of a task carry out in the public interest or in 

the exercise of official authority vested in the controller, Union or Member State law may 

determine and specify the task and purpose for which the further processing should be 

regard a compatible and lawful. Further processing for archive purpose in the public 

interest, scientific or historical research purpose or statistical purpose should be 

consider to be compatible lawful processing operations. The legal basis provide by 

Union or Member State law for the processing of personal data may also provide a legal 

basis for further processing. In order to ascertain whether a purpose of further processing be 

compatible with the purpose for which the personal data be initially collected, the 

controller, after have met all the requirement for the lawfulness of the original 

processing, should take into account, inter alia: any link between those purpose and the 

purpose of the intend further processing; the context in which the personal data have 

be collected, in particular the reasonable expectation of data subject base on their 

relationship with the controller a to their further use; the nature of the personal data; the 

consequence of the intend further processing for data subjects; and the existence of 

appropriate safeguard in both the original and intend further processing operations. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 30 
DGD 2 EN 


Where the data subject have give consent or the processing be base on Union or Member 

State law which constitutes a necessary and proportionate measure in a democratic society 

to safeguard, in particular, important objective of general public interest, the controller 

should be allow to further process the personal data irrespective of the compatibility of 

the purposes. In any case, the application of the principle set out in this Regulation and in 

particular the information of the data subject on those other purpose and on his or her 

right include the right to object, should be ensured. Indicating possible criminal act or 

threat to public security by the controller and transmit the relevant personal data in 

individual case or in several case relate to the same criminal act or threat to public 

security to a competent authority should be regard a be in the legitimate interest 

pursue by the controller. However, such transmission in the legitimate interest of the 

controller or further processing of personal data should be prohibit if the processing be 

not compatible with a legal, professional or other binding obligation of secrecy. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 31 
DGD 2 EN 


(51) Personal data which are, by their nature, particularly sensitive in relation to fundamental 

right and freedom merit specific protection a the context of their processing could create 

significant risk to the fundamental right and freedoms. Those personal data should 

include personal data reveal racial or ethnic origin, whereby the use of the term 'racial 

origin' in this Regulation do not imply an acceptance by the Union of theory which 

attempt to determine the existence of separate human races. The processing of photograph 

should not systematically be consider to be processing of special category of personal 

data a they be cover by the definition of biometric data only when process through a 

specific technical mean allow the unique identification or authentication of a natural 

person. Such personal data should not be processed, unless processing be allow in 

specific case set out in this Regulation, take into account that Member States law may 

lay down specific provision on data protection in order to adapt the application of the 

rule of this Regulation for compliance with a legal obligation or for the performance of a 

task carry out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested in the 

controller. In addition to the specific requirement for such processing, the general 

principle and other rule of this Regulation should apply, in particular a regard the 

condition for lawful processing. Derogations from the general prohibition for processing 

such special category of personal data should be explicitly provided, inter alia, where the 

data subject give his or her explicit consent or in respect of specific need in particular 

where the processing be carry out in the course of legitimate activity by certain 

association or foundation the purpose of which be to permit the exercise of fundamental 

freedoms. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 32 
DGD 2 EN 


(52) Derogating from the prohibition on processing special category of personal data should 

also be allow when provide for in Union or Member State law and subject to suitable 

safeguards, so a to protect personal data and other fundamental rights, where it be in the 

public interest to do so, in particular processing personal data in the field of employment 

law, social protection law include pension and for health security, monitoring and alert 

purposes, the prevention or control of communicable disease and other serious threat to 

health. Such a derogation may be make for health purposes, include public health and the 

management of health-care services, especially in order to ensure the quality and 

cost-effectiveness of the procedure use for settle claim for benefit and service in the 

health insurance system, or for archive purpose in the public interest, scientific or 

historical research purpose or statistical purposes. A derogation should also allow the 

processing of such personal data where necessary for the establishment, exercise or 

defence of legal claims, whether in court proceeding or in an administrative or 

out-of-court procedure. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 33 
DGD 2 EN 


(53) Special category of personal data which merit high protection should be process for 

health-related purpose only where necessary to achieve those purpose for the benefit of 

natural person and society a a whole, in particular in the context of the management of 

health or social care service and systems, include processing by the management and 

central national health authority of such data for the purpose of quality control, 

management information and the general national and local supervision of the health or 

social care system, and ensure continuity of health or social care and cross-border 

healthcare or health security, monitoring and alert purposes, or for archive purpose in 

the public interest, scientific or historical research purpose or statistical purposes, base 

on Union or Member State law which have to meet an objective of public interest, a well a 

for study conduct in the public interest in the area of public health. Therefore, this 

Regulation should provide for harmonise condition for the processing of special 

category of personal data concern health, in respect of specific needs, in particular 

where the processing of such data be carry out for certain health-related purpose by 

person subject to a legal obligation of professional secrecy. Union or Member State law 

should provide for specific and suitable measure so a to protect the fundamental right 

and the personal data of natural persons. Member States should be allow to maintain or 

introduce further conditions, include limitations, with regard to the processing of genetic 

data, biometric data or data concern health. However, this should not hamper the free 

flow of personal data within the Union when those condition apply to cross-border 

processing of such data. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 34 
DGD 2 EN 


(54) The processing of special category of personal data may be necessary for reason of 

public interest in the area of public health without consent of the data subject. Such 

processing should be subject to suitable and specific measure so a to protect the right 

and freedom of natural persons. In that context, 'public health' should be interpret a 

define in Regulation (EC) No 1338/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council1, 

namely all element related to health, namely health status, include morbidity and 

disability, the determinant have an effect on that health status, health care needs, 

resource allocate to health care, the provision of, and universal access to, health care a 

well a health care expenditure and financing, and the cause of mortality. Such processing 

of data concern health for reason of public interest should not result in personal data 

be process for other purpose by third party such a employer or insurance and 

banking companies. 

(55) Moreover, the processing of personal data by official authority for the purpose of 

achieve the aims, laid down in constitutional law or international public law, of officially 

recognise religious associations, be carry out on ground of public interest. 

(56) Where in the course of electoral activities, the operation of the democratic system in a 

Member State require that political party compile personal data on people's political 

opinions, the processing of such data may be permit for reason of public interest, 

provide that appropriate safeguard be established. 


1 Regulation (EC) No 1338/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 

16 December 2008 on Community statistic on public health and health and safety at work 
(OJ L 354, 31.12.2008, p. 70). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 35 
DGD 2 EN 


(57) If the personal data process by a controller do not permit the controller to identify a 

natural person, the data controller should not be oblige to acquire additional information 

in order to identify the data subject for the sole purpose of comply with any provision of 

this Regulation. However, the controller should not refuse to take additional information 

provide by the data subject in order to support the exercise of his or her rights. 

Identification should include the digital identification of a data subject, for example 

through authentication mechanism such a the same credentials, use by the data subject to 

log-in to the on-line service offer by the data controller. 

(58) The principle of transparency require that any information address to the public or to 

the data subject be concise, easily accessible and easy to understand, and that clear and 

plain language and, additionally, where appropriate, visualisation be used. Such 

information could be provide in electronic form, for example, when address to the 

public, through a website. This be of particular relevance in situation where the 

proliferation of actor and the technological complexity of practice make it difficult for the 

data subject to know and understand whether, by whom and for what purpose personal data 

relate to him or her be be collected, such a in the case of online advertising. Given 

that child merit specific protection, any information and communication, where 

processing be address to a child, should be in such a clear and plain language that the 

child can easily understand. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 36 
DGD 2 EN 


(59) Modalities should be provide for facilitate the exercise of the data subject's right under 

this Regulation, include mechanism to request and, if applicable, obtain, free of charge, 

in particular, access to and rectification or erasure of personal data and the exercise of the 

right to object. The controller should also provide mean for request to be make 

electronically, especially where personal data be process by electronic means. The 

controller should be oblige to respond to request from the data subject without undue 

delay and at the late within one month and to give reason where the controller do not 

intend to comply with any such requests. 

(60) The principle of fair and transparent processing require that the data subject be inform 

of the existence of the processing operation and it purposes. The controller should provide 

the data subject with any further information necessary to ensure fair and transparent 

processing take into account the specific circumstance and context in which the 

personal data be processed. Furthermore, the data subject should be inform of the 

existence of profile and the consequence of such profiling. Where the personal data be 

collect from the data subject, the data subject should also be inform whether he or she 

be oblige to provide the personal data and of the consequences, where he or she do not 

provide such data. That information may be provide in combination with standardise 

icon in order to give in an easily visible, intelligible and clearly legible manner, a 

meaningful overview of the intend processing. Where the icon be present 

electronically, they should be machine-readable. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 37 
DGD 2 EN 


(61) The information in relation to the processing of personal data relate to the data subject 

should be give to him or her at the time of collection from the data subject, or, where the 

personal data be obtain from another source, within a reasonable period, depend on 

the circumstance of the case. Where personal data can be legitimately disclose to another 

recipient, the data subject should be inform when the personal data be first disclose to 

the recipient. Where the controller intend to process the personal data for a purpose other 

than that for which they be collected, the controller should provide the data subject prior 

to that further processing with information on that other purpose and other necessary 

information. Where the origin of the personal data cannot be provide to the data subject 

because various source have be used, general information should be provided. 

(62) However, it be not necessary to impose the obligation to provide information where the 

data subject already posse the information, where the record or disclosure of the 

personal data be expressly laid down by law or where the provision of information to the 

data subject prof to be impossible or would involve a disproportionate effort. The latter 

could in particular be the case where processing be carry out for archive purpose in the 

public interest, scientific or historical research purpose or statistical purposes. In that 

regard, the number of data subjects, the age of the data and any appropriate safeguard 

adopt should be take into consideration. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 38 
DGD 2 EN 


(63) A data subject should have the right of access to personal data which have be collect 

concern him or her, and to exercise that right easily and at reasonable intervals, in order 

to be aware of, and verify, the lawfulness of the processing. This include the right for data 

subject to have access to data concern their health, for example the data in their 

medical record contain information such a diagnoses, examination results, 

assessment by treat physician and any treatment or intervention provided. Every data 

subject should therefore have the right to know and obtain communication in particular 

with regard to the purpose for which the personal data be processed, where possible the 

period for which the personal data be processed, the recipient of the personal data, the 

logic involve in any automatic personal data processing and, at least when base on 

profiling, the consequence of such processing. Where possible, the controller should be 

able to provide remote access to a secure system which would provide the data subject 

with direct access to his or her personal data. That right should not adversely affect the 

right or freedom of others, include trade secret or intellectual property and in 

particular the copyright protect the software. However, the result of those 

consideration should not be a refusal to provide all information to the data subject. Where 

the controller process a large quantity of information concern the data subject, the 

controller should be able to request that, before the information be delivered, the data 

subject specify the information or processing activity to which the request relates. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 39 
DGD 2 EN 


(64) The controller should use all reasonable measure to verify the identity of a data subject 

who request access, in particular in the context of online service and online identifiers. A 

controller should not retain personal data for the sole purpose of be able to react to 

potential requests. 

(65) A data subject should have the right to have personal data concern him or her rectify 

and a 'right to be forgotten' where the retention of such data infringes this Regulation or 

Union or Member State law to which the controller be subject. In particular, a data subject 

should have the right to have his or her personal data erase and no longer process where 

the personal data be no longer necessary in relation to the purpose for which they be 

collect or otherwise processed, where a data subject have withdrawn his or her consent or 

object to the processing of personal data concern him or her, or where the processing 

of his or her personal data do not otherwise comply with this Regulation. That right be 

relevant in particular where the data subject have give his or her consent a a child and be 

not fully aware of the risk involve by the processing, and late want to remove such 

personal data, especially on the internet. The data subject should be able to exercise that 

right notwithstanding the fact that he or she be no longer a child. However, the further 

retention of the personal data should be lawful where it be necessary, for exercise the 

right of freedom of expression and information, for compliance with a legal obligation, for 

the performance of a task carry out in the public interest or in the exercise of official 

authority vested in the controller, on the ground of public interest in the area of public 

health, for archive purpose in the public interest, scientific or historical research 

purpose or statistical purposes, or for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal 

claims. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 40 
DGD 2 EN 


(66) To strengthen the right to be forgotten in the online environment, the right to erasure 

should also be extend in such a way that a controller who have make the personal data 

public should be oblige to inform the controller which be processing such personal data 

to erase any link to, or copy or replication of those personal data. In do so, that 

controller should take reasonable steps, take into account available technology and the 

mean available to the controller, include technical measures, to inform the controller 

which be processing the personal data of the data subject's request. 

(67) Methods by which to restrict the processing of personal data could include, inter alia, 

temporarily move the select data to another processing system, make the select 

personal data unavailable to users, or temporarily remove publish data from a website. 

In automate filing systems, the restriction of processing should in principle be ensure by 

technical mean in such a manner that the personal data be not subject to further 

processing operation and cannot be changed. The fact that the processing of personal data 

be restrict should be clearly indicate in the system. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 41 
DGD 2 EN 


(68) To further strengthen the control over his or her own data, where the processing of 

personal data be carry out by automate means, the data subject should also be allow to 

receive personal data concern him or her which he or she have provide to a controller in 

a structured, commonly used, machine-readable and interoperable format, and to transmit it 

to another controller. Data controller should be encourage to develop interoperable 

format that enable data portability. That right should apply where the data subject 

provide the personal data on the basis of his or her consent or the processing be necessary 

for the performance of a contract. It should not apply where processing be base on a legal 

ground other than consent or contract. By it very nature, that right should not be exercise 

against controller processing personal data in the exercise of their public duties. It should 

therefore not apply where the processing of the personal data be necessary for compliance 

with a legal obligation to which the controller be subject or for the performance of a task 

carry out in the public interest or in the exercise of an official authority vested in the 

controller. The data subject's right to transmit or receive personal data concern him or 

her should not create an obligation for the controller to adopt or maintain processing 

system which be technically compatible. Where, in a certain set of personal data, more 

than one data subject be concerned, the right to receive the personal data should be without 

prejudice to the right and freedom of other data subject in accordance with this 

Regulation. Furthermore, that right should not prejudice the right of the data subject to 

obtain the erasure of personal data and the limitation of that right a set out in this 

Regulation and should, in particular, not imply the erasure of personal data concern the 

data subject which have be provide by him or her for the performance of a contract to 

the extent that and for a long a the personal data be necessary for the performance of 

that contract. Where technically feasible, the data subject should have the right to have the 

personal data transmit directly from one controller to another. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 42 
DGD 2 EN 


(69) Where personal data might lawfully be process because processing be necessary for the 

performance of a task carry out in the public interest or in the exercise of official 

authority vested in the controller, or on ground of the legitimate interest of a controller or 

a third party, a data subject should, nevertheless, be entitle to object to the processing of 

any personal data relate to his or her particular situation. It should be for the controller to 

demonstrate that it compelling legitimate interest override the interest or the 

fundamental right and freedom of the data subject. 

(70) Where personal data be process for the purpose of direct marketing, the data subject 

should have the right to object to such processing, include profile to the extent that it be 

related to such direct marketing, whether with regard to initial or further processing, at any 

time and free of charge. That right should be explicitly brought to the attention of the data 

subject and present clearly and separately from any other information. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 43 
DGD 2 EN 


(71) The data subject should have the right not to be subject to a decision, which may include a 

measure, evaluate personal aspect relate to him or her which be base solely on 

automate processing and which produce legal effect concern him or her or similarly 

significantly affect him or her, such a automatic refusal of an online credit application or 

e-recruiting practice without any human intervention. Such processing include 'profiling' 

that consists of any form of automate processing of personal data evaluate the personal 

aspect relate to a natural person, in particular to analyse or predict aspect concern 

the data subject's performance at work, economic situation, health, personal preference or 

interests, reliability or behaviour, location or movements, where it produce legal effect 

concern him or her or similarly significantly affect him or her. However, 

decision-making base on such processing, include profiling, should be allow where 

expressly authorise by Union or Member State law to which the controller be subject, 

include for fraud and tax-evasion monitoring and prevention purpose conduct in 

accordance with the regulations, standard and recommendation of Union institution or 

national oversight body and to ensure the security and reliability of a service provide by 

the controller, or necessary for the enter or performance of a contract between the data 

subject and a controller, or when the data subject have give his or her explicit consent. In 

any case, such processing should be subject to suitable safeguards, which should include 

specific information to the data subject and the right to obtain human intervention, to 

express his or her point of view, to obtain an explanation of the decision reach after such 

assessment and to challenge the decision. Such measure should not concern a child. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 44 
DGD 2 EN 


In order to ensure fair and transparent processing in respect of the data subject, take into 

account the specific circumstance and context in which the personal data be processed, 

the controller should use appropriate mathematical or statistical procedure for the 

profiling, implement technical and organisational measure appropriate to ensure, in 

particular, that factor which result in inaccuracy in personal data be correct and the 

risk of error be minimised, secure personal data in a manner that take account of the 

potential risk involve for the interest and right of the data subject and that prevents, 

inter alia, discriminatory effect on natural person on the basis of racial or ethnic origin, 

political opinion, religion or beliefs, trade union membership, genetic or health status or 

sexual orientation, or that result in measure have such an effect. Automated 

decision-making and profile base on special category of personal data should be 

allow only under specific conditions. 

(72) Profiling be subject to the rule of this Regulation govern the processing of personal 

data, such a the legal ground for processing or data protection principles. The European 

Data Protection Board establish by this Regulation (the 'Board') should be able to issue 

guidance in that context. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 45 
DGD 2 EN 


(73) Restrictions concern specific principle and concern the right of information, access 

to and rectification or erasure of personal data and on the right to data portability, the right 

to object, decision base on profiling, a well a on the communication of a personal data 

breach to a data subject and on certain related obligation of the controller may be 

impose by Union or Member State law, a far a necessary and proportionate in a 

democratic society to safeguard public security, include the protection of human life 

especially in response to natural or man make disasters, the prevention, investigation and 

prosecution of criminal offence or the execution of criminal penalties, include the 

safeguard against and the prevention of threat to public security, or of breach of 

ethic for regulate professions, other important objective of general public interest of the 

Union or of a Member State, in particular an important economic or financial interest of 

the Union or of a Member State, the keep of public register kept for reason of general 

public interest, further processing of archive personal data to provide specific information 

related to the political behaviour under former totalitarian state regime or the protection of 

the data subject or the right and freedom of others, include social protection, public 

health and humanitarian purposes. Those restriction should be in accordance with the 

requirement set out in the Charter and in the European Convention for the Protection of 

Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 46 
DGD 2 EN 


(74) The responsibility and liability of the controller for any processing of personal data carry 

out by the controller or on the controller's behalf should be established. In particular, the 

controller should be oblige to implement appropriate and effective measure and be able 

to demonstrate the compliance of processing activity with this Regulation, include the 

effectiveness of the measures. Those measure should take into account the nature, scope, 

context and purpose of the processing and the risk to the right and freedom of natural 

persons. 

(75) The risk to the right and freedom of natural person , of vary likelihood and severity, 

may result from personal data processing which could lead to physical, material or 

non-material damage, in particular: where the processing may give rise to discrimination, 

identity theft or fraud, financial loss, damage to the reputation, loss of confidentiality of 

personal data protect by professional secrecy, unauthorised reversal of 

pseudonymisation, or any other significant economic or social disadvantage; where data 

subject might be deprive of their right and freedom or prevent from exercise 

control over their personal data; where personal data be process which reveal racial or 

ethnic origin, political opinions, religion or philosophical beliefs, trade-union membership, 

and the processing of genetic data, data concern health or data concern sex life or 

criminal conviction and offence or related security measures; where personal aspect be 

evaluated, in particular analyse or predict aspect concern performance at work, 

economic situation, health, personal preference or interests, reliability or behaviour, 

location or movements, in order to create or use personal profiles; where personal data of 

vulnerable natural persons, in particular of children, be processed; or where processing 

involves a large amount of personal data and affect a large number of data subjects. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 47 
DGD 2 EN 


(76) The likelihood and severity of the risk to the right and freedom of the data subject should 

be determine by reference to the nature, scope, context and purpose of the processing. 

Risk should be evaluate on the basis of an objective assessment, by which it be establish 

whether data processing operation involve a risk or a high risk. 

(77) Guidance on the implementation of appropriate measure and on the demonstration of 

compliance by the controller or the processor, especially a regard the identification of the 

risk related to the processing, their assessment in term of origin, nature, likelihood and 

severity, and the identification of best practice to mitigate the risk, could be provide in 

particular by mean of approve code of conduct, approve certifications, guideline 

provide by the Board or indication provide by a data protection officer. The Board may 

also issue guideline on processing operation that be consider to be unlikely to result in 

a high risk to the right and freedom of natural person and indicate what measure may 

be sufficient in such case to address such risk. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 48 
DGD 2 EN 


(78) The protection of the right and freedom of natural person with regard to the processing 

of personal data require that appropriate technical and organisational measure be take to 

ensure that the requirement of this Regulation be met. In order to be able to demonstrate 

compliance with this Regulation, the controller should adopt internal policy and 

implement measure which meet in particular the principle of data protection by design 

and data protection by default. Such measure could consist, inter alia, of minimise the 

processing of personal data, pseudonymising personal data a soon a possible, 

transparency with regard to the function and processing of personal data, enable the data 

subject to monitor the data processing, enable the controller to create and improve 

security features. When developing, designing, select and use applications, service 

and product that be base on the processing of personal data or process personal data to 

fulfil their task, producer of the products, service and application should be encourage 

to take into account the right to data protection when develop and design such 

products, service and application and, with due regard to the state of the art, to make sure 

that controller and processor be able to fulfil their data protection obligations.The 

principle of data protection by design and by default should also be take into 

consideration in the context of public tenders. 

(79) The protection of the right and freedom of data subject a well a the responsibility and 

liability of controller and processors, also in relation to the monitoring by and measure of 

supervisory authorities, require a clear allocation of the responsibility under this 

Regulation, include where a controller determines the purpose and mean of the 

processing jointly with other controller or where a processing operation be carry out on 

behalf of a controller. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 49 
DGD 2 EN 


(80) Where a controller or a processor not establish in the Union be processing personal data 

of data subject who be in the Union whose processing activity be related to the offering 

of good or services, irrespective of whether a payment of the data subject be required, to 

such data subject in the Union, or to the monitoring of their behaviour a far a their 

behaviour take place within the Union, the controller or the processor should designate a 

representative, unless the processing be occasional, do not include processing, on a large 

scale, of special category of personal data or the processing of personal data relate to 

criminal conviction and offences, and be unlikely to result in a risk to the right and 

freedom of natural persons, take into account the nature, context, scope and purpose of 

the processing or if the controller be a public authority or body. The representative should 

act on behalf of the controller or the processor and may be address by any supervisory 

authority. The representative should be explicitly designate by a write mandate of the 

controller or the processor to act on it behalf with regard to their obligation under this 

Regulation. The designation of such representative do not affect the responsibility and 

liability of the controller or the processor under this Regulation. Such representative should 

perform it task accord to the mandate receive from the controller or processor, 

include to cooperate with the competent supervisory authority on any action take in 

ensure compliance with this Regulation. The designate representative should be subject 

to enforcement proceeding in the event of non-compliance by the controller or processor. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 50 
DGD 2 EN 


(81) To ensure compliance with the requirement of this Regulation in respect of the processing 

to be carry out by the processor on behalf of the controller, when entrust a processor 

with processing activities, the controller should use only processor provide sufficient 

guarantees, in particular in term of expert knowledge, reliability and resources, to 

implement technical and organisational measure which will meet the requirement of this 

Regulation, include for the security of processing. The adherence of the processor to an 

approve code of conduct or an approve certification mechanism may be use a an 

element to demonstrate compliance with the obligation of the controller. The carrying-out 

of processing by a processor should be govern by a contract or other legal act under 

Union or Member State law, binding the processor to the controller, set out the 

subject-matter and duration of the processing, the nature and purpose of the processing, 

the type of personal data and category of data subjects, take into account the specific 

task and responsibility of the processor in the context of the processing to be carry out 

and the risk to the right and freedom of the data subject. The controller and processor 

may choose to use an individual contract or standard contractual clause which be adopt 

either directly by the Commission or by a supervisory authority in accordance with the 

consistency mechanism and then adopt by the Commission. After the completion of the 

processing on behalf of the controller, the processor should, at the choice of the controller, 

return or delete the personal data, unless there be a requirement to store the personal data 

under Union or Member State law to which the processor be subject. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 51 
DGD 2 EN 


(82) In order to demonstrate compliance with this Regulation, the controller or processor should 

maintain record of processing activity under it responsibility. Each controller and 

processor should be oblige to cooperate with the supervisory authority and make those 

records, on request, available to it, so that it might serve for monitoring those processing 

operations. 

(83) In order to maintain security and to prevent processing in infringement of this Regulation, 

the controller or processor should evaluate the risk inherent in the processing and 

implement measure to mitigate those risks, such a encryption. Those measure should 

ensure an appropriate level of security, include confidentiality, take into account the 

stateof the art and the cost of implementation in relation to the risk and the nature of the 

personal data to be protected. In assess data security risk, consideration should be give 

to the risk that be present by personal data processing, such a accidental or unlawful 

destruction, loss, alteration, unauthorised disclosure of, or access to, personal data 

transmitted, store or otherwise process which may in particular lead to physical, 

material or non-material damage. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 52 
DGD 2 EN 


(84) In order to enhance compliance with this Regulation where processing operation be likely 

to result in a high risk to the right and freedom of natural persons, the controller should 

be responsible for the carrying-out of a data protection impact assessment to evaluate, in 

particular, the origin, nature, particularity and severity of that risk. The outcome of the 

assessment should be take into account when determine the appropriate measure to be 

take in order to demonstrate that the processing of personal data complies with this 

Regulation. Where a data-protection impact assessment indicates that processing 

operation involve a high risk which the controller cannot mitigate by appropriate 

measure in term of available technology and cost of implementation, a consultation of 

the supervisory authority should take place prior to the processing. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 53 
DGD 2 EN 


(85) A personal data breach may, if not address in an appropriate and timely manner, result in 

physical, material or non-material damage to natural person such a loss of control over 

their personal data or limitation of their rights, discrimination, identity theft or fraud, 

financial loss, unauthorised reversal of pseudonymisation, damage to reputation, loss of 

confidentiality of personal data protect by professional secrecy or any other significant 

economic or social disadvantage to the natural person concerned. Therefore, a soon a the 

controller becomes aware that a personal data breach have occurred, the controller should 

notify the personal data breach to the supervisory authority without undue delay and, 

where feasible, not late than 72 hour after have become aware of it, unless the 

controller be able to demonstrate, in accordance with the accountability principle, that the 

personal data breach be unlikely to result in a risk to the right and freedom of natural 

persons. Where such notification cannot be achieve within 72 hours, the reason for the 

delay should accompany the notification and information may be provide in phase 

without undue further delay. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 54 
DGD 2 EN 


(86) The controller should communicate to the data subject a personal data breach, without 

undue delay, where that personal data breach be likely to result in a high risk to the right 

and freedom of the natural person in order to allow him or her to take the necessary 

precautions. The communication should describe the nature of the personal data breach a 

well a recommendation for the natural person concerned to mitigate potential adverse 

effects. Such communication to data subject should be make a soon a reasonably 

feasible and in close cooperation with the supervisory authority, respect guidance 

provide by it or by other relevant authority such a law-enforcement authorities. For 

example, the need to mitigate an immediate risk of damage would call for prompt 

communication with data subject whereas the need to implement appropriate measure 

against continue or similar personal data breach may justify more time for 

communication. 

(87) It should be ascertain whether all appropriate technological protection and organisational 

measure have be implement to establish immediately whether a personal data breach 

have take place and to inform promptly the supervisory authority and the data subject. The 

fact that the notification be make without undue delay should be establish take into 

account in particular the nature and gravity of the personal data breach and it 

consequence and adverse effect for the data subject. Such notification may result in an 

intervention of the supervisory authority in accordance with it task and power laid down 

in this Regulation. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 55 
DGD 2 EN 


(88) In set detailed rule concern the format and procedure applicable to the notification 

of personal data breaches, due consideration should be give to the circumstance of that 

breach, include whether or not personal data have be protect by appropriate technical 

protection measures, effectively limit the likelihood of identity fraud or other form of 

misuse. Moreover, such rule and procedure should take into account the legitimate 

interest of law-enforcement authority where early disclosure could unnecessarily hamper 

the investigation of the circumstance of a personal data breach. 

(89) Directive 95/46/EC provide for a general obligation to notify the processing of personal 

data to the supervisory authorities. While that obligation produce administrative and 

financial burdens, it do not in all case contribute to improve the protection of personal 

data. Such indiscriminate general notification obligation should therefore be abolished, 

and replace by effective procedure and mechanism which focus instead on those type 

of processing operation which be likely to result in a high risk to the right and freedom 

of natural person by virtue of their nature, scope, context and purposes. Such type of 

processing operation may be those which in, particular, involve use new technologies, 

or be of a new kind and where no data protection impact assessment have be carry out 

before by the controller, or where they become necessary in the light of the time that have 

elapse since the initial processing. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 56 
DGD 2 EN 


(90) In such cases, a data protection impact assessment should be carry out by the controller 

prior to the processing in order to ass the particular likelihood and severity of the high 

risk, take into account the nature, scope, context and purpose of the processing and the 

source of the risk. That impact assessment should include, in particular, the measures, 

safeguard and mechanism envisage for mitigate that risk, ensure the protection of 

personal data and demonstrate compliance with this Regulation. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 57 
DGD 2 EN 


(91) This should in particular apply to large-scale processing operation which aim to process a 

considerable amount of personal data at regional, national or supranational level and which 

could affect a large number of data subject and which be likely to result in a high risk, for 

example, on account of their sensitivity, where in accordance with the achieve state of 

technological knowledge a new technology be use on a large scale a well a to other 

processing operation which result in a high risk to the right and freedom of data 

subjects, in particular where those operation render it more difficult for data subject to 

exercise their rights. A data protection impact assessment should also be make where 

personal data be process for take decision regard specific natural person 

follow any systematic and extensive evaluation of personal aspect relate to natural 

person base on profile those data or follow the processing of special category of 

personal data, biometric data, or data on criminal conviction and offence or related 

security measures. A data protection impact assessment be equally require for monitoring 

publicly accessible area on a large scale, especially when use optic-electronic device or 

for any other operation where the competent supervisory authority considers that the 

processing be likely to result in a high risk to the right and freedom of data subjects, in 

particular because they prevent data subject from exercise a right or use a service or a 

contract, or because they be carry out systematically on a large scale. The processing of 

personal data should not be consider to be on a large scale if the processing concern 

personal data from patient or client by an individual physician, other health care 

professional or lawyer. In such cases, a data protection impact assessment should not be 

mandatory. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 58 
DGD 2 EN 


(92) There be circumstance under which it may be reasonable and economical for the subject 

of a data protection impact assessment to be broader than a single project, for example 

where public authority or body intend to establish a common application or processing 

platform or where several controller plan to introduce a common application or processing 

environment across an industry sector or segment or for a widely use horizontal activity. 

(93) In the context of the adoption of the Member State law on which the performance of the 

task of the public authority or public body be base and which regulates the specific 

processing operation or set of operation in question, Member States may deem it 

necessary to carry out such assessment prior to the processing activities. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 59 
DGD 2 EN 


(94) Where a data protection impact assessment indicates that the processing would, in the 

absence of safeguards, security measure and mechanism to mitigate the risk, result in a 

high risk to the right and freedom of natural person and the controller be of the opinion 

that the risk cannot be mitigate by reasonable mean in term of available technology 

and cost of implementation, the supervisory authority should be consult prior to the 

start of processing activities. Such high risk be likely to result from certain type of 

processing and the extent and frequency of processing, which may result also in a 

realisation of damage or interference with the right and freedom of the natural person. 

The supervisory authority should respond to the request for consultation within a specify 

period. However, the absence of a reaction of the supervisory authority within that period 

should be without prejudice to any intervention of the supervisory authority in accordance 

with it task and power laid down in this Regulation, include the power to prohibit 

processing operations. As part of that consultation process, the outcome of a data 

protection impact assessment carry out with regard to the processing at issue may be 

submit to the supervisory authority, in particular the measure envisage to mitigate the 

risk to the right and freedom of natural persons. 

(95) The processor should assist the controller, where necessary and upon request, in ensure 

compliance with the obligation derive from the carry out of data protection impact 

assessment and from prior consultation of the supervisory authority. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 60 
DGD 2 EN 


(96) A consultation of the supervisory authority should also take place in the course of the 

preparation of a legislative or regulatory measure which provide for the processing of 

personal data, in order to ensure compliance of the intend processing with this 

Regulation and in particular to mitigate the risk involve for the data subject. 

(97) Where the processing be carry out by a public authority, except for court or independent 

judicial authority when act in their judicial capacity, where, in the private sector, 

processing be carry out by a controller whose core activity consist of processing 

operation that require regular and systematic monitoring of the data subject on a large 

scale, or where the core activity of the controller or the processor consist of processing on 

a large scale of special category of personal data and data relate to criminal conviction 

and offences, a person with expert knowledge of data protection law and practice should 

assist the controller or processor to monitor internal compliance with this Regulation. In 

the private sector, the core activity of a controller relate to it primary activity and do 

not relate to the processing of personal data a ancillary activities. The necessary level of 

expert knowledge should be determine in particular accord to the data processing 

operation carry out and the protection require for the personal data process by the 

controller or the processor. Such data protection officers, whether or not they be an 

employee of the controller, should be in a position to perform their duty and task in an 

independent manner. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 61 
DGD 2 EN 


(98) Associations or other body represent category of controller or processor should be 

encourage to draw up code of conduct, within the limit of this Regulation, so a to 

facilitate the effective application of this Regulation, take account of the specific 

characteristic of the processing carry out in certain sector and the specific need of 

micro, small and medium enterprises. In particular, such code of conduct could calibrate 

the obligation of controller and processors, take into account the risk likely to result 

from the processing for the right and freedom of natural persons. 

(99) When draw up a code of conduct, or when amend or extend such a code, 

association and other body represent category of controller or processor should 

consult relevant stakeholders, include data subject where feasible, and have regard to 

submission receive and view express in response to such consultations. 

(100) In order to enhance transparency and compliance with this Regulation, the establishment of 

certification mechanism and data protection seal and mark should be encouraged, 

allow data subject to quickly ass the level of data protection of relevant product 

and services. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 62 
DGD 2 EN 


(101) Flows of personal data to and from country outside the Union and international 

organisation be necessary for the expansion of international trade and international 

cooperation. The increase in such flow have raise new challenge and concern with 

regard to the protection of personal data. However, when personal data be transfer 

from the Union to controllers, processor or other recipient in third country or to 

international organisations, the level of protection of natural person ensure in the Union 

by this Regulation should not be undermined, include in case of onward transfer of 

personal data from the third country or international organisation to controllers, processor 

in the same or another third country or international organisation. In any event, transfer to 

third country and international organisation may only be carry out in full compliance 

with this Regulation. A transfer could take place only if, subject to the other provision of 

this Regulation, the condition laid down in the provision of this Regulation relate to the 

transfer of personal data to third country or international organisation be comply with 

by the controller or processor. 

(102) This Regulation be without prejudice to international agreement conclude between the 

Union and third country regulate the transfer of personal data include appropriate 

safeguard for the data subjects. Member States may conclude international agreement 

which involve the transfer of personal data to third country or international organisations, 

a far a such agreement do not affect this Regulation or any other provision of Union 

law and include an appropriate level of protection for the fundamental right of the data 

subjects. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 63 
DGD 2 EN 


(103) The Commission may decide with effect for the entire Union that a third country, a 

territory or specify sector within a third country, or an international organisation, offer 

an adequate level of data protection, thus provide legal certainty and uniformity 

throughout the Union a regard the third country or international organisation which be 

consider to provide such level of protection. In such cases, transfer of personal data to 

that third country or international organisation may take place without the need to obtain 

any further authorisation. The Commission may also decide, have give notice and a full 

statement set out the reason to the third country or international organisation, to 

revoke such a decision. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 64 
DGD 2 EN 


(104) In line with the fundamental value on which the Union be founded, in particular the 

protection of human rights, the Commission should, in it assessment of the third country, 

or of a territory or specify sector within a third country, take into account how a 

particular third country respect the rule of law, access to justice a well a international 

human right norm and standard and it general and sectoral law, include legislation 

concern public security, defence and national security a well a public order and 

criminal law. The adoption of an adequacy decision with regard to a territory or a specify 

sector in a third country should take into account clear and objective criteria, such a 

specific processing activity and the scope of applicable legal standard and legislation in 

force in the third country. The third country should offer guarantee ensure an adequate 

level of protection essentially equivalent to that ensure within the Union, in particular 

where personal data be process in one or several specific sectors. In particular, the third 

country should ensure effective independent data protection supervision and should 

provide for cooperation mechanism with the Member States' data protection authorities, 

and the data subject should be provide with effective and enforceable right and effective 

administrative and judicial redress. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 65 
DGD 2 EN 


(105) Apart from the international commitment the third country or international organisation 

have enter into, the Commission should take account of obligation arise from the third 

country's or international organisation's participation in multilateral or regional system in 

particular in relation to the protection of personal data, a well a the implementation of 

such obligations. In particular, the third country's accession to the Council of Europe 

Convention of 28 January 1981 for the Protection of Individuals with regard to the 

Automatic Processing of Personal Data and it Additional Protocol should be take into 

account. The Commission should consult the Board when assess the level of protection 

in third country or international organisations. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 66 
DGD 2 EN 


(106) The Commission should monitor the function of decision on the level of protection in a 

third country, a territory or specify sector within a third country, or an international 

organisation, and monitor the function of decision adopt on the basis of Article 25(6) 

or Article 26(4) of Directive 95/46/EC. In it adequacy decisions, the Commission should 

provide for a periodic review mechanism of their functioning. That periodic review should 

be conduct in consultation with the third country or international organisation in 

question and take into account all relevant development in the third country or 

international organisation. For the purpose of monitoring and of carry out the periodic 

reviews, the Commission should take into consideration the view and finding of the 

European Parliament and of the Council a well a of other relevant body and sources. 

The Commission should evaluate, within a reasonable time, the function of the latter 

decision and report any relevant finding to the Committee within the meaning of 

Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council1 a 

establish under this Regulation, to the European Parliament and to the Council. 


1 Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 

16 February 2011 lay down the rule and general principle concern mechanism for 
control by Member States of the Commission's exercise of implement power (OJ L 55, 
28.2.2011, p. 13). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 67 
DGD 2 EN 


(107) The Commission may recognise that a third country, a territory or a specify sector within 

a third country, or an international organisation no longer ensures an adequate level of data 

protection. Consequently the transfer of personal data to that third country or international 

organisation should be prohibited, unless the requirement in this Regulation relate to 

transfer subject to appropriate safeguards, include binding corporate rules, and 

derogation for specific situation be fulfilled. In that case, provision should be make for 

consultation between the Commission and such third country or international 

organisations. The Commission should, in a timely manner, inform the third country or 

international organisation of the reason and enter into consultation with it in order to 

remedy the situation. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 68 
DGD 2 EN 


(108) In the absence of an adequacy decision, the controller or processor should take measure to 

compensate for the lack of data protection in a third country by way of appropriate 

safeguard for the data subject. Such appropriate safeguard may consist of make use of 

binding corporate rules, standard data protection clause adopt by the Commission, 

standard data protection clause adopt by a supervisory authority or contractual clause 

authorise by a supervisory authority. Those safeguard should ensure compliance with 

data protection requirement and the right of the data subject appropriate to processing 

within the Union, include the availability of enforceable data subject right and of 

effective legal remedies, include to obtain effective administrative or judicial redress and 

to claim compensation, in the Union or in a third country. They should relate in particular 

to compliance with the general principle relate to personal data processing, the 

principle of data protection by design and by default. Transfers may also be carry out by 

public authority or body with public authority or body in third country or with 

international organisation with correspond duty or functions, include on the basis 

of provision to be insert into administrative arrangements, such a a memorandum of 

understanding, provide for enforceable and effective right for data subjects. 

Authorisation by the competent supervisory authority should be obtain when the 

safeguard be provide for in administrative arrangement that be not legally binding. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 69 
DGD 2 EN 


(109) The possibility for the controller or processor to use standard data-protection clause 

adopt by the Commission or by a supervisory authority should prevent controller or 

processor neither from include the standard data-protection clause in a wider contract, 

such a a contract between the processor and another processor, nor from add other 

clause or additional safeguard provide that they do not contradict, directly or indirectly, 

the standard contractual clause adopt by the Commission or by a supervisory authority 

or prejudice the fundamental right or freedom of the data subjects. Controllers and 

processor should be encourage to provide additional safeguard via contractual 

commitment that supplement standard protection clauses. 

(110) A group of undertakings, or a group of enterprise engage in a joint economic activity, 

should be able to make use of approve binding corporate rule for it international 

transfer from the Union to organisation within the same group of undertakings, or group 

of enterprise engage in a joint economic activity, provide that such corporate rule 

include all essential principle and enforceable right to ensure appropriate safeguard for 

transfer or category of transfer of personal data. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 70 
DGD 2 EN 


(111) Provisions should be make for the possibility for transfer in certain circumstance where 

the data subject have give his or her explicit consent, where the transfer be occasional and 

necessary in relation to a contract or a legal claim, regardless of whether in a judicial 

procedure or whether in an administrative or any out-of-court procedure, include 

procedure before regulatory bodies. Provision should also be make for the possibility for 

transfer where important ground of public interest laid down by Union or Member State 

law so require or where the transfer be make from a register establish by law and 

intend for consultation by the public or person have a legitimate interest. In the latter 

case, such a transfer should not involve the entirety of the personal data or entire category 

of the data contain in the register and, when the register be intend for consultation by 

person have a legitimate interest, the transfer should be make only at the request of 

those person or, if they be to be the recipients, take into full account the interest and 

fundamental right of the data subject. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 71 
DGD 2 EN 


(112) Those derogation should in particular apply to data transfer require and necessary for 

important reason of public interest, for example in case of international data exchange 

between competition authorities, tax or custom administrations, between financial 

supervisory authorities, between service competent for social security matters, or for 

public health, for example in the case of contact trace for contagious disease or in order 

to reduce and/or eliminate dope in sport. A transfer of personal data should also be 

regard a lawful where it be necessary to protect an interest which be essential for the data 

subject's or another person's vital interests, include physical integrity or life, if the data 

subject be incapable of give consent. In the absence of an adequacy decision, Union or 

Member State law may, for important reason of public interest, expressly set limit to the 

transfer of specific category of data to a third country or an international organisation. 

Member States should notify such provision to the Commission. Any transfer to an 

international humanitarian organisation of personal data of a data subject who be physically 

or legally incapable of give consent, with a view to accomplish a task incumbent 

under the Geneva Conventions or to comply with international humanitarian law 

applicable in arm conflicts, could be consider to be necessary for an important reason 

of public interest or because it be in the vital interest of the data subject. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 72 
DGD 2 EN 


(113) Transfers which can be qualify a not repetitive and that only concern a limited number 

of data subjects, could also be possible for the purpose of the compelling legitimate 

interest pursue by the controller, when those interest be not overridden by the interest 

or right and freedom of the data subject and when the controller have assess all the 

circumstance surround the data transfer. The controller should give particular 

consideration to the nature of the personal data, the purpose and duration of the propose 

processing operation or operations, a well a the situation in the country of origin, the 

third country and the country of final destination, and should provide suitable safeguard to 

protect fundamental right and freedom of natural person with regard to the processing of 

their personal data. Such transfer should be possible only in residual case where none of 

the other ground for transfer be applicable. For scientific or historical research purpose 

or statistical purposes, the legitimate expectation of society for an increase of knowledge 

should be take into consideration. The controller should inform the supervisory authority 

and the data subject about the transfer. 

(114) In any case, where the Commission have take no decision on the adequate level of data 

protection in a third country, the controller or processor should make use of solution that 

provide data subject with enforceable and effective right a regard the processing of 

their data in the Union once those data have be transfer so that that they will continue 

to benefit from fundamental right and safeguards. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 73 
DGD 2 EN 


(115) Some third country adopt laws, regulation and other legal act which purport to directly 

regulate the processing activity of natural and legal person under the jurisdiction of the 

Member States. This may include judgment of court or tribunal or decision of 

administrative authority in third country require a controller or processor to transfer or 

disclose personal data, and which be not base on an international agreement, such a a 

mutual legal assistance treaty, in force between the request third country and the Union 

or a Member State. The extraterritorial application of those laws, regulation and other 

legal act may be in breach of international law and may impede the attainment of the 

protection of natural person ensure in the Union by this Regulation. Transfers should 

only be allow where the condition of this Regulation for a transfer to third country be 

met. This may inter alia be the case where the disclosure be necessary for an important 

ground of public interest recognise in Union or Member State law to which the controller 

be subject. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 74 
DGD 2 EN 


(116) When personal data move across border outside the Union it may put at increase risk 

the ability of natural person to exercise data protection right in particular to protect 

themselves from the unlawful use or disclosure of that information. At the same time, 

supervisory authority may find that they be unable to pursue complaint or conduct 

investigation relate to the activity outside their borders. Their effort to work together 

in the cross-border context may also be hamper by insufficient preventative or remedial 

powers, inconsistent legal regimes, and practical obstacle like resource constraints. 

Therefore, there be a need to promote closer cooperation among data protection supervisory 

authority to help them exchange information and carry out investigation with their 

international counterparts. For the purpose of develop international cooperation 

mechanism to facilitate and provide international mutual assistance for the enforcement of 

legislation for the protection of personal data, the Commission and the supervisory 

authority should exchange information and cooperate in activity related to the exercise 

of their power with competent authority in third countries, base on reciprocity and in 

accordance with this Regulation. 

(117) The establishment of supervisory authority in Member States, empower to perform 

their task and exercise their power with complete independence, be an essential 

component of the protection of natural person with regard to the processing of their 

personal data. Member States should be able to establish more than one supervisory 

authority, to reflect their constitutional, organisational and administrative structure. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 75 
DGD 2 EN 


(118) The independence of supervisory authority should not mean that the supervisory 

authority cannot be subject to control or monitoring mechanism regard their financial 

expenditure or to judicial review. 

(119) Where a Member State establishes several supervisory authorities, it should establish by 

law mechanism for ensure the effective participation of those supervisory authority in 

the consistency mechanism. That Member State should in particular designate the 

supervisory authority which function a a single contact point for the effective 

participation of those authority in the mechanism, to ensure swift and smooth cooperation 

with other supervisory authorities, the Board and the Commission. 

(120) Each supervisory authority should be provide with the financial and human resources, 

premise and infrastructure necessary for the effective performance of their tasks, 

include those related to mutual assistance and cooperation with other supervisory 

authority throughout the Union. Each supervisory authority should have a separate, 

public annual budget, which may be part of the overall state or national budget. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 76 
DGD 2 EN 


(121) The general condition for the member or member of the supervisory authority should be 

laid down by law in each Member State and should in particular provide that those 

member be to be appointed, by mean of a transparent procedure, either by the 

parliament, government or the head of State of the Member State on the basis of a proposal 

from the government, a member of the government, the parliament or a chamber of the 

parliament, or by an independent body entrust under Member State law. In order to 

ensure the independence of the supervisory authority, the member or member should act 

with integrity, refrain from any action that be incompatible with their duty and should not, 

during their term of office, engage in any incompatible occupation, whether gainful or not. 

The supervisory authority should have it own staff, chosen by the supervisory authority or 

an independent body establish by Member State law, which should be subject to the 

exclusive direction of the member or member of the supervisory authority. 

(122) Each supervisory authority should be competent on the territory of it own Member State 

to exercise the power and to perform the task confer on it in accordance with this 

Regulation. This should cover in particular the processing in the context of the activity of 

an establishment of the controller or processor on the territory of it own Member State, 

the processing of personal data carry out by public authority or private body act in 

the public interest, processing affect data subject on it territory or processing carry 

out by a controller or processor not establish in the Union when target data subject 

reside on it territory. This should include handle complaint lodge by a data subject, 

conduct investigation on the application of this Regulation and promote public 

awareness of the risks, rules, safeguard and right in relation to the processing of personal 

data. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 77 
DGD 2 EN 


(123) The supervisory authority should monitor the application of the provision pursuant to 

this Regulation and contribute to it consistent application throughout the Union, in order 

to protect natural person in relation to the processing of their personal data and to 

facilitate the free flow of personal data within the internal market. For that purpose, the 

supervisory authority should cooperate with each other and with the Commission, 

without the need for any agreement between Member States on the provision of mutual 

assistance or on such cooperation. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 78 
DGD 2 EN 


(124) Where the processing of personal data take place in the context of the activity of an 

establishment of a controller or a processor in the Union and the controller or processor be 

establish in more than one Member State, or where processing take place in the 

context of the activity of a single establishment of a controller or processor in the Union 

substantially affect or be likely to substantially affect data subject in more than one 

Member State, the supervisory authority for the main establishment of the controller or 

processor or for the single establishment of the controller or processor should act a lead 

authority. It should cooperate with the other authority concerned, because the controller 

or processor have an establishment on the territory of their Member State, because data 

subject reside on their territory be substantially affected, or because a complaint have 

be lodge with them. Also where a data subject not reside in that Member State have 

lodge a complaint, the supervisory authority with which such complaint have be lodge 

should also be a supervisory authority concerned. Within it task to issue guideline on 

any question cover the application of this Regulation, the Board should be able to issue 

guideline in particular on the criterion to be take into account in order to ascertain whether 

the processing in question substantially affect data subject in more than one 

Member State and on what constitutes a relevant and reason objection. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 79 
DGD 2 EN 


(125) The lead authority should be competent to adopt binding decision regard measure 

apply the power confer on it in accordance with this Regulation. In it capacity a 

lead authority, the supervisory authority should closely involve and coordinate the 

supervisory authority concerned in the decision-making process. Where the decision be to 

reject the complaint by the data subject in whole or in part, that decision should be adopt 

by the supervisory authority with which the complaint have be lodged. 

(126) The decision should be agree jointly by the lead supervisory authority and the supervisory 

authority concerned and should be direct towards the main or single establishment of 

the controller or processor and be binding on the controller and processor. The controller 

or processor should take the necessary measure to ensure compliance with this Regulation 

and the implementation of the decision notify by the lead supervisory authority to the 

main establishment of the controller or processor a regard the processing activity in the 

Union. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 80 
DGD 2 EN 


(127) Each supervisory authority not act a the lead supervisory authority should be 

competent to handle local case where the controller or processor be establish in more 

than one Member State, but the subject matter of the specific processing concern only 

processing carry out in a single Member State and involves only data subject in that 

single Member State, for example, where the subject matter concern the processing of 

employees' personal data in the specific employment context of a Member State. In such 

cases, the supervisory authority should inform the lead supervisory authority without delay 

about the matter. After be informed, the lead supervisory authority should decide, 

whether it will handle the case pursuant to the provision on cooperation between the lead 

supervisory authority and other supervisory authorites concerned ('one-stop-shop 

mechanism'), or whether the supervisory authority which inform it should handle the 

case at local level. When decide whether it will handle the case, the lead supervisory 

authority should take into account whether there be an establishment of the controller or 

processor in the Member State of the supervisory authority which inform it in order to 

ensure effective enforcement of a decision vis-à-vis the controller or processor. Where the 

lead supervisory authority decides to handle the case, the supervisory authority which 

inform it should have the possibility to submit a draft for a decision, of which the lead 

supervisory authority should take utmost account when prepare it draft decision in that 

one-stop-shop mechanism. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 81 
DGD 2 EN 


(128) The rule on the lead supervisory authority and the one-stop-shop mechanism should not 

apply where the processing be carry out by public authority or private body in the 

public interest. In such case the only supervisory authority competent to exercise the 

power confer to it in accordance with this Regulation should be the supervisory 

authority of the Member State where the public authority or private body be established. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 82 
DGD 2 EN 


(129) In order to ensure consistent monitoring and enforcement of this Regulation throughout the 

Union, the supervisory authority should have in each Member State the same task and 

effective powers, include power of investigation, corrective power and sanctions, and 

authorisation and advisory powers, in particular in case of complaint from natural 

persons, and without prejudice to the power of prosecutorial authority under 

Member State law, to bring infringement of this Regulation to the attention of the judicial 

authority and engage in legal proceedings. Such power should also include the power to 

impose a temporary or definitive limitation, include a ban, on processing. Member States 

may specify other task related to the protection of personal data under this Regulation. 

The power of supervisory authority should be exercise in accordance with appropriate 

procedural safeguard set out in Union and Member State law, impartially, fairly and 

within a reasonable time. In particular each measure should be appropriate, necessary and 

proportionate in view of ensure compliance with this Regulation, take into account the 

circumstance of each individual case, respect the right of every person to be heard before 

any individual measure which would affect him or her adversely be take and avoid 

superfluous cost and excessive inconvenience for the person concerned. Investigatory 

power a regard access to premise should be exercise in accordance with specific 

requirement in Member State procedural law, such a the requirement to obtain a prior 

judicial authorisation. Each legally binding measure of the supervisory authority should be 

in writing, be clear and unambiguous, indicate the supervisory authority which have issue 

the measure, the date of issue of the measure, bear the signature of the head, or a member 

of the supervisory authority authorise by him or her, give the reason for the measure, and 

refer to the right of an effective remedy. This should not preclude additional requirement 

pursuant to Member State procedural law. The adoption of a legally binding decision 

implies that it may give rise to judicial review in the Member State of the supervisory 

authority that adopt the decision. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 83 
DGD 2 EN 


(130) Where the supervisory authority with which the complaint have be lodge be not the lead 

supervisory authority, the lead supervisory authority should closely cooperate with the 

supervisory authority with which the complaint have be lodge in accordance with the 

provision on cooperation and consistency laid down in this Regulation. In such cases, the 

lead supervisory authority should, when take measure intend to produce legal effects, 

include the imposition of administrative fines, take utmost account of the view of the 

supervisory authority with which the complaint have be lodge and which should remain 

competent to carry out any investigation on the territory of it own Member State in liaison 

with the competent supervisory authority. 

(131) Where another supervisory authority should act a a lead supervisory authority for the 

processing activity of the controller or processor but the concrete subject matter of a 

complaint or the possible infringement concern only processing activity of the controller 

or processor in the Member State where the complaint have be lodge or the possible 

infringement detect and the matter do not substantially affect or be not likely to 

substantially affect data subject in other Member States, the supervisory authority 

receive a complaint or detect or be inform otherwise of situation that entail 

possible infringement of this Regulation should seek an amicable settlement with the 

controller and, if this prof unsuccessful, exercise it full range of powers. This should 

include: specific processing carry out in the territory of the Member State of the 

supervisory authority or with regard to data subject on the territory of that Member State; 

processing that be carry out in the context of an offer of good or service specifically 

aim at data subject in the territory of the Member State of the supervisory authority; or 

processing that have to be assess take into account relevant legal obligation under 

Member State law. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 84 
DGD 2 EN 


(132) Awareness-raising activity by supervisory authority address to the public should 

include specific measure direct at controller and processors, include micro, small 

and medium-sized enterprises, a well a natural person in particular in the educational 

context. 

(133) The supervisory authority should assist each other in perform their task and provide 

mutual assistance, so a to ensure the consistent application and enforcement of this 

Regulation in the internal market. A supervisory authority request mutual assistance 

may adopt a provisional measure if it receives no response to a request for mutual 

assistance within one month of the receipt of that request by the other supervisory 

authority. 

(134) Each supervisory authority should, where appropriate, participate in joint operation with 

other supervisory authorities. The request supervisory authority should be oblige to 

respond to the request within a specify time period. 

(135) In order to ensure the consistent application of this Regulation throughout the Union, a 

consistency mechanism for cooperation between the supervisory authority should be 

established. That mechanism should in particular apply where a supervisory authority 

intend to adopt a measure intend to produce legal effect a regard processing 

operation which substantially affect a significant number of data subject in several 

Member States. It should also apply where any supervisory authority concerned or the 

Commission request that such matter should be handle in the consistency mechanism. 

That mechanism should be without prejudice to any measure that the Commission may 

take in the exercise of it power under the Treaties. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 85 
DGD 2 EN 


(136) In apply the consistency mechanism, the Board should, within a determine period of 

time, issue an opinion, if a majority of it member so decides or if so request by any 

supervisory authority concerned or the Commission. The Board should also be empower 

to adopt legally binding decision where there be dispute between supervisory 

authorities. For that purpose, it should issue, in principle with a two-third majority of it 

members, legally binding decision in clearly specify case where there be conflict 

view among supervisory authorities, in particular in the cooperation mechanism between 

the lead supervisory authority and supervisory authority concerned on the merit of the 

case, in particular whether there be an infringement of this Regulation. 

(137) There may be an urgent need to act in order to protect the right and freedom of data 

subjects, in particular when the danger exists that the enforcement of a right of a data 

subject could be considerably impeded.A supervisory authority should therefore be able to 

adopt duly justified provisional measure on it territory with a specify period of validity 

which should not exceed three months. 

(138) The application of such mechanism should be a condition for the lawfulness of a measure 

intend to produce legal effect by a supervisory authority in those case where it 

application be mandatory. In other case of cross-border relevance, the cooperation 

mechanism between the lead supervisory authority and supervisory authority concerned 

should be apply and mutual assistance and joint operation might be carry out between 

the supervisory authority concerned on a bilateral or multilateral basis without trigger 

the consistency mechanism. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 86 
DGD 2 EN 


(139) In order to promote the consistent application of this Regulation, the Board should be set 

up a an independent body of the Union. To fulfil it objectives, the Board should have 

legal personality. The Board should be represent by it Chair. It should replace the 

Working Party on the Protection of Individuals with Regard to the Processing of Personal 

Data establish by Directive 95/46/EC. It should consist of the head of a supervisory 

authority of each Member State and the European Data Protection Supervisor or their 

respective representatives. The Commission should participate in the Board's activity 

without voting right and the European Data Protection Supervisor should have specific 

voting rights. The Board should contribute to the consistent application of this Regulation 

throughout the Union, include by advise the Commission, in particular on the level of 

protection in third country or international organisations, and promote cooperation of 

the supervisory authority throughout the Union. The Board should act independently 

when perform it tasks. 

(140) The Board should be assist by a secretariat provide by the European Data Protection 

Supervisor. The staff of the European Data Protection Supervisor involve in carry out 

the task confer on the Board by this Regulation should perform it task exclusively 

under the instruction of, and report to, the Chair of the Board. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 87 
DGD 2 EN 


(141) Every data subject should have the right to lodge a complaint with a single supervisory 

authority, in particular in the Member State of his or her habitual residence, and the right to 

an effective judicial remedy in accordance with Article 47 of the Charter if the data subject 

considers that his or her right under this Regulation be infringe or where the supervisory 

authority do not act on a complaint, partially or wholly reject or dismisses a complaint 

or do not act where such action be necessary to protect the right of the data subject. The 

investigation follow a complaint should be carry out, subject to judicial review, to the 

extent that be appropriate in the specific case. The supervisory authority should inform the 

data subject of the progress and the outcome of the complaint within a reasonable period. If 

the case require further investigation or coordination with another supervisory authority, 

intermediate information should be give to the data subject. In order to facilitate the 

submission of complaints, each supervisory authority should take measure such a 

provide a complaint submission form which can also be complete electronically, 

without exclude other mean of communication. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 88 
DGD 2 EN 


(142) Where a data subject considers that his or her right under this Regulation be infringed, he 

or she should have the right to mandate a not-for-profit body, organisation or association 

which be constitute in accordance with the law of a Member State, have statutory objective 

which be in the public interest and be active in the field of the protection of personal data 

to lodge a complaint on his or her behalf with a supervisory authority, exercise the right to 

a judicial remedy on behalf of data subject or, if provide for in Member State law, 

exercise the right to receive compensation on behalf of data subjects. A Member State may 

provide for such a body, organisation or association to have the right to lodge a complaint 

in that Member State, independently of a data subject's mandate, and the right to an 

effective judicial remedy where it have reason to consider that the right of a data subject 

have be infringe a a result of the processing of personal data which infringes this 

Regulation. That body, organisation or association may not be allow to claim 

compensation on a data subject's behalf independently of the data subject's mandate. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 89 
DGD 2 EN 


(143) Any natural or legal person have the right to bring an action for annulment of decision of 

the Board before the Court of Justice under the condition provide for in 

Article 263 TFEU. As addressee of such decisions, the supervisory authority 

concernedwhich wish to challenge them have to bring action within two month of be 

notify of them, in accordance with Article 263 TFEU. Where decision of the Board be 

of direct and individual concern to a controller, processor or complainant, the latter may 

bring an action for annulment against those decision within two month of their 

publication on the website of the Board, in accordance with Article 263 TFEU. Without 

prejudice to this right under Article 263 TFEU, each natural or legal person should have an 

effective judicial remedy before the competent national court against a decision of a 

supervisory authority which produce legal effect concern that person. Such a decision 

concern in particular the exercise of investigative, corrective and authorisation power by 

the supervisory authority or the dismissal or rejection of complaints. However, the right to 

an effective judicial remedy do not encompass measure take by supervisory authority 

which be not legally binding, such a opinion issue by or advice provide by the 

supervisory authority. Proceedings against a supervisory authority should be brought 

before the court of the Member State where the supervisory authority be establish and 

should be conduct in accordance with that Member State's procedural law. Those court 

should exercise full jurisdiction, which should include jurisdiction to examine all question 

of fact and law relevant to the dispute before them. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 90 
DGD 2 EN 


Where a complaint have be reject or dismiss by a supervisory authority, the 

complainant may bring proceeding before the court in the same Member State. In the 

context of judicial remedy relate to the application of this Regulation, national court 

which consider a decision on the question necessary to enable them to give judgment, may, 

or in the case provide for in Article 267 TFEU, must, request the Court of Justice to give 

a preliminary ruling on the interpretation of Union law, include this Regulation. 

Furthermore, where a decision of a supervisory authority implement a decision of the 

Board be challenged before a national court and the validity of the decision of the Board be 

at issue, that national court do not have the power to declare the Board's decision invalid 

but must refer the question of validity to the Court of Justice in accordance with 

Article 267 TFEU a interpret by the Court of Justice, where it considers the decision 

invalid. However, a national court may not refer a question on the validity of the decision 

of the Board at the request of a natural or legal person which have the opportunity to bring 

an action for annulment of that decision, in particular if it be directly and individually 

concerned by that decision, but have not do so within the period laid down by 

Article 263 TFEU. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 91 
DGD 2 EN 


(144) Where a court seize of proceeding against a decision by a supervisory authority have 

reason to believe that proceeding concern the same processing, such a the same 

subject matter a regard processing by the same controller or processor, or the same cause 

of action, be brought before a competent court in another Member State, it should contact 

that court in order to confirm the existence of such related proceedings. If related 

proceeding be pending before a court in another Member State, any court other than the 

court first seize may stay it proceeding or may, on request of one of the parties, decline 

jurisdiction in favour of the court first seize if that court have jurisdiction over the 

proceeding in question and it law permit the consolidation of such related proceedings. 

Proceedings be deem to be related where they be so closely connect that it be 

expedient to hear and determine them together in order to avoid the risk of irreconcilable 

judgment result from separate proceedings. 

(145) For proceeding against a controller or processor, the plaintiff should have the choice to 

bring the action before the court of the Member States where the controller or processor 

have an establishment or where the data subject resides, unless the controller be a public 

authority of a Member State act in the exercise of it public powers. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 92 
DGD 2 EN 


(146) The controller or processor should compensate any damage which a person may suffer a a 

result of processing that infringes this Regulation. The controller or processor should be 

exempt from liability if it prof that it be not in any way responsible for the damage. The 

concept of damage should be broadly interpret in the light of the case-law of the Court of 

Justice in a manner which fully reflect the objective of this Regulation. This be without 

prejudice to any claim for damage derive from the violation of other rule in Union or 

Member State law. Processing that infringes this Regulation also include processing that 

infringes delegate and implement act adopt in accordance with this Regulation and 

Member State law specify rule of this Regulation. Data subject should receive full and 

effective compensation for the damage they have suffered. Where controller or processor 

be involve in the same processing, each controller or processor should be held liable for 

the entire damage. However, where they be join to the same judicial proceedings, in 

accordance with Member State law, compensation may be apportion accord to the 

responsibility of each controller or processor for the damage cause by the processing, 

provide that full and effective compensation of the data subject who suffer the damage 

be ensured. Any controller or processor which have paid full compensation may 

subsequently institute recourse proceeding against other controller or processor 

involve in the same processing. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 93 
DGD 2 EN 


(147) Where specific rule on jurisdiction be contain in this Regulation, in particular a 

regard proceeding seek a judicial remedy include compensation, against a controller 

or processor, general jurisdiction rule such a those of Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012 of 

the European Parliament and of the Council1 should not prejudice the application of such 

specific rules. 

(148) In order to strengthen the enforcement of the rule of this Regulation, penalty include 

administrative fine should be impose for any infringement of this Regulation, in addition 

to, or instead of appropriate measure impose by the supervisory authority pursuant to this 

Regulation. In a case of a minor infringement or if the fine likely to be impose would 

constitute a disproportionate burden to a natural person, a reprimand may be issue instead 

of a fine. Due regard should however be give to the nature, gravity and duration of the 

infringement, the intentional character of the infringement, action take to mitigate the 

damage suffered, degree of responsibility or any relevant previous infringements, the 

manner in which the infringement become know to the supervisory authority, compliance 

with measure order against the controller or processor, adherence to a code of conduct 

and any other aggravate or mitigate factor. The imposition of penalty include 

administrative fine should be subject to appropriateprocedural safeguard in accordance 

with the general principle of Union law and the Charter, include effective judicial 

protection and due process. 


1 Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 

12 December 2012 on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgment in civil 
and commercial matter (OJ L 351, 20.12.2012, p. 1). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 94 
DGD 2 EN 


(149) Member States should be able to lay down the rule on criminal penalty for infringement 

of this Regulation, include for infringement of national rule adopt pursuant to and 

within the limit of this Regulation. Those criminal penalty may also allow for the 

deprivation of the profit obtain through infringement of this Regulation. However, the 

imposition of criminal penalty for infringement of such national rule and of 

administrative penalty should not lead to a breach of the principle of ne bi in idem, a 

interpret by the Court of Justice. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 95 
DGD 2 EN 


(150) In order to strengthen and harmonise administrative penalty for infringement of this 

Regulation, each supervisory authority should have the power to impose administrative 

fines. This Regulation should indicate infringement and the upper limit and criterion for 

fix the related administrative fines, which should be determine by the competent 

supervisory authority in each individual case, take into account all relevant 

circumstance of the specific situation, with due regard in particular to the nature, gravity 

and duration of the infringement and of it consequence and the measure take to ensure 

compliance with the obligation under this Regulation and to prevent or mitigate the 

consequence of the infringement. Where administrative fine be impose on an 

undertaking, an undertaking should be understood to be an undertaking in accordance with 

Articles 101 and 102 TFEU for those purposes. Where administrative fine be impose on 

person that be not an undertaking, the supervisory authority should take account of the 

general level of income in the Member State a well a the economic situation of the 

person in consider the appropriate amount of the fine. The consistency mechanism may 

also be use to promote a consistent application of administrative fines. It should be for the 

Member States to determine whether and to which extent public authority should be 

subject to administrative fines. Imposing an administrative fine or give a warn do 

not affect the application of other power of the supervisory authority or of other 

penalty under this Regulation. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 96 
DGD 2 EN 


(151) The legal system of Denmark and Estonia do not allow for administrative fine a set out 

in this Regulation. The rule on administrative fine may be apply in such a manner that 

in Denmark the fine be impose by competent national court a a criminal penalty and in 

Estonia the fine be impose by the supervisory authority in the framework of a 

misdemeanor procedure, provide that such an application of the rule in those 

Member States have an equivalent effect to administrative fine impose by supervisory 

authorities. Therefore the competent national court should take into account the 

recommendation by the supervisory authority initiate the fine. In any event, the fine 

impose should be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. 

(152) Where this Regulation do not harmonise administrative penalty or where necessary in 

other cases, for example in case of serious infringement of this Regulation, 

Member States should implement a system which provide for effective, proportionate and 

dissuasive penalties. The nature of such penalties, criminal or administrative, should be 

determine by Member State law. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 97 
DGD 2 EN 


(153) Member States law should reconcile the rule govern freedom of expression and 

information, include journalistic, academic, artistic and or literary expression with the 

right to the protection of personal data pursuant to this Regulation. The processing of 

personal data solely for journalistic purposes, or for the purpose of academic, artistic or 

literary expression should be subject to derogation or exemption from certain provision 

of this Regulation if necessary to reconcile the right to the protection of personal data with 

the right to freedom of expression and information, a enshrine in Article 11 of the 

Charter. This should apply in particular to the processing of personal data in the 

audiovisual field and in news archive and press libraries. Therefore, Member States 

should adopt legislative measure which lay down the exemption and derogation 

necessary for the purpose of balance those fundamental rights. Member States should 

adopt such exemption and derogation on general principles, the right of the data subject, 

the controller and the processor, the transfer of personal data to third country or 

international organisations, the independent supervisory authorities, cooperation and 

consistency, and specific data-processing situations. Where such exemption or 

derogation differ from one Member State to another, the law of the Member State to 

which the controller be subject should apply. In order to take account of the importance of 

the right to freedom of expression in every democratic society, it be necessary to interpret 

notion relate to that freedom, such a journalism, broadly. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 98 
DGD 2 EN 


(154) This Regulation allows the principle of public access to official document to be take into 

account when apply this Regulation. Public access to official document may be 

consider to be in the public interest. Personal data in document held by a public 

authority or a public body should be able to be publicly disclose by that authority or body 

if the disclosure be provide for by Union or Member State law to which the public 

authority or public body be subject. Such law should reconcile public access to official 

document and the reuse of public sector information with the right to the protection of 

personal data and may therefore provide for the necessary reconciliation with the right to 

the protection of personal data pursuant to this Regulation. The reference to public 

authority and body should in that context include all authority or other body cover 

by Member State law on public access to documents. Directive 2003/98/EC of the 

European Parliament and of the Council1 leaf intact and in no way affect the level of 

protection of natural person with regard to the processing of personal data under the 

provision of Union and Member State law, and in particular do not alter the obligation 

and right set out in this Regulation. In particular, that Directive should not apply to 

document to which access be exclude or restrict by virtue of the access regime on the 

ground of protection of personal data, and part of document accessible by virtue of 

those regime which contain personal data the re-use of which have be provide for by 

law a be incompatible with the law concern the protection of natural person with 

regard to the processing of personal data. 


1 Directive 2003/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 November 2003 

on the re-use of public sector information (OJ L 345, 31.12.2003, p. 90). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 99 
DGD 2 EN 


(155) Member State law or collective agreements, include 'works agreements', may provide for 

specific rule on the processing of employees' personal data in the employment context, in 

particular for the condition under which personal data in the employment context may be 

process on the basis of the consent of the employee, the purpose of the recruitment, the 

performance of the contract of employment, include discharge of obligation laid down 

by law or by collective agreements, management, planning and organisation of work, 

equality and diversity in the workplace, health and safety at work, and for the purpose of 

the exercise and enjoyment, on an individual or collective basis, of right and benefit 

related to employment, and for the purpose of the termination of the employment 

relationship. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 100 
DGD 2 EN 


(156) The processing of personal data for archive purpose in the public interest, scientific or 

historical research purpose or statistical purpose should be subject to appropriate 

safeguard for the right and freedom of the data subject pursuant to this Regulation. 

Those safeguard should ensure that technical and organisational measure be in place in 

order to ensure, in particular, the principle of data minimisation. The further processing of 

personal data for archive purpose in the public interest, scientific or historical research 

purpose or statistical purpose be to be carry out when the controller have assess the 

feasibility to fulfil those purpose by processing data which do not permit or no longer 

permit the identification of data subjects, provide that appropriate safeguard exist (such 

as, for instance, pseudonymisation of the data). Member States should provide for 

appropriate safeguard for the processing of personal data for archive purpose in the 

public interest, scientific or historical research purpose or statistical purposes. 

Member States should be authorise to provide, under specific condition and subject to 

appropriate safeguard for data subjects, specification and derogation with regard to the 

information requirement and right to rectification, to erasure, to be forgotten, to 

restriction of processing, to data portability, and to object when processing personal data 

for archive purpose in the public interest, scientific or historical research purpose or 

statistical purposes. The condition and safeguard in question may entail specific 

procedure for data subject to exercise those right if this be appropriate in the light of the 

purpose sought by the specific processing along with technical and organisational 

measure aim at minimise the processing of personal data in pursuance of the 

proportionality and necessity principles. The processing of personal data for scientific 

purpose should also comply with other relevant legislation such a on clinical trials. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 101 
DGD 2 EN 


(157) By couple information from registries, researcher can obtain new knowledge of great 

value with regard to widespread medical condition such a cardiovascular disease, cancer 

and depression. On the basis of registries, research result can be enhanced, a they draw 

on a large population. Within social science, research on the basis of registry enables 

researcher to obtain essential knowledge about the long-term correlation of a number of 

social condition such a unemployment and education with other life conditions. Research 

result obtain through registry provide solid, high-quality knowledge which can 

provide the basis for the formulation and implementation of knowledge-based policy, 

improve the quality of life for a number of people and improve the efficiency of social 

services. In order to facilitate scientific research, personal data can be process for 

scientific research purposes, subject to appropriate condition and safeguard set out in 

Union or Member State law. 

(158) Where personal data be process for archive purposes, this Regulation should also 

apply to that processing, bearing in mind that this Regulation should not apply to decease 

persons. Public authority or public or private body that hold record of public interest 

should be service which, pursuant to Union or Member State law, have a legal obligation 

to acquire, preserve, appraise, arrange, describe, communicate, promote, disseminate and 

provide access to record of endure value for general public interest. Member States 

should also be authorise to provide for the further processing of personal data for 

archive purposes, for example with a view to provide specific information related to 

the political behaviour under former totalitarian state regimes, genocide, crime against 

humanity, in particular the Holocaust, or war crimes. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 102 
DGD 2 EN 


(159) Where personal data be process for scientific research purposes, this Regulation should 

also apply to that processing. For the purpose of this Regulation, the processing of 

personal data for scientific research purpose should be interpret in a broad manner 

include for example technological development and demonstration, fundamental 

research, apply research and privately fund research. In addition, it should take into 

account the Union's objective under Article 179(1) TFEU of achieve a European 

Research Area. Scientific research purpose should also include study conduct in the 

public interest in the area of public health. To meet the specificity of processing personal 

data for scientific research purposes, specific condition should apply in particular a 

regard the publication or otherwise disclosure of personal data in the context of scientific 

research purposes. If the result of scientific research in particular in the health context 

give reason for further measure in the interest of the data subject, the general rule of this 

Regulation should apply in view of those measures. 

(160) Where personal data be process for historical research purposes, this Regulation should 

also apply to that processing. This should also include historical research and research for 

genealogical purposes, bearing in mind that this Regulation should not apply to decease 

persons. 

(161) For the purpose of consent to the participation in scientific research activity in clinical 

trials, the relevant provision of Regulation (EU) No 536/2014 of the European Parliament 

and of the Council1 should apply. 


1 Regulation (EU) No 536/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 

16 April 2014 on clinical trial on medicinal product for human use, and repeal 
Directive 2001/20/EC (OJ L 158, 27.5.2014, p. 1). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 103 
DGD 2 EN 


(162) Where personal data be process for statistical purposes, this Regulation should apply to 

that processing. Union or Member State law should, within the limit of this Regulation, 

determine statistical content, control of access, specification for the processing of personal 

data for statistical purpose and appropriate measure to safeguard the right and freedom 

of the data subject and for ensure statistical confidentiality. Statistical purpose mean any 

operation of collection and the processing of personal data necessary for statistical survey 

or for the production of statistical results. Those statistical result may further be use for 

different purposes, include a scientific research purpose. The statistical purpose implies 

that the result of processing for statistical purpose be not personal data, but aggregate data, 

and that this result or the personal data be not use in support of measure or decision 

regard any particular natural person. 

(163) The confidential information which the Union and national statistical authority collect for 

the production of official European and official national statistic should be protected. 

European statistic should be developed, produce and disseminate in accordance with 

the statistical principle a set out in Article 338(2) TFEU, while national statistic should 

also comply with Member State law. Regulation (EC) No 223/2009 of the European 

Parliament and of the Council1 provide further specification on statistical confidentiality 

for European statistics. 


1 Regulation (EC) No 223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 

11 March 2009 on European statistic and repeal Regulation (EC, Euratom) 
No 1101/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the transmission of data 
subject to statistical confidentiality to the Statistical Office of the European Communities, 
Council Regulation (EC) No 322/97 on Community Statistics, and Council 
Decision 89/382/EEC, Euratom establish a Committee on the Statistical Programmes of 
the European Communities (OJ L 87, 31.3.2009, p. 164). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 104 
DGD 2 EN 


(164) As regard the power of the supervisory authority to obtain from the controller or 

processor access to personal data and access to their premises, Member States may adopt 

by law, within the limit of this Regulation, specific rule in order to safeguard the 

professional or other equivalent secrecy obligations, in so far a necessary to reconcile the 

right to the protection of personal data with an obligation of professional secrecy. This be 

without prejudice to exist Member State obligation to adopt rule on professional 

secrecy where require by Union law. 

(165) This Regulation respect and do not prejudice the status under exist constitutional law 

of church and religious association or community in the Member States, a recognise 

in Article 17 TFEU. 

(166) In order to fulfil the objective of this Regulation, namely to protect the fundamental right 

and freedom of natural person and in particular their right to the protection of personal 

data and to ensure the free movement of personal data within the Union, the power to 

adopt act in accordance with Article 290 TFEU should be delegate to the Commission. 

In particular, delegate act should be adopt in respect of criterion and requirement for 

certification mechanisms, information to be present by standardise icon and 

procedure for provide such icons. It be of particular importance that the Commission 

carry out appropriate consultation during it preparatory work, include at expert level. 

The Commission, when prepare and drawing-up delegate acts, should ensure a 

simultaneous, timely and appropriate transmission of relevant document to the European 

Parliament and to the Council. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 105 
DGD 2 EN 


(167) In order to ensure uniform condition for the implementation of this Regulation, 

implement power should be confer on the Commission when provide for by this 

Regulation. Those power should be exercise in accordance with Regulation (EU) 

No 182/2011. In that context, the Commission should consider specific measure for 

micro, small and medium-sized enterprises. 

(168) The examination procedure should be use for the adoption of implement act on 

standard contractual clause between controller and processor and between processors; 

code of conduct; technical standard and mechanism for certification; the adequate level 

of protection afford by a third country, a territory or a specify sector within that third 

country, or an international organisation; standard protection clauses; format and 

procedure for the exchange of information by electronic mean between controllers, 

processor and supervisory authority for binding corporate rules; mutual assistance; and 

arrangement for the exchange of information by electronic mean between supervisory 

authorities, and between supervisory authority and the Board. 

(169) The Commission should adopt immediately applicable implement act where available 

evidence reveals that a third country, a territory or a specify sector within that third 

country, or an international organisation do not ensure an adequate level of protection, 

and imperative ground of urgency so require. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 106 
DGD 2 EN 


(170) Since the objective of this Regulation, namely to ensure an equivalent level of protection 

of natural person and the free flow of personal data throughout the Union, cannot be 

sufficiently achieve by the Member States and can rather, by reason of the scale or effect 

of the action, be good achieve at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in 

accordance with the principle of subsidiarity a set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on 

European Union (TEU). In accordance with the principle of proportionality a set out in 

that Article, this Regulation do not go beyond what be necessary in order to achieve that 

objective. 

(171) Directive 95/46/EC should be repeal by this Regulation. Processing already under way 

on the date of application of this Regulation should be brought into conformity with this 

Regulation within the period of two year after which this Regulation enters into force. 

Where processing be base on consent pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC, it be not necessary 

for the data subject to give his or her consent again if the manner in which the consent have 

be give be in line with the condition of this Regulation, so a to allow the controller to 

continue such processing after the date of application of this Regulation. Commission 

decision adopt and authorisation by supervisory authority base on 

Directive 95/46/EC remain in force until amended, replace or repealed. 

(172) The European Data Protection Supervisor be consult in accordance with Article 28(2) 

of Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and deliver an opinion on 7 March 20121. 


1 OJ C 192, 30.6.2012, p. 7. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 107 
DGD 2 EN 


(173) This Regulation should apply to all matter concern the protection of fundamental right 

and freedom vis-à-vis the processing of personal data which be not subject to specific 

obligation with the same objective set out in Directive 2002/58/EC of the European 

Parliament and of the Council1, include the obligation on the controller and the right of 

natural persons. In order to clarify the relationship between this Regulation and 

Directive 2002/58/EC, that Directive should be amend accordingly. Once this 

Regulation be adopted, Directive 2002/58/EC should be review in particular in order to 

ensure consistency with this Regulation, 

HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: 


1 Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2002 

concern the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic 
communication sector (Directive on privacy and electronic communications) (OJ L 201, 
31.7.2002, p. 37). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 108 
DGD 2 EN 


CHAPTER I 

GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Article 1 

Subject-matter and objective 

1. This Regulation lay down rule relate to the protection of natural person with regard to 

the processing of personal data and rule relate to the free movement of personal data. 

2. This Regulation protects fundamental right and freedom of natural person and in 

particular their right to the protection of personal data. 

3. The free movement of personal data within the Union shall be neither restrict nor 

prohibit for reason connect with the protection of natural person with regard to the 

processing of personal data. 

Article 2 

Material scope 

1. This Regulation applies to the processing of personal data wholly or partly by automate 

mean and to the processing other than by automate mean of personal data which form 

part of a filing system or be intend to form part of a filing system. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 109 
DGD 2 EN 


2. This Regulation do not apply to the processing of personal data: 

(a) in the course of an activity which fall outside the scope of Union law; 

(b) by the Member States when carry out activity which fall within the scope of 

Chapter 2 of Title V of the TEU; 

(c) by a natural person in the course of a purely personal or household activity; 

(d) by competent authority for the purpose of the prevention, investigation, detection 

or prosecution of criminal offences, the execution of criminal penalties, include the 

safeguard against and the prevention of threat to public security. 

3. For the processing of personal data by the Union institutions, bodies, office and agencies, 

Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 applies. Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and other Union legal 

act applicable to such processing of personal data shall be adapt to the principle and 

rule of this Regulation in accordance with Article 98. 

4. This Regulation shall be without prejudice to the application of Directive 2000/31/EC, in 

particular of the liability rule of intermediary service provider in Articles 12 to 15 of that 

Directive. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 110 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 3 

Territorial scope 

1. This Regulation applies to the processing of personal data in the context of the activity of 

an establishment of a controller or a processor in the Union, regardless of whether the 

processing take place in the Union or not. 

2. This Regulation applies to the processing of personal data of data subject who be in the 

Union by a controller or processor not establish in the Union, where the processing 

activity be related to: 

(a) the offering of good or services, irrespective of whether a payment of the data 

subject be required, to such data subject in the Union; or 

(b) the monitoring of their behaviour a far a their behaviour take place within the 

Union. 

3. This Regulation applies to the processing of personal data by a controller not establish in 

the Union, but in a place where Member State law applies by virtue of public international 

law. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 111 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 4 

Definitions 

For the purpose of this Regulation: 

(1) 'personal data' mean any information relate to an identify or identifiable natural person 

('data subject'); an identifiable natural person be one who can be identified, directly or 

indirectly, in particular by reference to an identifier such a a name, an identification 

number, location data, an online identifier or to one or more factor specific to the 

physical, physiological, genetic, mental, economic, cultural or social identity of that natural 

person; 

(2) 'processing' mean any operation or set of operation which be perform on personal data 

or on set of personal data, whether or not by automate means, such a collection, 

recording, organisation, structuring, storage, adaptation or alteration, retrieval, 

consultation, use, disclosure by transmission, dissemination or otherwise make available, 

alignment or combination, restriction, erasure or destruction; 

(3) 'restriction of processing' mean the mark of store personal data with the aim of 

limit their processing in the future; 

(4) 'profiling' mean any form of automate processing of personal data consist of the use 

of personal data to evaluate certain personal aspect relate to a natural person, in 

particular to analyse or predict aspect concern that natural person's performance at 

work, economic situation, health, personal preferences, interests, reliability, behaviour, 

location or movements; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 112 
DGD 2 EN 


(5) 'pseudonymisation' mean the processing of personal data in such a manner that the 

personal data can no longer be attribute to a specific data subject without the use of 

additional information, provide that such additional information be kept separately and be 

subject to technical and organisational measure to ensure that the personal data be not 

attribute to an identify or identifiable natural person; 

(6) 'filing system' mean any structure set of personal data which be accessible accord to 

specific criteria, whether centralised, decentralise or disperse on a functional or 

geographical basis; 

(7) 'controller' mean the natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body which, 

alone or jointly with others, determines the purpose and mean of the processing of 

personal data; where the purpose and mean of such processing be determine by Union 

or Member State law, the controller or the specific criterion for it nomination may be 

provide for by Union or Member State law; 

(8) 'processor' mean a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body which 

process personal data on behalf of the controller; 

(9) 'recipient' mean a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or another body, to 

which the personal data be disclosed, whether a third party or not. However, public 

authority which may receive personal data in the framework of a particular inquiry in 

accordance with Union or Member State law shall not be regard a recipients; the 

processing of those data by those public authority shall be in compliance with the 

applicable data protection rule accord to the purpose of the processing; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 113 
DGD 2 EN 


(10) 'third party' mean a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or body other than the 

data subject, controller, processor and person who, under the direct authority of the 

controller or processor, be authorise to process personal data; 

(11) 'consent' of the data subject mean any freely given, specific, inform and unambiguous 

indication of the data subject's wish by which he or she, by a statement or by a clear 

affirmative action, signifies agreement to the processing of personal data relate to him or 

her; 

(12) 'personal data breach' mean a breach of security lead to the accidental or unlawful 

destruction, loss, alteration, unauthorised disclosure of, or access to, personal data 

transmitted, store or otherwise processed; 

(13) 'genetic data' mean personal data relate to the inherit or acquire genetic 

characteristic of a natural person which give unique information about the physiology or 

the health of that natural person and which result, in particular, from an analysis of a 

biological sample from the natural person in question; 

(14) 'biometric data' mean personal data result from specific technical processing relate to 

the physical, physiological or behavioural characteristic of a natural person, which allow 

or confirm the unique identification of that natural person, such a facial image or 

dactyloscopic data; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 114 
DGD 2 EN 


(15) 'data concern health' mean personal data related to the physical or mental health of a 

natural person, include the provision of health care services, which reveal information 

about his or her health status; 

(16) 'main establishment' means: 

(a) a regard a controller with establishment in more than one Member State, the place 

of it central administration in the Union, unless the decision on the purpose and 

mean of the processing of personal data be take in another establishment of the 

controller in the Union and the latter establishment have the power to have such 

decision implemented, in which case the establishment have take such decision 

be to be consider to be the main establishment; 

(b) a regard a processor with establishment in more than one Member State, the place 

of it central administration in the Union, or, if the processor have no central 

administration in the Union, the establishment of the processor in the Union where 

the main processing activity in the context of the activity of an establishment of 

the processor take place to the extent that the processor be subject to specific 

obligation under this Regulation; 

(17) 'representative' mean a natural or legal person establish in the Union who, designate 

by the controller or processor in write pursuant to Article 27, represent the controller or 

processor with regard to their respective obligation under this Regulation; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 115 
DGD 2 EN 


(18) 'enterprise' mean a natural or legal person engage in an economic activity, irrespective of 

it legal form, include partnership or association regularly engage in an economic 

activity; 

(19) 'group of undertakings' mean a control undertaking and it control undertakings; 

(20) 'binding corporate rules' mean personal data protection policy which be adhere to by a 

controller or processor establish on the territory of a Member State for transfer or a set 

of transfer of personal data to a controller or processor in one or more third country 

within a group of undertakings, or group of enterprise engage in a joint economic 

activity; 

(21) 'supervisory authority' mean an independent public authority which be establish by a 

Member State pursuant to Article 51; 

(22) 'supervisory authority concerned' mean a supervisory authority which be concerned by the 

processing of personal data because: 

(a) the controller or processor be establish on the territory of the Member State of that 

supervisory authority; 

(b) data subject reside in the Member State of that supervisory authority be 

substantially affected or likely to be substantially affected by the processing; or 

(c) a complaint have be lodge with that supervisory authority; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 116 
DGD 2 EN 


(23) 'cross-border processing' mean either: 

(a) processing of personal data which take place in the context of the activity of 

establishment in more than one Member State of a controller or processor in the 

Union where the controller or processor be establish in more than one 

Member State; or 

(b) processing of personal data which take place in the context of the activity of a 

single establishment of a controller or processor in the Union but which substantially 

affect or be likely to substantially affect data subject in more than one 

Member State. 

(24) 'relevant and reason objection' mean an objection a to whether there be an infringement 

of this Regulation or not, or whether the envisage action in relation to the controller or 

processor complies with this Regulation, which clearly demonstrates the significance of the 

risk pose by the draft decision a regard the fundamental right and freedom of data 

subject and, where applicable, the free flow of personal data within the Union; 

(25) 'information society service' mean a service a define in point (b) of Article 1(1) of 

Directive (EU) 2015/1535 of the European Parliament and of the Council1; 

(26) 'international organisation' mean an organisation and it subordinate body govern by 

public international law, or any other body which be set up by, or on the basis of, an 

agreement between two or more countries. 


1 Directive (EU) 2015/1535 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 

9 September 2015 lay down a procedure for the provision of information in the field of 
technical regulation and of rule on Information Society service (OJ L 241, 17.9.2015, 
p. 1). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 117 
DGD 2 EN 


CHAPTER II 

PRINCIPLES 

Article 5 

Principles relate to processing of personal data 

1. Personal data shall be: 

(a) process lawfully, fairly and in a transparent manner in relation to the data subject 

('lawfulness, fairness and transparency'); 

(b) collect for specified, explicit and legitimate purpose and not further process in a 

manner that be incompatible with those purposes; further processing for archive 

purpose in the public interest, scientific or historical research purpose or statistical 

purpose shall, in accordance with Article 89(1), not be consider to be 

incompatible with the initial purpose ('purpose limitation'); 

(c) adequate, relevant and limited to what be necessary in relation to the purpose for 

which they be process ('data minimisation'); 

(d) accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date; every reasonable step must be take 

to ensure that personal data that be inaccurate, have regard to the purpose for 

which they be processed, be erase or rectify without delay ('accuracy'); 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 118 
DGD 2 EN 


(e) kept in a form which permit identification of data subject for no longer than be 

necessary for the purpose for which the personal data be processed; personal data 

may be store for longer period insofar a the personal data will be process solely 

for archive purpose in the public interest, scientific or historical research purpose 

or statistical purpose in accordance with Article 89(1) subject to implementation of 

the appropriate technical and organisational measure require by this Regulation in 

order to safeguard the right and freedom of the data subject ('storage limitation'); 

(f) process in a manner that ensures appropriate security of the personal data, 

include protection against unauthorised or unlawful processing and against 

accidental loss, destruction or damage, use appropriate technical or organisational 

measure ('integrity and confidentiality'). 

2. The controller shall be responsible for, and be able to demonstrate compliance with, 

paragraph 1 ('accountability'). 

Article 6 

Lawfulness of processing 

1. Processing shall be lawful only if and to the extent that at least one of the follow 

applies: 

(a) the data subject have give consent to the processing of his or her personal data for 

one or more specific purposes; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 119 
DGD 2 EN 


(b) processing be necessary for the performance of a contract to which the data subject be 

party or in order to take step at the request of the data subject prior to enter into a 

contract; 

(c) processing be necessary for compliance with a legal obligation to which the controller 

be subject; 

(d) processing be necessary in order to protect the vital interest of the data subject or of 

another natural person; 

(e) processing be necessary for the performance of a task carry out in the public interest 

or in the exercise of official authority vested in the controller; 

(f) processing be necessary for the purpose of the legitimate interest pursue by the 

controller or by a third party, except where such interest be overridden by the 

interest or fundamental right and freedom of the data subject which require 

protection of personal data, in particular where the data subject be a child. 

Point (f) of the first subparagraph shall not apply to processing carry out by public 

authority in the performance of their tasks. 

2. Member States may maintain or introduce more specific provision to adapt the application 

of the rule of this Regulation with regard to processing for compliance with point (c) 

and (e) of paragraph 1 by determine more precisely specific requirement for the 

processing and other measure to ensure lawful and fair processing include for other 

specific processing situation a provide for in Chapter IX. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 120 
DGD 2 EN 


3. The basis for the processing refer to in point (c) and (e) of paragraph 1 shall be laid 

down by: 

(a) Union law; or 

(b) Member State law to which the controller be subject. 

The purpose of the processing shall be determine in that legal basis or, a regard the 

processing refer to in point (e) of paragraph 1, shall be necessary for the performance of 

a task carry out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested in the 

controller. That legal basis may contain specific provision to adapt the application of rule 

of this Regulation, inter alia: the general condition govern the lawfulness of processing 

by the controller; the type of data which be subject to the processing; the data subject 

concerned; the entity to, and the purpose for which, the personal data may be disclosed; 

the purpose limitation; storage periods; and processing operation and processing 

procedures, include measure to ensure lawful and fair processing such a those for other 

specific processing situation a provide for in Chapter IX. The Union or the 

Member State law shall meet an objective of public interest and be proportionate to the 

legitimate aim pursued. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 121 
DGD 2 EN 


4. Where the processing for a purpose other than that for which the personal data have be 

collect be not base on the data subject's consent or on a Union or Member State law 

which constitutes a necessary and proportionate measure in a democratic society to 

safeguard the objective refer to in Article 23(1), the controller shall, in order to 

ascertain whether processing for another purpose be compatible with the purpose for which 

the personal data be initially collected, take into account, inter alia: 

(a) any link between the purpose for which the personal data have be collect and 

the purpose of the intend further processing; 

(b) the context in which the personal data have be collected, in particular regard the 

relationship between data subject and the controller; 

(c) the nature of the personal data, in particular whether special category of personal 

data be processed, pursuant to Article 9, or whether personal data related to criminal 

conviction and offence be processed, pursuant to Article 10; 

(d) the possible consequence of the intend further processing for data subjects; 

(e) the existence of appropriate safeguards, which may include encryption or 

pseudonymisation. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 122 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 7 

Conditions for consent 

1. Where processing be base on consent, the controller shall be able to demonstrate that the 

data subject have consent to processing of his or her personal data. 

2. If the data subject's consent be give in the context of a write declaration which also 

concern other matters, the request for consent shall be present in a manner which be 

clearly distinguishable from the other matters, in an intelligible and easily accessible form, 

use clear and plain language. Any part of such a declaration which constitutes an 

infringement of this Regulation shall not be binding. 

3. The data subject shall have the right to withdraw his or her consent at any time. The 

withdrawal of consent shall not affect the lawfulness of processing base on consent before 

it withdrawal. Prior to give consent, the data subject shall be inform thereof. It shall 

be a easy to withdraw consent a to give it. 

4. When assess whether consent be freely given, utmost account shall be take of whether, 

inter alia, the performance of a contract, include the provision of a service, be conditional 

on consent to the processing of personal data that be not necessary for the performance of 

that contract. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 123 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 8 

Conditions applicable to child's consent 

in relation to information society service 

1. Where point (a) of Article 6(1) applies, in relation to the offer of information society 

service directly to a child, the processing of the personal data of a child shall be lawful 

where the child be at least 16 year old. Where the child be below the age of 16 years, such 

processing shall be lawful only if and to the extent that consent be give or authorise by 

the holder of parental responsibility over the child. 

Member States may provide by law for a low age for those purpose provide that such 

low age be not below 13 years. 

2. The controller shall make reasonable effort to verify in such case that consent be give or 

authorise by the holder of parental responsibility over the child, take into consideration 

available technology. 

3. Paragraph 1 shall not affect the general contract law of Member States such a the rule on 

the validity, formation or effect of a contract in relation to a child. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 124 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 9 

Processing of special category of personal data 

1. Processing of personal data reveal racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, religious or 

philosophical beliefs, or trade-union membership, and the processing of genetic data, 

biometric data for the purpose of uniquely identify a natural person, data concern 

health or data concern a natural person's sex life or sexual orientation shall be 

prohibited. 

2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply if one of the follow applies: 

(a) the data subject have give explicit consent to the processing of those personal data 

for one or more specify purposes, except where Union or Member State law 

provide that the prohibition refer to in paragraph 1 may not be lift by the data 

subject; 

(b) processing be necessary for the purpose of carry out the obligation and 

exercise specific right of the controller or of the data subject in the field of 

employment and social security and social protection law in so far a it be authorise 

by Union or Member State law or a collective agreement pursuant to Member State 

law provide for appropriate safeguard for the fundamental right and the interest 

of the data subject; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 125 
DGD 2 EN 


(c) processing be necessary to protect the vital interest of the data subject or of another 

natural person where the data subject be physically or legally incapable of give 

consent; 

(d) processing be carry out in the course of it legitimate activity with appropriate 

safeguard by a foundation, association or any other not-for-profit body with a 

political, philosophical, religious or trade-union aim and on condition that the 

processing relates solely to the member or to former member of the body or to 

person who have regular contact with it in connection with it purpose and that the 

personal data be not disclose outside that body without the consent of the data 

subjects; 

(e) processing relates to personal data which be manifestly make public by the data 

subject; 

(f) processing be necessary for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claim or 

whenever court be act in their judicial capacity; 

(g) processing be necessary for reason of substantial public interest, on the basis of 

Union or Member State law which shall be proportionate to the aim pursued, respect 

the essence of the right to data protection and provide for suitable and specific 

measure to safeguard the fundamental right and the interest of the data subject; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 126 
DGD 2 EN 


(h) processing be necessary for the purpose of preventive or occupational medicine, for 

the assessment of the work capacity of the employee, medical diagnosis, the 

provision of health or social care or treatment or the management of health or social 

care system and service on the basis of Union or Member State law or pursuant to 

contract with a health professional and subject to the condition and safeguard 

refer to in paragraph 3; 

(i) processing be necessary for reason of public interest in the area of public health, 

such a protect against serious cross-border threat to health or ensure high 

standard of quality and safety of health care and of medicinal product or medical 

devices, on the basis of Union or Member State law which provide for suitable and 

specific measure to safeguard the right and freedom of the data subject, in 

particular professional secrecy; or 

(j) processing be necessary for archive purpose in the public interest, scientific or 

historical research purpose or statistical purpose in accordance with Article 89(1) 

base on Union or Member State law which shall be proportionate to the aim 

pursued, respect the essence of the right to data protection and provide for suitable 

and specific measure to safeguard the fundamental right and the interest of the 

data subject. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 127 
DGD 2 EN 


3. Personal data refer to in paragraph 1 may be process for the purpose refer to in 

point (h) of paragraph 2 when those data be process by or under the responsibility of a 

professional subject to the obligation of professional secrecy under Union or Member State 

law or rule establish by national competent body or by another person also subject to 

an obligation of secrecy under Union or Member State law or rule establish by national 

competent bodies. 

4. Member States may maintain or introduce further conditions, include limitations, with 

regard to the processing of genetic data, biometric data or data concern health. 

Article 10 

Processing of personal data relate to criminal conviction and offence 

Processing of personal data relate to criminal conviction and offence or related security 

measure base on Article 6(1) shall be carry out only under the control of official authority or 

when the processing be authorise by Union or Member State law provide for appropriate 

safeguard for the right and freedom of data subjects. Any comprehensive register of criminal 

conviction shall be kept only under the control of official authority. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 128 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 11 

Processing which do not require identification 

1. If the purpose for which a controller process personal data do not or do no longer 

require the identification of a data subject by the controller, the controller shall not be 

oblige to maintain, acquire or process additional information in order to identify the data 

subject for the sole purpose of comply with this Regulation. 

2. Where, in case refer to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the controller be able to 

demonstrate that it be not in a position to identify the data subject, the controller shall 

inform the data subject accordingly, if possible. In such cases, Articles 15 to 20 shall not 

apply except where the data subject, for the purpose of exercise his or her right under 

those articles, provide additional information enable his or her identification. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 129 
DGD 2 EN 


CHAPTER III 

RIGHTS OF THE DATA SUBJECT 

SECTION 1 

TRANSPARENCY AND MODALITIES 

Article 12 

Transparent information, communication and modality 

for the exercise of the right of the data subject 

1. The controller shall take appropriate measure to provide any information refer to in 

Articles 13 and 14 and any communication under Articles 15 to 22 and 34 relate to 

processing to the data subject in a concise, transparent, intelligible and easily accessible 

form, use clear and plain language, in particular for any information address 

specifically to a child. The information shall be provide in writing, or by other means, 

including, where appropriate, by electronic means. When request by the data subject, the 

information may be provide orally, provide that the identity of the data subject be proven 

by other means. 

2. The controller shall facilitate the exercise of data subject right under Articles 15 to 22. In 

the case refer to in Article 11(2), the controller shall not refuse to act on the request of 

the data subject for exercise his or her right under Articles 15 to 22, unless the 

controller demonstrates that it be not in a position to identify the data subject. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 130 
DGD 2 EN 


3. The controller shall provide information on action take on a request under Articles 15 

to 22 to the data subject without undue delay and in any event within one month of receipt 

of the request. That period may be extend by two further month where necessary, take 

into account the complexity and number of the requests. The controller shall inform the 

data subject of any such extension within one month of receipt of the request, together with 

the reason for the delay. Where the data subject make the request by electronic form 

means, the information shall be provide by electronic mean where possible, unless 

otherwise request by the data subject. 

4. If the controller do not take action on the request of the data subject, the controller shall 

inform the data subject without delay and at the late within one month of receipt of the 

request of the reason for not take action and on the possibility of lodge a complaint 

with a supervisory authority and seek a judicial remedy. 

5. Information provide under Articles 13 and 14 and any communication and any action 

take under Articles 15 to 22 and 34 shall be provide free of charge. Where request from 

a data subject be manifestly unfounded or excessive, in particular because of their 

repetitive character, the controller may either: 

(a) charge a reasonable fee take into account the administrative cost of provide the 

information or communication or take the action requested; or 

(b) refuse to act on the request. 

The controller shall bear the burden of demonstrate the manifestly unfounded or 

excessive character of the request. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 131 
DGD 2 EN 


6. Without prejudice to Article 11, where the controller have reasonable doubt concern the 

identity of the natural person make the request refer to in Articles 15 to 21, the 

controller may request the provision of additional information necessary to confirm the 

identity of the data subject. 

7. The information to be provide to data subject pursuant to Articles 13 and 14 may be 

provide in combination with standardise icon in order to give in an easily visible, 

intelligible and clearly legible manner a meaningful overview of the intend processing. 

Where the icon be present electronically they shall be machine-readable. 

8. The Commission shall be empower to adopt delegate act in accordance with Article 92 

for the purpose of determine the information to be present by the icon and the 

procedure for provide standardise icons. 

SECTION 2 

INFORMATION AND ACCESS TO PERSONAL DATA 

Article 13 

Information to be provide where personal data be collect from the data subject 

1. Where personal data relate to a data subject be collect from the data subject, the 

controller shall, at the time when personal data be obtained, provide the data subject with 

all of the follow information: 

(a) the identity and the contact detail of the controller and, where applicable, of the 

controller's representative; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 132 
DGD 2 EN 


(b) the contact detail of the data protection officer, where applicable; 

(c) the purpose of the processing for which the personal data be intend a well a the 

legal basis for the processing; 

(d) where the processing be base on point (f) of Article 6(1), the legitimate interest 

pursue by the controller or by a third party; 

(e) the recipient or category of recipient of the personal data, if any; 

(f) where applicable, the fact that the controller intend to transfer personal data to a 

third country or international organisation and the existence or absence of an 

adequacy decision by the Commission, or in the case of transfer refer to in 

Article 46 or 47, or the second subparagraph of Article 49(1), reference to the 

appropriate or suitable safeguard and the mean by which to obtain a copy of them 

or where they have be make available. 

2. In addition to the information refer to in paragraph 1, the controller shall, at the time 

when personal data be obtained, provide the data subject with the follow further 

information necessary to ensure fair and transparent processing: 

(a) the period for which the personal data will be stored, or if that be not possible, the 

criterion use to determine that period; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 133 
DGD 2 EN 


(b) the existence of the right to request from the controller access to and rectification or 

erasure of personal data or restriction of processing concern the data subject or to 

object to processing a well a the right to data portability; 

(c) where the processing be base on point (a) of Article 6(1) or point (a) of Article 9(2), 

the existence of the right to withdraw consent at any time, without affect the 

lawfulness of processing base on consent before it withdrawal; 

(d) the right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority; 

(e) whether the provision of personal data be a statutory or contractual requirement, or a 

requirement necessary to enter into a contract, a well a whether the data subject be 

oblige to provide the personal data and of the possible consequence of failure to 

provide such data; 

(f) the existence of automate decision-making, include profiling, refer to in 

Article 22(1) and (4) and, at least in those cases, meaningful information about the 

logic involved, a well a the significance and the envisage consequence of such 

processing for the data subject. 

3. Where the controller intend to further process the personal data for a purpose other than 

that for which the personal data be collected, the controller shall provide the data subject 

prior to that further processing with information on that other purpose and with any 

relevant further information a refer to in paragraph 2. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 134 
DGD 2 EN 


4. Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall not apply where and insofar a the data subject already have the 

information. 

Article 14 

Information to be provide where personal data have not be obtain from the data subject 

1. Where personal data have not be obtain from the data subject, the controller shall 

provide the data subject with the follow information: 

(a) the identity and the contact detail of the controller and, if any, of the controller's 

representative; 

(b) the contact detail of the data protection officer, where applicable; 

(c) the purpose of the processing for which the personal data be intend a well a the 

legal basis for the processing; 

(d) the category of personal data concerned; 

(e) the recipient or category of recipient of the personal data, where applicable; 

(f) where applicable, that the controller intend to transfer personal data to a recipient in 

a third country or international organisation and the existence or absence of an 

adequacy decision by the Commission, or in the case of transfer refer to in 

Article 46 or 47, or the second subparagraph of Article 49(1), reference to the 

appropriate or suitable safeguard and the mean to obtain a copy of them or where 

they have be make available. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 135 
DGD 2 EN 


2. In addition to the information refer to in paragraph 1, the controller shall provide the 

data subject with the follow information necessary to ensure fair and transparent 

processing in respect of the data subject: 

(a) the period for which the personal data will be stored, or if that be not possible, the 

criterion use to determine that period; 

(b) where the processing be base on point (f) of Article 6(1), the legitimate interest 

pursue by the controller or by a third party; 

(c) the existence of the right to request from the controller access to and rectification or 

erasure of personal data or restriction of processing concern the data subject and 

to object to processing a well a the right to data portability; 

(d) where processing be base on point (a) of Article 6(1) or point (a) of Article 9(2), the 

existence of the right to withdraw consent at any time, without affect the 

lawfulness of processing base on consent before it withdrawal; 

(e) the right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority; 

(f) from which source the personal data originate, and if applicable, whether it come 

from publicly accessible sources; 

(g) the existence of automate decision-making, include profiling, refer to in 

Article 22(1) and (4) and, at least in those cases, meaningful information about the 

logic involved, a well a the significance and the envisage consequence of such 

processing for the data subject. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 136 
DGD 2 EN 


3. The controller shall provide the information refer to in paragraph 1 and 2: 

(a) within a reasonable period after obtain the personal data, but at the late within 

one month, have regard to the specific circumstance in which the personal data 

be processed; 

(b) if the personal data be to be use for communication with the data subject, at the 

late at the time of the first communication to that data subject; or 

(c) if a disclosure to another recipient be envisaged, at the late when the personal data 

be first disclosed. 

4. Where the controller intend to further process the personal data for a purpose other than 

that for which the personal data be obtained, the controller shall provide the data subject 

prior to that further processing with information on that other purpose and with any 

relevant further information a refer to in paragraph 2. 

5. Paragraphs 1 to 4 shall not apply where and insofar as: 

(a) the data subject already have the information; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 137 
DGD 2 EN 


(b) the provision of such information prof impossible or would involve a 

disproportionate effort, in particular for processing for archive purpose in the 

public interest, scientific or historical research purpose or statistical purposes, 

subject to the condition and safeguard refer to in Article 89(1) or in so far a the 

obligation refer to in paragraph 1 of this Article be likely to render impossible or 

seriously impair the achievement of the objective of that processing. In such case 

the controller shall take appropriate measure to protect the data subject's right and 

freedom and legitimate interests, include make the information publicly 

available; 

(c) obtain or disclosure be expressly laid down by Union or Member State law to 

which the controller be subject and which provide appropriate measure to protect 

the data subject's legitimate interests; or 

(d) where the personal data must remain confidential subject to an obligation of 

professional secrecy regulate by Union or Member State law, include a statutory 

obligation of secrecy. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 138 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 15 

Right of access by the data subject 

1. The data subject shall have the right to obtain from the controller confirmation a to 

whether or not personal data concern him or her be be processed, and where that be 

the case, access to the personal data and the follow information: 

(a) the purpose of the processing; 

(b) the category of personal data concerned; 

(c) the recipient or category of recipient to whom the personal data have be or will 

be disclosed, in particular recipient in third country or international organisations; 

(d) where possible, the envisage period for which the personal data will be stored, or, if 

not possible, the criterion use to determine that period; 

(e) the existence of the right to request from the controller rectification or erasure of 

personal data or restriction of processing of personal data concern the data subject 

or to object to such processing; 

(f) the right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority; 

(g) where the personal data be not collect from the data subject, any available 

information a to their source; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 139 
DGD 2 EN 


(h) the existence of automate decision-making, include profiling, refer to in 

Article 22(1) and (4) and, at least in those cases, meaningful information about the 

logic involved, a well a the significance and the envisage consequence of such 

processing for the data subject. 

2. Where personal data be transfer to a third country or to an international organisation, 

the data subject shall have the right to be inform of the appropriate safeguard pursuant 

to Article 46 relate to the transfer. 

3. The controller shall provide a copy of the personal data undergo processing. For any 

further copy request by the data subject, the controller may charge a reasonable fee 

base on administrative costs. Where the data subject make the request by electronic 

means, and unless otherwise request by the data subject, the information shall be 

provide in a commonly use electronic form. 

4. The right to obtain a copy refer to in paragraph 3 shall not adversely affect the right 

and freedom of others. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 140 
DGD 2 EN 


SECTION 3 

RECTIFICATION AND ERASURE 

Article 16 

Right to rectification 

The data subject shall have the right to obtain from the controller without undue delay the 

rectification of inaccurate personal data concern him or her . Taking into account the purpose of 

the processing, the data subject shall have the right to have incomplete personal data completed, 

include by mean of provide a supplementary statement. 

Article 17 

Right to erasure ('right to be forgotten') 

1. The data subject shall have the right to obtain from the controller the erasure of personal 

data concern him or her without undue delay and the controller shall have the obligation 

to erase personal data without undue delay where one of the follow ground applies: 

(a) the personal data be no longer necessary in relation to the purpose for which they 

be collect or otherwise processed; 

(b) the data subject withdraws consent on which the processing be base accord to 

point (a) of Article 6(1), or point (a) of Article 9(2), and where there be no other legal 

ground for the processing; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 141 
DGD 2 EN 


(c) the data subject object to the processing pursuant to Article 21(1) and there be no 

override legitimate ground for the processing, or the data subject object to the 

processing pursuant to Article 21(2); 

(d) the personal data have be unlawfully processed; 

(e) the personal data have to be erase for compliance with a legal obligation in Union 

or Member State law to which the controller be subject; 

(f) the personal data have be collect in relation to the offer of information society 

service refer to in Article 8(1). 

2. Where the controller have make the personal data public and be oblige pursuant to 

paragraph 1 to erase the personal data, the controller, take account of available 

technology and the cost of implementation, shall take reasonable steps, include technical 

measures, to inform controller which be processing the personal data that the data subject 

have request the erasure by such controller of any link to, or copy or replication of, 

those personal data. 

3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to the extent that processing be necessary: 

(a) for exercise the right of freedom of expression and information; 

(b) for compliance with a legal obligation which require processing by Union or 

Member State law to which the controller be subject or for the performance of a task 

carry out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested in the 

controller; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 142 
DGD 2 EN 


(c) for reason of public interest in the area of public health in accordance with 

point (h) and (i) of Article 9(2) a well a Article 9(3); 

(d) for archive purpose in the public interest, scientific or historical research purpose 

or statistical purpose in accordance with Article 89(1) in so far a the right refer 

to in paragraph 1 be likely to render impossible or seriously impair the achievement 

of the objective of that processing; or 

(e) for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims. 

Article 18 

Right to restriction of processing 

1. The data subject shall have the right to obtain from the controller restriction of processing 

where one of the follow applies: 

(a) the accuracy of the personal data be contest by the data subject, for a period 

enable the controller to verify the accuracy of the personal data; 

(b) the processing be unlawful and the data subject opposes the erasure of the personal 

data and request the restriction of their use instead; 

(c) the controller no longer need the personal data for the purpose of the processing, 

but they be require by the data subject for the establishment, exercise or defence of 

legal claims; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 143 
DGD 2 EN 


(d) the data subject have object to processing pursuant to Article 21(1) pending the 

verification whether the legitimate ground of the controller override those of the 

data subject. 

2. Where processing have be restrict under paragraph 1, such personal data shall, with the 

exception of storage, only be process with the data subject's consent or for the 

establishment, exercise or defence of legal claim or for the protection of the right of 

another natural or legal person or for reason of important public interest of the Union or of 

a Member State. 

3. A data subject who have obtain restriction of processing pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be 

inform by the controller before the restriction of processing be lifted. 

Article 19 

Notification obligation regard rectification 

or erasure of personal data or restriction of processing 

The controller shall communicate any rectification or erasure of personal data or restriction of 

processing carry out in accordance with Articles 16, 17(1) and 18 to each recipient to whom the 

personal data have be disclosed, unless this prof impossible or involves disproportionate effort. 

The controller shall inform the data subject about those recipient if the data subject request it. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 144 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 20 

Right to data portability 

1. The data subject shall have the right to receive the personal data concern him or her, 

which he or she have provide to a controller, in a structured, commonly use and 

machine-readable format and have the right to transmit those data to another controller 

without hindrance from the controller to which the personal data have be provided, 

where: 

(a) the processing be base on consent pursuant to point (a) of Article 6(1) or point (a) of 

Article 9(2) or on a contract pursuant to point (b) of Article 6(1); and 

(b) the processing be carry out by automate means. 

2. In exercise his or her right to data portability pursuant to paragraph 1, the data subject 

shall have the right to have the personal data transmit directly from one controller to 

another, where technically feasible. 

3. The exercise of the right refer to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be without 

prejudice to Article 17. That right shall not apply to processing necessary for the 

performance of a task carry out in the public interest or in the exercise of official 

authority vested in the controller. 

4. The right refer to in paragraph 1 shall not adversely affect the right and freedom of 

others. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 145 
DGD 2 EN 


SECTION 4 

RIGHT TO OBJECT AND AUTOMATED INDIVIDUAL DECISION-MAKING 

Article 21 

Right to object 

1. The data subject shall have the right to object, on ground relate to his or her particular 

situation, at any time to processing of personal data concern him or her which be base 

on point (e) or (f) of Article 6(1), include profile base on those provisions. The 

controller shall no longer process the personal data unless the controller demonstrates 

compelling legitimate ground for the processing which override the interests, right and 

freedom of the data subject or for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims. 

2. Where personal data be process for direct marketing purposes, the data subject shall 

have the right to object at any time to processing of personal data concern him or her 

for such marketing, which include profile to the extent that it be related to such direct 

marketing. 

3. Where the data subject object to processing for direct marketing purposes, the personal 

data shall no longer be process for such purposes. 

4. At the late at the time of the first communication with the data subject, the right refer 

to in paragraph 1 and 2 shall be explicitly brought to the attention of the data subject and 

shall be present clearly and separately from any other information. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 146 
DGD 2 EN 


5. In the context of the use of information society services, and notwithstanding 

Directive 2002/58/EC, the data subject may exercise his or her right to object by automate 

mean use technical specifications. 

6. Where personal data be process for scientific or historical research purpose or 

statistical purpose pursuant to Article 89(1), the data subject, on ground relate to his or 

her particular situation, shall have the right to object to processing of personal data 

concern him or her, unless the processing be necessary for the performance of a task 

carry out for reason of public interest. 

Article 22 

Automated individual decision-making, include profile 

1. The data subject shall have the right not to be subject to a decision base solely on 

automate processing, include profiling, which produce legal effect concern him or 

her or similarly significantly affect him or her. 

2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply if the decision: 

(a) be necessary for enter into, or performance of, a contract between the data subject 

and a data controller; 

(b) be authorise by Union or Member State law to which the controller be subject and 

which also lay down suitable measure to safeguard the data subject's right and 

freedom and legitimate interests; or 

(c) be base on the data subject's explicit consent. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 147 
DGD 2 EN 


3. In the case refer to in point (a) and (c) of paragraph 2, the data controller shall 

implement suitable measure to safeguard the data subject's right and freedom and 

legitimate interests, at least the right to obtain human intervention on the part of the 

controller, to express his or her point of view and to contest the decision. 

4. Decisions refer to in paragraph 2 shall not be base on special category of personal 

data refer to in Article 9(1), unless point (a) or (g) of Article 9(2) apply and suitable 

measure to safeguard the data subject's right and freedom and legitimate interest be in 

place. 

SECTION 5 

RESTRICTIONS 

Article 23 

Restrictions 

1. Union or Member State law to which the data controller or processor be subject may restrict 

by way of a legislative measure the scope of the obligation and right provide for in 

Articles 12 to 22 and Article 34, a well a Article 5 in so far a it provision correspond 

to the right and obligation provide for in Articles 12 to 22, when such a restriction 

respect the essence of the fundamental right and freedom and be a necessary and 

proportionate measure in a democratic society to safeguard: 

(a) national security; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 148 
DGD 2 EN 


(b) defence; 

(c) public security; 

(d) the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offence or the 

execution of criminal penalties, include the safeguard against and the 

prevention of threat to public security; 

(e) other important objective of general public interest of the Union or of a 

Member State, in particular an important economic or financial interest of the Union 

or of a Member State, include monetary, budgetary and taxation a matters, public 

health and social security; 

(f) the protection of judicial independence and judicial proceedings; 

(g) the prevention, investigation, detection and prosecution of breach of ethic for 

regulate professions; 

(h) a monitoring, inspection or regulatory function connected, even occasionally, to the 

exercise of official authority in the case refer to in point (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) 

and (g); 

(i) the protection of the data subject or the right and freedom of others; 

(j) the enforcement of civil law claims. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 149 
DGD 2 EN 


2. In particular, any legislative measure refer to in paragraph 1 shall contain specific 

provision at least, where relevant, a to: 

(a) the purpose of the processing or category of processing; 

(b) the category of personal data; 

(c) the scope of the restriction introduced; 

(d) the safeguard to prevent abuse or unlawful access or transfer; 

(e) the specification of the controller or category of controllers; 

(f) the storage period and the applicable safeguard take into account the nature, 

scope and purpose of the processing or category of processing; 

(g) the risk to the right and freedom of data subjects; and 

(h) the right of data subject to be inform about the restriction, unless that may be 

prejudicial to the purpose of the restriction. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 150 
DGD 2 EN 


CHAPTER IV 

CONTROLLER AND PROCESSOR 

SECTION 1 

GENERAL OBLIGATIONS 

Article 24 

Responsibility of the controller 

1. Taking into account the nature, scope, context and purpose of processing a well a the 

risk of vary likelihood and severity for the right and freedom of natural persons, the 

controller shall implement appropriate technical and organisational measure to ensure and 

to be able to demonstrate that processing be perform in accordance with this Regulation. 

Those measure shall be review and update where necessary. 

2. Where proportionate in relation to processing activities, the measure refer to in 

paragraph 1 shall include the implementation of appropriate data protection policy by the 

controller. 

3. Adherence to approve code of conduct a refer to in Article 40 or approve 

certification mechanism a refer to in Article 42 may be use a an element by which 

to demonstrate compliance with the obligation of the controller. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 151 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 25 

Data protection by design and by default 

1. Taking into account the state of the art, the cost of implementation and the nature, scope, 

context and purpose of processing a well a the risk of vary likelihood and severity 

for right and freedom of natural person pose by the processing, the controller shall, 

both at the time of the determination of the mean for processing and at the time of the 

processing itself, implement appropriate technical and organisational measures, such a 

pseudonymisation, which be design to implement data-protection principles, such a 

data minimisation, in an effective manner and to integrate the necessary safeguard into the 

processing in order to meet the requirement of this Regulation and protect the right of 

data subjects. 

2. The controller shall implement appropriate technical and organisational measure for 

ensure that, by default, only personal data which be necessary for each specific purpose 

of the processing be processed. That obligation applies to the amount of personal data 

collected, the extent of their processing, the period of their storage and their accessibility. 

In particular, such measure shall ensure that by default personal data be not make 

accessible without the individual's intervention to an indefinite number of natural persons. 

3. An approve certification mechanism pursuant to Article 42 may be use a an element to 

demonstrate compliance with the requirement set out in paragraph 1 and 2 of this Article. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 152 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 26 

Joint controller 

1. Where two or more controller jointly determine the purpose and mean of processing, 

they shall be joint controllers. They shall in a transparent manner determine their 

respective responsibility for compliance with the obligation under this Regulation, in 

particular a regard the exercise of the right of the data subject and their respective 

duty to provide the information refer to in Articles 13 and 14, by mean of an 

arrangement between them unless, and in so far as, the respective responsibility of the 

controller be determine by Union or Member State law to which the controller be 

subject. The arrangement may designate a contact point for data subjects. 

2. The arrangement refer to in paragraph 1 shall duly reflect the respective role and 

relationship of the joint controller vis-à-vis the data subjects. The essence of the 

arrangement shall be make available to the data subject. 

3. Irrespective of the term of the arrangement refer to in paragraph 1, the data subject 

may exercise his or her right under this Regulation in respect of and against each of the 

controllers. 

Article 27 

Representatives of controller or processor not establish in the Union 

1. Where Article 3(2) applies, the controller or the processor shall designate in write a 

representative in the Union. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 153 
DGD 2 EN 


2. This obligation shall not apply to: 

(a) processing which be occasional, do not include, on a large scale, processing of 

special category of data a refer to in Article 9(1) or processing of personal data 

relate to criminal conviction and offence refer to in Article 10, and be unlikely 

to result in a risk to the right and freedom of natural persons, take into account 

the nature, context, scope and purpose of the processing; or 

(b) a public authority or body. 

3. The representative shall be establish in one of those Member States where the data 

subject be and whose personal data be process in relation to the offering of good or 

service to them, or whose behaviour be monitored. 

4. The representative shall be mandate by the controller or processor to be address in 

addition to or instead of the controller or the processor by, in particular, supervisory 

authority and data subjects, on all issue related to processing, for the purpose of 

ensure compliance with this Regulation. 

5. The designation of a representative by the controller or processor shall be without 

prejudice to legal action which could be initiate against the controller or the processor 

themselves. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 154 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 28 

Processor 

1. Where processing be to be carry out on behalf of a controller, the controller shall use only 

processor provide sufficient guarantee to implement appropriate technical and 

organisational measure in such a manner that processing will meet the requirement of 

this Regulation and ensure the protection of the right of the data subject. 

2. The processor shall not engage another processor without prior specific or general write 

authorisation of the controller. In the case of general write authorisation, the processor 

shall inform the controller of any intend change concern the addition or replacement 

of other processors, thereby give the controller the opportunity to object to such changes. 

3. Processing by a processor shall be govern by a contract or other legal act under Union or 

Member State law, that be binding on the processor with regard to the controller and that 

set out the subject-matter and duration of the processing, the nature and purpose of the 

processing, the type of personal data and category of data subject and the obligation 

and right of the controller. That contract or other legal act shall stipulate, in particular, that 

the processor: 

(a) process the personal data only on document instruction from the controller, 

include with regard to transfer of personal data to a third country or an 

international organisation, unless require to do so by Union or Member State law to 

which the processor be subject; in such a case, the processor shall inform the 

controller of that legal requirement before processing, unless that law prohibits such 

information on important ground of public interest; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 155 
DGD 2 EN 


(b) ensures that person authorise to process the personal data have commit 

themselves to confidentiality or be under an appropriate statutory obligation of 

confidentiality; 

(c) take all measure require pursuant to Article 32; 

(d) respect the condition refer to in paragraph 2 and 4 for engage another 

processor; 

(e) take into account the nature of the processing, assist the controller by appropriate 

technical and organisational measures, insofar a this be possible, for the fulfilment of 

the controller's obligation to respond to request for exercise the data subject's 

right laid down in Chapter III; 

(f) assist the controller in ensure compliance with the obligation pursuant to 

Articles 32 to 36 take into account the nature of processing and the information 

available to the processor; 

(g) at the choice of the controller, deletes or return all the personal data to the controller 

after the end of the provision of service relate to processing, and deletes exist 

copy unless Union or Member State law require storage of the personal data; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 156 
DGD 2 EN 


(h) make available to the controller all information necessary to demonstrate 

compliance with the obligation laid down in this Article and allow for and 

contribute to audits, include inspections, conduct by the controller or another 

auditor mandate by the controller. 

With regard to point (h) of the first subparagraph, the processor shall immediately inform 

the controller if, in it opinion, an instruction infringes this Regulation or other Union or 

Member State data protection provisions. 

4. Where a processor engages another processor for carry out specific processing activity 

on behalf of the controller, the same data protection obligation a set out in the contract or 

other legal act between the controller and the processor a refer to in paragraph 3 shall 

be impose on that other processor by way of a contract or other legal act under Union or 

Member State law, in particular provide sufficient guarantee to implement appropriate 

technical and organisational measure in such a manner that the processing will meet the 

requirement of this Regulation. Where that other processor fails to fulfil it data protection 

obligations, the initial processor shall remain fully liable to the controller for the 

performance of that other processor's obligations. 

5. Adherence of a processor to an approve code of conduct a refer to in Article 40 or an 

approve certification mechanism a refer to in Article 42 may be use a an element 

by which to demonstrate sufficient guarantee a refer to in paragraph 1 and 4 of 

this Article. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 157 
DGD 2 EN 


6. Without prejudice to an individual contract between the controller and the processor, the 

contract or the other legal act refer to in paragraph 3 and 4 of this Article may be 

based, in whole or in part, on standard contractual clause refer to in paragraph 7 and 8 

of this Article, include when they be part of a certification grant to the controller or 

processor pursuant to Articles 42 and 43. 

7. The Commission may lay down standard contractual clause for the matter refer to in 

paragraph 3 and 4 of this Article and in accordance with the examination procedure 

refer to in Article 93(2). 

8. A supervisory authority may adopt standard contractual clause for the matter refer to 

in paragraph 3 and 4 of this Article and in accordance with the consistency mechanism 

refer to in Article 63. 

9. The contract or the other legal act refer to in paragraph 3 and 4 shall be in writing, 

include in electronic form. 

10. Without prejudice to Articles 82, 83 and 84, if a processor infringes this Regulation by 

determine the purpose and mean of processing, the processor shall be consider to be 

a controller in respect of that processing. 

Article 29 

Processing under the authority of the controller or processor 

The processor and any person act under the authority of the controller or of the processor, who 

have access to personal data, shall not process those data except on instruction from the controller, 

unless require to do so by Union or Member State law. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 158 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 30 

Records of processing activity 

1. Each controller and, where applicable, the controller's representative, shall maintain a 

record of processing activity under it responsibility. That record shall contain all of the 

follow information: 

(a) the name and contact detail of the controller and, where applicable, the joint 

controller, the controller's representative and the data protection officer; 

(b) the purpose of the processing; 

(c) a description of the category of data subject and of the category of personal data; 

(d) the category of recipient to whom the personal data have be or will be disclose 

include recipient in third country or international organisations; 

(e) where applicable, transfer of personal data to a third country or an international 

organisation, include the identification of that third country or international 

organisation and, in the case of transfer refer to in the second subparagraph of 

Article 49(1), the documentation of appropriate safeguards; 

(f) where possible, the envisage time limit for erasure of the different category of 

data; 

(g) where possible, a general description of the technical and organisational security 

measure refer to in Article 32(1). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 159 
DGD 2 EN 


2. Each processor and, where applicable, the processor's representative shall maintain a 

record of all category of processing activity carry out on behalf of a controller, 

containing: 

(a) the name and contact detail of the processor or processor and of each controller on 

behalf of which the processor be acting, and, where applicable, of the controller's or 

the processor's representative, and the data protection officer; 

(b) the category of processing carry out on behalf of each controller; 

(c) where applicable, transfer of personal data to a third country or an international 

organisation, include the identification of that third country or international 

organisation and, in the case of transfer refer to in the second subparagraph of 

Article 49(1), the documentation of appropriate safeguards; 

(d) where possible, a general description of the technical and organisational security 

measure refer to in Article 32(1). 

3. The record refer to in paragraph 1 and 2 shall be in writing, include in electronic 

form. 

4. The controller or the processor and, where applicable, the controller's or the processor's 

representative, shall make the record available to the supervisory authority on request. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 160 
DGD 2 EN 


5. The obligation refer to in paragraph 1 and 2 shall not apply to an enterprise or an 

organisation employ few than 250 person unless the processing it carry out be likely 

to result in a risk to the right and freedom of data subjects, the processing be not 

occasional, or the processing include special category of data a refer to in 

Article 9(1) or personal data relate to criminal conviction and offence refer to in 

Article 10. 

Article 31 

Cooperation with the supervisory authority 

The controller and the processor and, where applicable, their representatives, shall cooperate, on 

request, with the supervisory authority in the performance of it tasks. 

SECTION 2 

SECURITY OF PERSONAL DATA 

Article 32 

Security of processing 

1. Taking into account the state of the art, the cost of implementation and the nature, scope, 

context and purpose of processing a well a the risk of vary likelihood and severity 

for the right and freedom of natural persons, the controller and the processor shall 

implement appropriate technical and organisational measure to ensure a level of security 

appropriate to the risk, include inter alia a appropriate: 

(a) the pseudonymisation and encryption of personal data; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 161 
DGD 2 EN 


(b) the ability to ensure the ongoing confidentiality, integrity, availability and resilience 

of processing system and services; 

(c) the ability to restore the availability and access to personal data in a timely manner in 

the event of a physical or technical incident; 

(d) a process for regularly testing, assess and evaluate the effectiveness of technical 

and organisational measure for ensure the security of the processing. 

2. In assess the appropriate level of security account shall be take in particular of the 

risk that be present by processing, in particular from accidental or unlawful 

destruction, loss, alteration, unauthorised disclosure of, or access to personal data 

transmitted, store or otherwise processed. 

3. Adherence to an approve code of conduct a refer to in Article 40 or an approve 

certification mechanism a refer to in Article 42 may be use a an element by which to 

demonstrate compliance with the requirement set out in paragraph 1 of this Article. 

4. The controller and processor shall take step to ensure that any natural person act under 

the authority of the controller or the processor who have access to personal data do not 

process them except on instruction from the controller, unless he or she be require to do 

so by Union or Member State law. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 162 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 33 

Notification of a personal data breach to the supervisory authority 

1. In the case of a personal data breach, the controller shall without undue delay and, where 

feasible, not late than 72 hour after have become aware of it, notify the personal data 

breach to the supervisory authority competent in accordance with Article 55, unless the 

personal data breach be unlikely to result in a risk to the right and freedom of natural 

persons. Where the notification to the supervisory authority be not make within 72 hours, it 

shall be accompany by reason for the delay. 

2. The processor shall notify the controller without undue delay after become aware of a 

personal data breach. 

3. The notification refer to in paragraph 1 shall at least: 

(a) describe the nature of the personal data breach include where possible, the 

category and approximate number of data subject concerned and the category 

and approximate number of personal data record concerned; 

(b) communicate the name and contact detail of the data protection officer or other 

contact point where more information can be obtained; 

(c) describe the likely consequence of the personal data breach; 

(d) describe the measure take or propose to be take by the controller to address the 

personal data breach, including, where appropriate, measure to mitigate it possible 

adverse effects. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 163 
DGD 2 EN 


4. Where, and in so far as, it be not possible to provide the information at the same time, the 

information may be provide in phase without undue further delay. 

5. The controller shall document any personal data breaches, comprise the fact relate to 

the personal data breach, it effect and the remedial action taken. That documentation 

shall enable the supervisory authority to verify compliance with this Article. 

Article 34 

Communication of a personal data breach to the data subject 

1. When the personal data breach be likely to result in a high risk to the right and freedom of 

natural persons, the controller shall communicate the personal data breach to the data 

subject without undue delay. 

2. The communication to the data subject refer to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall 

describe in clear and plain language the nature of the personal data breach and contain at 

least the information and the recommendation provide for in point (b), (c) and (d) of 

Article 33(3). 

3. The communication to the data subject refer to in paragraph 1 shall not be require if 

any of the follow condition be met: 

(a) the controller have implement appropriate technical and organisational protection 

measures, and that those measure be apply to the personal data affected by the 

personal data breach, in particular those that render the personal data unintelligible to 

any person who be not authorise to access it, such a encryption; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 164 
DGD 2 EN 


(b) the controller have take subsequent measure which ensure that the high risk to the 

right and freedom of data subject refer to in paragraph 1 be no longer likely to 

materialise; 

(c) it would involve disproportionate effort. In such a case, there shall instead be a 

public communication or similar measure whereby the data subject be inform in 

an equally effective manner. 

4. If the controller have not already communicate the personal data breach to the data subject, 

the supervisory authority, have consider the likelihood of the personal data breach 

result in a high risk, may require it to do so or may decide that any of the condition 

refer to in paragraph 3 be met. 

SECTION 3 

DATA PROTECTION IMPACT ASSESSMENT AND PRIOR CONSULTATION 

Article 35 

Data protection impact assessment 

1. Where a type of processing in particular use new technologies, and take into account 

the nature, scope, context and purpose of the processing, be likely to result in a high risk to 

the right and freedom of natural persons, the controller shall, prior to the processing, 

carry out an assessment of the impact of the envisage processing operation on the 

protection of personal data. A single assessment may address a set of similar processing 

operation that present similar high risks. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 165 
DGD 2 EN 


2. The controller shall seek the advice of the data protection officer, where designated, when 

carry out a data protection impact assessment. 

3. A data protection impact assessment refer to in paragraph 1 shall in particular be 

require in the case of: 

(a) a systematic and extensive evaluation of personal aspect relate to natural person 

which be base on automate processing, include profiling, and on which decision 

be base that produce legal effect concern the natural person or similarly 

significantly affect the natural person; 

(b) processing on a large scale of special category of data refer to in Article 9(1), or 

of personal data relate to criminal conviction and offence refer to in 

Article 10; or 

(c) a systematic monitoring of a publicly accessible area on a large scale. 

4. The supervisory authority shall establish and make public a list of the kind of processing 

operation which be subject to the requirement for a data protection impact assessment 

pursuant to paragraph 1. The supervisory authority shall communicate those list to 

the Board refer to in Article 68. 

5. The supervisory authority may also establish and make public a list of the kind of 

processing operation for which no data protection impact assessment be required. The 

supervisory authority shall communicate those list to the Board. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 166 
DGD 2 EN 


6. Prior to the adoption of the list refer to in paragraph 4 and 5, the competent 

supervisory authority shall apply the consistency mechanism refer to in Article 63 

where such list involve processing activity which be related to the offering of good or 

service to data subject or to the monitoring of their behaviour in several Member States, 

or may substantially affect the free movement of personal data within the Union. 

7. The assessment shall contain at least: 

(a) a systematic description of the envisage processing operation and the purpose of 

the processing, including, where applicable, the legitimate interest pursue by the 

controller; 

(b) an assessment of the necessity and proportionality of the processing operation in 

relation to the purposes; 

(c) an assessment of the risk to the right and freedom of data subject refer to in 

paragraph 1; and 

(d) the measure envisage to address the risks, include safeguards, security measure 

and mechanism to ensure the protection of personal data and to demonstrate 

compliance with this Regulation take into account the right and legitimate 

interest of data subject and other person concerned. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 167 
DGD 2 EN 


8. Compliance with approve code of conduct refer to in Article 40 by the relevant 

controller or processor shall be take into due account in assess the impact of the 

processing operation perform by such controller or processors, in particular for the 

purpose of a data protection impact assessment. 

9. Where appropriate, the controller shall seek the view of data subject or their 

representative on the intend processing, without prejudice to the protection of 

commercial or public interest or the security of processing operations. 

10. Where processing pursuant to point (c) or (e) of Article 6(1) have a legal basis in Union law 

or in the law of the Member State to which the controller be subject, that law regulates the 

specific processing operation or set of operation in question, and a data protection impact 

assessment have already be carry out a part of a general impact assessment in the 

context of the adoption of that legal basis, paragraph 1 to 7 shall not apply unless 

Member States deem it to be necessary to carry out such an assessment prior to processing 

activities. 

11. Where necessary, the controller shall carry out a review to ass if processing be 

perform in accordance with the data protection impact assessment at least when there be 

a change of the risk represent by processing operations. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 168 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 36 

Prior consultation 

1. The controller shall consult the supervisory authority prior to processing where a data 

protection impact assessment under Article 35 indicates that the processing would result in 

a high risk in the absence of measure take by the controller to mitigate the risk. 

2. Where the supervisory authority be of the opinion that the intend processing refer to in 

paragraph 1 would infringe this Regulation, in particular where the controller have 

insufficiently identify or mitigate the risk, the supervisory authority shall, within period 

of up to eight week of receipt of the request for consultation, provide write advice to the 

controller and, where applicable to the processor, and may use any of it power refer to 

in Article 58. That period may be extend by six weeks, take into account the 

complexity of the intend processing. The supervisory authority shall inform the 

controller and, where applicable, the processor, of any such extension within one month of 

receipt of the request for consultation together with the reason for the delay. Those 

period may be suspend until the supervisory authority have obtain information it have 

request for the purpose of the consultation. 

3. When consult the supervisory authority pursuant to paragraph 1, the controller shall 

provide the supervisory authority with: 

(a) where applicable, the respective responsibility of the controller, joint controller 

and processor involve in the processing, in particular for processing within a group 

of undertakings; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 169 
DGD 2 EN 


(b) the purpose and mean of the intend processing; 

(c) the measure and safeguard provide to protect the right and freedom of data 

subject pursuant to this Regulation; 

(d) where applicable, the contact detail of the data protection officer; 

(e) the data protection impact assessment provide for in Article 35; and 

(f) any other information request by the supervisory authority. 

4. Member States shall consult the supervisory authority during the preparation of a proposal 

for a legislative measure to be adopt by a national parliament, or of a regulatory measure 

base on such a legislative measure, which relates to processing. 

5. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, Member State law may require controller to consult with, 

and obtain prior authorisation from, the supervisory authority in relation to processing by a 

controller for the performance of a task carry out by the controller in the public interest, 

include processing in relation to social protection and public health. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 170 
DGD 2 EN 


SECTION 4 

DATA PROTECTION OFFICER 

Article 37 

Designation of the data protection officer 

1. The controller and the processor shall designate a data protection officer in any case where: 

(a) the processing be carry out by a public authority or body, except for court act in 

their judicial capacity; 

(b) the core activity of the controller or the processor consist of processing operation 

which, by virtue of their nature, their scope and/or their purposes, require regular and 

systematic monitoring of data subject on a large scale; or 

(c) the core activity of the controller or the processor consist of processing on a large 

scale of special category of data pursuant to Article 9 and personal data relate to 

criminal conviction and offence refer to in Article 10. 

2. A group of undertaking may appoint a single data protection officer provide that a data 

protection officer be easily accessible from each establishment. 

3. Where the controller or the processor be a public authority or body, a single data protection 

officer may be designate for several such authority or bodies, take account of their 

organisational structure and size. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 171 
DGD 2 EN 


4. In case other than those refer to in paragraph 1, the controller or processor or 

association and other body represent category of controller or processor may or, 

where require by Union or Member State law shall, designate a data protection officer. 

The data protection officer may act for such association and other body represent 

controller or processors. 

5. The data protection officer shall be designate on the basis of professional quality and, in 

particular, expert knowledge of data protection law and practice and the ability to fulfil 

the task refer to in Article 39. 

6. The data protection officer may be a staff member of the controller or processor, or fulfil 

the task on the basis of a service contract. 

7. The controller or the processor shall publish the contact detail of the data protection 

officer and communicate them to the supervisory authority. 

Article 38 

Position of the data protection officer 

1. The controller and the processor shall ensure that the data protection officer be involved, 

properly and in a timely manner, in all issue which relate to the protection of personal 

data. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 172 
DGD 2 EN 


2. The controller and processor shall support the data protection officer in perform the 

task refer to in Article 39 by provide resource necessary to carry out those task and 

access to personal data and processing operations, and to maintain his or her expert 

knowledge. 

3. The controller and processor shall ensure that the data protection officer do not receive 

any instruction regard the exercise of those tasks. He or she shall not be dismiss or 

penalise by the controller or the processor for perform his tasks. The data protection 

officer shall directly report to the high management level of the controller or the 

processor. 

4. Data subject may contact the data protection officer with regard to all issue related to 

processing of their personal data and to the exercise of their right under this Regulation. 

5. The data protection officer shall be bound by secrecy or confidentiality concern the 

performance of his or her tasks, in accordance with Union or Member State law. 

6. The data protection officer may fulfil other task and duties. The controller or processor 

shall ensure that any such task and duty do not result in a conflict of interests. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 173 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 39 

Tasks of the data protection officer 

1. The data protection officer shall have at least the follow tasks: 

(a) to inform and advise the controller or the processor and the employee who carry out 

processing of their obligation pursuant to this Regulation and to other Union or 

Member State data protection provisions; 

(b) to monitor compliance with this Regulation, with other Union or Member State data 

protection provision and with the policy of the controller or processor in relation to 

the protection of personal data, include the assignment of responsibilities, 

awareness-raising and training of staff involve in processing operations, and the 

related audits; 

(c) to provide advice where request a regard the data protection impact assessment 

and monitor it performance pursuant to Article 35; 

(d) to cooperate with the supervisory authority; 

(e) to act a the contact point for the supervisory authority on issue relate to 

processing, include the prior consultation refer to in Article 36, and to consult, 

where appropriate, with regard to any other matter. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 174 
DGD 2 EN 


2. The data protection officer shall in the performance of his or her task have due regard to 

the risk associate with processing operations, take into account the nature, scope, 

context and purpose of processing. 

SECTION 5 

CODES OF CONDUCT AND CERTIFICATION 

Article 40 

Codes of conduct 

1. The Member States, the supervisory authorities, the Board and the Commission shall 

encourage the draw up of code of conduct intend to contribute to the proper 

application of this Regulation, take account of the specific feature of the various 

processing sector and the specific need of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises. 

2. Associations and other body represent category of controller or processor may 

prepare code of conduct, or amend or extend such codes, for the purpose of specify the 

application of this Regulation, such a with regard to: 

(a) fair and transparent processing; 

(b) the legitimate interest pursue by controller in specific contexts; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 175 
DGD 2 EN 


(c) the collection of personal data; 

(d) the pseudonymisation of personal data; 

(e) the information provide to the public and to data subjects; 

(f) the exercise of the right of data subjects; 

(g) the information provide to, and the protection of, children, and the manner in which 

the consent of the holder of parental responsibility over child be to be obtained; 

(h) the measure and procedure refer to in Articles 24 and 25 and the measure to 

ensure security of processing refer to in Article 32; 

(i) the notification of personal data breach to supervisory authority and the 

communication of such personal data breach to data subjects; 

(j) the transfer of personal data to third country or international organisations; or 

(k) out-of-court proceeding and other dispute resolution procedure for resolve 

dispute between controller and data subject with regard to processing, without 

prejudice to the right of data subject pursuant to Articles 77 and 79. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 176 
DGD 2 EN 


3. In addition to adherence by controller or processor subject to this Regulation, code of 

conduct approve pursuant to paragraph 5 of this Article and have general validity 

pursuant to paragraph 9 of this Article may also be adhere to by controller or processor 

that be not subject to this Regulation pursuant to Article 3 in order to provide appropriate 

safeguard within the framework of personal data transfer to third country or 

international organisation under the term refer to in point (e) of Article 46(2). Such 

controller or processor shall make binding and enforceable commitments, via contractual 

or other legally binding instruments, to apply those appropriate safeguard include with 

regard to the right of data subjects. 

4. A code of conduct refer to in paragraph 2 of this Article shall contain mechanism 

which enable the body refer to in Article 41(1) to carry out the mandatory monitoring of 

compliance with it provision by the controller or processor which undertake to apply it, 

without prejudice to the task and power of supervisory authority competent pursuant to 

Article 55 or 56. 

5. Associations and other body refer to in paragraph 2 of this Article which intend to 

prepare a code of conduct or to amend or extend an exist code shall submit the draft 

code, amendment or extension to the supervisory authority which be competent pursuant to 

Article 55. The supervisory authority shall provide an opinion on whether the draft code, 

amendment or extension complies with this Regulation and shall approve that draft code, 

amendment or extension if it find that it provide sufficient appropriate safeguards. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 177 
DGD 2 EN 


6. Where the draft code, or amendment or extension be approve in accordance with 

paragraph 5, and where the code of conduct concerned do not relate to processing 

activity in several Member States, the supervisory authority shall register and publish the 

code. 

7. Where a draft code of conduct relates to processing activity in several Member States, the 

supervisory authority which be competent pursuant to Article 55 shall, before approve the 

draft code, amendment or extension, submit it in the procedure refer to in Article 63 to 

the Board which shall provide an opinion on whether the draft code, amendment or 

extension complies with this Regulation or, in the situation refer to in paragraph 3, 

provide appropriate safeguards. 

8. Where the opinion refer to in paragraph 7 confirms that the draft code, amendment or 

extension complies with this Regulation, or, in the situation refer to in paragraph 3, 

provide appropriate safeguards, the Board shall submit it opinion to the Commission. 

9. The Commission may, by way of implement acts, decide that the approve code of 

conduct, amendment or extension submit to it pursuant to paragraph 8 have general 

validity within the Union. Those implement act shall be adopt in accordance with 

the examination procedure set out in Article 93(2). 

10. The Commission shall ensure appropriate publicity for the approve code which have 

be decide a have general validity in accordance with paragraph 9. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 178 
DGD 2 EN 


11. The Board shall collate all approve code of conduct, amendment and extension in a 

register and shall make them publicly available by way of appropriate means. 

Article 41 

Monitoring of approve code of conduct 

1. Without prejudice to the task and power of the competent supervisory authority under 

Articles 57 and 58, the monitoring of compliance with a code of conduct pursuant to 

Article 40 may be carry out by a body which have an appropriate level of expertise in 

relation to the subject-matter of the code and be accredit for that purpose by the 

competent supervisory authority. 

2. A body a refer to in paragraph 1 may be accredit to monitor compliance with a code 

of conduct where that body has: 

(a) demonstrate it independence and expertise in relation to the subject-matter of the 

code to the satisfaction of the competent supervisory authority; 

(b) establish procedure which allow it to ass the eligibility of controller and 

processor concerned to apply the code, to monitor their compliance with it 

provision and to periodically review it operation; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 179 
DGD 2 EN 


(c) establish procedure and structure to handle complaint about infringement of 

the code or the manner in which the code have been, or be being, implement by a 

controller or processor, and to make those procedure and structure transparent to 

data subject and the public; and 

(d) demonstrate to the satisfaction of the competent supervisory authority that it task 

and duty do not result in a conflict of interests. 

3. The competent supervisory authority shall submit the draft criterion for accreditation of a 

body a refer to in paragraph 1 of this Article to the Board pursuant to the consistency 

mechanism refer to in Article 63. 

4. Without prejudice to the task and power of the competent supervisory authority and the 

provision of Chapter VIII, a body a refer to in paragraph 1 shall, subject to 

appropriate safeguards, take appropriate action in case of infringement of the code by a 

controller or processor, include suspension or exclusion of the controller or processor 

concerned from the code. It shall inform the competent supervisory authority of such 

action and the reason for take them. 

5. The competent supervisory authority shall revoke the accreditation of a body a refer to 

in paragraph 1 if the condition for accreditation be not, or be no longer, met or where 

action take by the body infringe this Regulation. 

6. This Article shall not apply to processing carry out by public authority and bodies. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 180 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 42 

Certification 

1. The Member States, the supervisory authorities, the Board and the Commission shall 

encourage, in particular at Union level, the establishment of data protection certification 

mechanism and of data protection seal and marks, for the purpose of demonstrate 

compliance with this Regulation of processing operation by controller and processors. 

The specific need of micro, small and medium-sized enterprise shall be take into 

account. 

2. In addition to adherence by controller or processor subject to this Regulation, data 

protection certification mechanisms, seal or mark approve pursuant to paragraph 5 of 

this Article may be establish for the purpose of demonstrate the existence of 

appropriate safeguard provide by controller or processor that be not subject to this 

Regulation pursuant to Article 3 within the framework of personal data transfer to third 

country or international organisation under the term refer to in point (f) of 

Article 46(2). Such controller or processor shall make binding and enforceable 

commitments, via contractual or other legally binding instruments, to apply those 

appropriate safeguards, include with regard to the right of data subjects. 

3. The certification shall be voluntary and available via a process that be transparent. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 181 
DGD 2 EN 


4. A certification pursuant to this Article do not reduce the responsibility of the controller 

or the processor for compliance with this Regulation and be without prejudice to the task 

and power of the supervisory authority which be competent pursuant to Article 55 

or 56. 

5. A certification pursuant to this Article shall be issue by the certification body refer to 

in Article 43 or by the competent supervisory authority, on the basis of criterion approve 

by that competent supervisory authority pursuant to Article 58(3) or by the Board pursuant 

to Article 63. Where the criterion be approve by the Board, this may result in a common 

certification, the European Data Protection Seal. 

6. The controller or processor which submits it processing to the certification mechanism 

shall provide the certification body refer to in Article 43, or where applicable, the 

competent supervisory authority, with all information and access to it processing activity 

which be necessary to conduct the certification procedure. 

7. Certification shall be issue to a controller or processor for a maximum period of three 

year and may be renewed, under the same conditions, provide that the relevant 

requirement continue to be met. Certification shall be withdrawn, a applicable, by the 

certification body refer to in Article 43 or by the competent supervisory authority 

where the requirement for the certification be not or be no longer met. 

8. The Board shall collate all certification mechanism and data protection seal and mark in 

a register and shall make them publicly available by any appropriate means. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 182 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 43 

Certification body 

1. Without prejudice to the task and power of the competent supervisory authority under 

Articles 57 and 58, certification body which have an appropriate level of expertise in 

relation to data protection shall, after inform the supervisory authority in order to allow 

it to exercise it power pursuant to point (h) of Article 58(2) where necessary, issue and 

renew certification. Member States shall ensure that those certification body be 

accredit by one or both of the following: 

(a) the supervisory authority which be competent pursuant to Article 55 or 56; 

(b) the national accreditation body name in accordance with Regulation (EC) 

No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council1 in accordance with 

EN-ISO/IEC 17065/2012 and with the additional requirement establish by the 

supervisory authority which be competent pursuant to Article 55 or 56. 

2. Certification body refer to in paragraph 1 shall be accredit in accordance with 

paragraph 1 only where they have: 

(a) demonstrate their independence and expertise in relation to the subject-matter of the 

certification to the satisfaction of the competent supervisory authority; 


1 Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 July 2008 

set out the requirement for accreditation and market surveillance relate to the 
marketing of product and repeal Regulation (EEC) No 339/93 (OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, 
p. 30). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 183 
DGD 2 EN 


(b) undertaken to respect the criterion refer to in Article 42(5) and approve by the 

supervisory authority which be competent pursuant to Article 55 or 56 or by the 

Board pursuant to Article 63; 

(c) establish procedure for the issuing, periodic review and withdrawal of data 

protection certification, seal and marks; 

(d) establish procedure and structure to handle complaint about infringement of 

the certification or the manner in which the certification have been, or be being, 

implement by the controller or processor, and to make those procedure and 

structure transparent to data subject and the public; and 

(e) demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the competent supervisory authority, that their 

task and duty do not result in a conflict of interests. 

3. The accreditation of certification body a refer to in paragraph 1 and 2 shall take 

place on the basis of criterion approve by the supervisory authority which be competent 

pursuant to Article 55 or 56 or by the Board pursuant to Article 63. In the case of 

accreditation pursuant to point (b) of paragraph 1 of this Article, those requirement shall 

complement those envisage in Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 and the technical rule that 

describe the method and procedure of the certification bodies. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 184 
DGD 2 EN 


4. The certification body refer to in paragraph 1 shall be responsible for the proper 

assessment lead to the certification or the withdrawal of such certification without 

prejudice to the responsibility of the controller or processor for compliance with this 

Regulation. The accreditation shall be issue for a maximum period of five year and may 

be renew on the same condition provide that the certification body meet the 

requirement set out in this Article. 

5. The certification body refer to in paragraph 1 shall provide the competent supervisory 

authority with the reason for grant or withdraw the request certification. 

6. The requirement refer to in paragraph 3 of this Article and the criterion refer to in 

Article 42(5) shall be make public by the supervisory authority in an easily accessible 

form. The supervisory authority shall also transmit those requirement and criterion to the 

Board. The Board shall collate all certification mechanism and data protection seal in a 

register and shall make them publicly available by any appropriate means. 

7. Without prejudice to Chapter VIII, the competent supervisory authority or the national 

accreditation body shall revoke an accreditation of a certification body pursuant to 

paragraph 1 of this Article where the condition for the accreditation be not, or be no 

longer, met or where action take by a certification body infringe this Regulation. 

8. The Commission shall be empower to adopt delegate act in accordance with Article 92 

for the purpose of specify the requirement to be take into account for the data 

protection certification mechanism refer to in Article 42(1). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 185 
DGD 2 EN 


9. The Commission may adopt implement act lay down technical standard for 

certification mechanism and data protection seal and marks, and mechanism to promote 

and recognise those certification mechanisms, seal and marks. Those implement act 

shall be adopt in accordance with the examination procedure refer to in Article 93(2). 

CHAPTER V 

TRANSFER OF PERSONAL DATA TO THIRD COUNTRIES 

OR INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS 

Article 44 

General principle for transfer 

Any transfer of personal data which be undergo processing or be intend for processing after 

transfer to a third country or to an international organisation shall take place only if, subject to the 

other provision of this Regulation, the condition laid down in this Chapter be comply with by 

the controller and processor, include for onward transfer of personal data from the third country 

or an international organisation to another third country or to another international organisation. All 

provision in this Chapter shall be apply in order to ensure that the level of protection of natural 

person guaranteed by this Regulation be not undermined. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 186 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 45 

Transfers on the basis of an adequacy decision 

1. A transfer of personal data to a third country or an international organisation may take 

place where the Commission have decide that the third country, a territory or one or more 

specify sector within that third country, or the international organisation in question 

ensures an adequate level of protection. Such a transfer shall not require any specific 

authorisation. 

2. When assess the adequacy of the level of protection, the Commission shall, in 

particular, take account of the follow elements: 

(a) the rule of law, respect for human right and fundamental freedoms, relevant 

legislation, both general and sectoral, include concern public security, defence, 

national security and criminal law and the access of public authority to personal 

data, a well a the implementation of such legislation, data protection rules, 

professional rule and security measures, include rule for the onward transfer of 

personal data to another third country or international organisation which be 

comply with in that country or international organisation, case-law, a well a 

effective and enforceable data subject right and effective administrative and judicial 

redress for the data subject whose personal data be be transferred; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 187 
DGD 2 EN 


(b) the existence and effective function of one or more independent supervisory 

authority in the third country or to which an international organisation be subject, 

with responsibility for ensure and enforce compliance with the data protection 

rules, include adequate enforcement powers, for assist and advise the data 

subject in exercise their right and for cooperation with the supervisory authority 

of the Member States; and 

(c) the international commitment the third country or international organisation 

concerned have enter into, or other obligation arise from legally binding 

convention or instrument a well a from it participation in multilateral or regional 

systems, in particular in relation to the protection of personal data. 

3. The Commission, after assess the adequacy of the level of protection, may decide, by 

mean of implement act, that a third country, a territory or one or more specify sector 

within a third country, or an international organisation ensures an adequate level of 

protection within the meaning of paragraph 2 of this Article. The implement act shall 

provide for a mechanism for a periodic review, at least every four years, which shall take 

into account all relevant development in the third country or international organisation. 

The implement act shall specify it territorial and sectoral application and, where 

applicable, identify the supervisory authority or authority refer to in point (b) of 

paragraph 2 of this Article. The implement act shall be adopt in accordance with the 

examination procedure refer to in Article 93(2). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 188 
DGD 2 EN 


4. The Commission shall, on an ongoing basis, monitor development in third country and 

international organisation that could affect the function of decision adopt pursuant 

to paragraph 3 of this Article and decision adopt on the basis of Article 25(6) of 

Directive 95/46/EC. 

5. The Commission shall, where available information reveals, in particular follow the 

review refer to in paragraph 3 of this Article, that a third country, a territory or one or 

more specify sector within a third country, or an international organisation no longer 

ensures an adequate level of protection within the meaning of paragraph 2 of this Article, 

to the extent necessary, repeal, amend or suspend the decision refer to in paragraph 3 of 

this Article by mean of implement act without retro-active effect. Those 

implement act shall be adopt in accordance with the examination procedure refer 

to in Article 93(2). 

On duly justified imperative ground of urgency, the Commission shall adopt immediately 

applicable implement act in accordance with the procedure refer to in Article 93(3). 

6. The Commission shall enter into consultation with the third country or international 

organisation with a view to remedy the situation give rise to the decision make 

pursuant to paragraph 5. 

7. A decision pursuant to paragraph 5 of this Article be without prejudice to transfer of 

personal data to the third country, a territory or one or more specify sector within that 

third country, or the international organisation in question pursuant to Articles 46 to 49. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 189 
DGD 2 EN 


8. The Commission shall publish in the Official Journal of the European Union and on it 

website a list of the third countries, territory and specify sector within a third country 

and international organisation for which it have decide that an adequate level of protection 

be or be no longer ensured. 

9. Decisions adopt by the Commission on the basis of Article 25(6) of Directive 95/46/EC 

shall remain in force until amended, replace or repeal by a Commission Decision 

adopt in accordance with paragraph 3 or 5 of this Article. 

Article 46 

Transfers subject to appropriate safeguard 

1. In the absence of a decision pursuant to Article 45(3), a controller or processor may 

transfer personal data to a third country or an international organisation only if the 

controller or processor have provide appropriate safeguards, and on condition that 

enforceable data subject right and effective legal remedy for data subject be available. 

2. The appropriate safeguard refer to in paragraph 1 may be provide for, without 

require any specific authorisation from a supervisory authority, by: 

(a) a legally binding and enforceable instrument between public authority or bodies; 

(b) binding corporate rule in accordance with Article 47; 

(c) standard data protection clause adopt by the Commission in accordance with the 

examination procedure refer to in Article 93(2); 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 190 
DGD 2 EN 


(d) standard data protection clause adopt by a supervisory authority and approve by 

the Commission pursuant to the examination procedure refer to in Article 93(2); 

(e) an approve code of conduct pursuant to Article 40 together with binding and 

enforceable commitment of the controller or processor in the third country to apply 

the appropriate safeguards, include a regard data subjects' rights; or 

(f) an approve certification mechanism pursuant to Article 42 together with binding 

and enforceable commitment of the controller or processor in the third country to 

apply the appropriate safeguards, include a regard data subjects' rights. 

3. Subject to the authorisation from the competent supervisory authority, the appropriate 

safeguard refer to in paragraph 1 may also be provide for, in particular, by: 

(a) contractual clause between the controller or processor and the controller, processor 

or the recipient of the personal data in the third country or international organisation; 

or 

(b) provision to be insert into administrative arrangement between public authority 

or body which include enforceable and effective data subject rights. 

4. The supervisory authority shall apply the consistency mechanism refer to in Article 63 

in the case refer to in paragraph 3 of this Article. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 191 
DGD 2 EN 


5. Authorisations by a Member State or supervisory authority on the basis of Article 26(2) of 

Directive 95/46/EC shall remain valid until amended, replace or repealed, if necessary, by 

that supervisory authority. Decisions adopt by the Commission on the basis of 

Article 26(4) of Directive 95/46/EC shall remain in force until amended, replace or 

repealed, if necessary, by a Commission Decision adopt in accordance with paragraph 2 

of this Article. 

Article 47 

Binding corporate rule 

1. The competent supervisory authority shall approve binding corporate rule in accordance 

with the consistency mechanism set out in Article 63, provide that they: 

(a) be legally binding and apply to and be enforce by every member concerned of the 

group of undertakings, or group of enterprise engage in a joint economic activity, 

include their employees; 

(b) expressly confer enforceable right on data subject with regard to the processing of 

their personal data; and 

(c) fulfil the requirement laid down in paragraph 2. 

2. The binding corporate rule refer to in paragraph 1 shall specify at least: 

(a) the structure and contact detail of the group of undertakings, or group of enterprise 

engage in a joint economic activity and of each of it members; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 192 
DGD 2 EN 


(b) the data transfer or set of transfers, include the category of personal data, the 

type of processing and it purposes, the type of data subject affected and the 

identification of the third country or country in question; 

(c) their legally binding nature, both internally and externally; 

(d) the application of the general data protection principles, in particular purpose 

limitation, data minimisation, limited storage periods, data quality, data protection by 

design and by default, legal basis for processing, processing of special category of 

personal data, measure to ensure data security, and the requirement in respect of 

onward transfer to body not bound by the binding corporate rules; 

(e) the right of data subject in regard to processing and the mean to exercise those 

rights, include the right not to be subject to decision base solely on automate 

processing, include profile in accordance with Article 22, the right to lodge a 

complaint with the competent supervisory authority and before the competent court 

of the Member States in accordance with Article 79, and to obtain redress and, where 

appropriate, compensation for a breach of the binding corporate rules; 

(f) the acceptance by the controller or processor establish on the territory of a 

Member State of liability for any breach of the binding corporate rule by any 

member concerned not establish in the Union; the controller or the processor shall 

be exempt from that liability, in whole or in part, only if it prof that that member be 

not responsible for the event give rise to the damage; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 193 
DGD 2 EN 


(g) how the information on the binding corporate rules, in particular on the provision 

refer to in point (d), (e) and (f) of this paragraph be provide to the data subject 

in addition to Articles 13 and 14; 

(h) the task of any data protection officer designate in accordance with Article 37 or 

any other person or entity in charge of the monitoring compliance with the binding 

corporate rule within the group of undertakings, or group of enterprise engage in a 

joint economic activity, a well a monitoring training and complaint-handling; 

(i) the complaint procedures; 

(j) the mechanism within the group of undertakings, or group of enterprise engage in 

a joint economic activity for ensure the verification of compliance with the binding 

corporate rules. Such mechanism shall include data protection audit and method 

for ensure corrective action to protect the right of the data subject. Results of 

such verification should be communicate to the person or entity refer under 

point (h) and to the board of the control undertaking of a group of undertakings, 

or of the group of enterprise engage in a joint economic activity, and should be 

available upon request to the competent supervisory authority; 

(k) the mechanism for reporting and record change to the rule and reporting those 

change to the supervisory authority; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 194 
DGD 2 EN 


(l) the cooperation mechanism with the supervisory authority to ensure compliance by 

any member of the group of undertakings, or group of enterprise engage in a joint 

economic activity, in particular by make available to the supervisory authority the 

result of verification of the measure refer to in point (j); 

(m) the mechanism for reporting to the competent supervisory authority any legal 

requirement to which a member of the group of undertakings, or group of 

enterprise engage in a joint economic activity be subject in a third country which 

be likely to have a substantial adverse effect on the guarantee provide by the 

binding corporate rules; and 

(n) the appropriate data protection training to personnel have permanent or regular 

access to personal data. 

3. The Commission may specify the format and procedure for the exchange of information 

between controllers, processor and supervisory authority for binding corporate rule 

within the meaning of this Article. Those implement act shall be adopt in accordance 

with the examination procedure set out in Article 93(2). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 195 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 48 

Transfers or disclosure not authorise by Union law 

Any judgment of a court or tribunal and any decision of an administrative authority of a third 

country require a controller or processor to transfer or disclose personal data may only be 

recognise or enforceable in any manner if base on an international agreement, such a a mutual 

legal assistance treaty, in force between the request third country and the Union or a 

Member State, without prejudice to other ground for transfer pursuant to this Chapter. 

Article 49 

Derogations for specific situation 

1. In the absence of an adequacy decision pursuant to Article 45(3), or of appropriate 

safeguard pursuant to Article 46, include binding corporate rules, a transfer or a set of 

transfer of personal data to a third country or an international organisation shall take place 

only on one of the follow conditions: 

(a) the data subject have explicitly consent to the propose transfer, after have be 

inform of the possible risk of such transfer for the data subject due to the absence 

of an adequacy decision and appropriate safeguards; 

(b) the transfer be necessary for the performance of a contract between the data subject 

and the controller or the implementation of pre-contractual measure take at the 

data subject's request; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 196 
DGD 2 EN 


(c) the transfer be necessary for the conclusion or performance of a contract conclude in 

the interest of the data subject between the controller and another natural or legal 

person; 

(d) the transfer be necessary for important reason of public interest; 

(e) the transfer be necessary for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims; 

(f) the transfer be necessary in order to protect the vital interest of the data subject or of 

other persons, where the data subject be physically or legally incapable of give 

consent; 

(g) the transfer be make from a register which accord to Union or Member State law be 

intend to provide information to the public and which be open to consultation either 

by the public in general or by any person who can demonstrate a legitimate interest, 

but only to the extent that the condition laid down in Union or Member State law for 

consultation be fulfil in the particular case. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 197 
DGD 2 EN 


Where a transfer could not be base on a provision in Articles 45 or 46, include the 

provision on binding corporate rules, and none of the derogation for a specific situation 

pursuant to point (a) to (g) of this paragraph be applicable, a transfer to a third country or 

an international organisation may take place only if the transfer be not repetitive, concern 

only a limited number of data subjects, be necessary for the purpose of compelling 

legitimate interest pursue by the controller which be not overridden by the interest or 

right and freedom of the data subject, and the controller have assess all the 

circumstance surround the data transfer and have on the basis of that assessment 

provide suitable safeguard with regard to the protection of personal data. The controller 

shall inform the supervisory authority of the transfer. The controller shall, in addition to 

provide the information refer to in Articles 13 and 14, inform the data subject of the 

transfer and on the compelling legitimate interest pursued. 

2. A transfer pursuant to point (g) of paragraph 1 shall not involve the entirety of the personal 

data or entire category of the personal data contain in the register. Where the register be 

intend for consultation by person have a legitimate interest, the transfer shall be make 

only at the request of those person or if they be to be the recipients. 

3. Points (a), (b) and (c) of the first subparagraph and the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 

shall not apply to activity carry out by public authority in the exercise of their public 

powers. 

4. The public interest refer to in point (d) of paragraph 1 shall be recognise in Union law 

or in the law of the Member State to which the controller be subject. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 198 
DGD 2 EN 


5. In the absence of an adequacy decision, Union or Member State law may, for important 

reason of public interest, expressly set limit to the transfer of specific category of 

personal data to a third country or an international organisation. Member States shall notify 

such provision to the Commission. 

6. The controller or processor shall document the assessment a well a the suitable 

safeguard refer to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article in the 

record refer to in Article 30. 

Article 50 

International cooperation for the protection of personal data 

In relation to third country and international organisations, the Commission and supervisory 

authority shall take appropriate step to: 

(a) develop international cooperation mechanism to facilitate the effective enforcement of 

legislation for the protection of personal data; 

(b) provide international mutual assistance in the enforcement of legislation for the protection 

of personal data, include through notification, complaint referral, investigative assistance 

and information exchange, subject to appropriate safeguard for the protection of personal 

data and other fundamental right and freedoms; 

(c) engage relevant stakeholder in discussion and activity aim at further international 

cooperation in the enforcement of legislation for the protection of personal data; 

(d) promote the exchange and documentation of personal data protection legislation and 

practice, include on jurisdictional conflict with third countries. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 199 
DGD 2 EN 


CHAPTER VI 

INDEPENDENT SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES 

SECTION 1 

INDEPENDENT STATUS 

Article 51 

Supervisory authority 

1. Each Member State shall provide for one or more independent public authority to be 

responsible for monitoring the application of this Regulation, in order to protect the 

fundamental right and freedom of natural person in relation to processing and to 

facilitate the free flow of personal data within the Union. 

2. Each supervisory authority shall contribute to the consistent application of this Regulation 

throughout the Union. For that purpose, the supervisory authority shall cooperate with 

each other and the Commission in accordance with Chapter VII. 

3. Where more than one supervisory authority be establish in a Member State, that 

Member State shall designate the supervisory authority which be to represent those 

authority in the Board and shall set out the mechanism to ensure compliance by the other 

authority with the rule relate to the consistency mechanism refer to in Article 63. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 200 
DGD 2 EN 


4. Each Member State shall notify to the Commission the provision of it law which it 

adopts pursuant to this Chapter, by … [two year from the date of entry into force of this 

Regulation] at the late and, without delay, any subsequent amendment affect them. 

Article 52 

Independence 

1. Each supervisory authority shall act with complete independence in perform it task 

and exercise it power in accordance with this Regulation. 

2. The member or member of each supervisory authority shall, in the performance of their 

task and exercise of their power in accordance with this Regulation, remain free from 

external influence, whether direct or indirect, and shall neither seek nor take instruction 

from anybody. 

3. Member or member of each supervisory authority shall refrain from any action 

incompatible with their duty and shall not, during their term of office, engage in any 

incompatible occupation, whether gainful or not. 

4. Each Member State shall ensure that each supervisory authority be provide with the 

human, technical and financial resources, premise and infrastructure necessary for the 

effective performance of it task and exercise of it powers, include those to be carry 

out in the context of mutual assistance, cooperation and participation in the Board. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 201 
DGD 2 EN 


5. Each Member State shall ensure that each supervisory authority chooses and have it own 

staff which shall be subject to the exclusive direction of the member or member of the 

supervisory authority concerned. 

6. Each Member State shall ensure that each supervisory authority be subject to financial 

control which do not affect it independence and that it have separate, public annual 

budgets, which may be part of the overall state or national budget. 

Article 53 

General condition for the member of the supervisory authority 

1. Member States shall provide for each member of their supervisory authority to be 

appoint by mean of a transparent procedure by: 

– their parliament; 

– their government; 

– their head of State; or 

– an independent body entrust with the appointment under Member State law. 

2. Each member shall have the qualifications, experience and skills, in particular in the area 

of the protection of personal data, require to perform it duty and exercise it powers. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 202 
DGD 2 EN 


3. The duty of a member shall end in the event of the expiry of the term of office, 

resignation or compulsory retirement, in accordance with the law of the Member State 

concerned. 

4. A member shall be dismiss only in case of serious misconduct or if the member no 

longer fulfils the condition require for the performance of the duties. 

Article 54 

Rules on the establishment of the supervisory authority 

1. Each Member State shall provide by law for all of the following: 

(a) the establishment of each supervisory authority; 

(b) the qualification and eligibility condition require to be appoint a member of 

each supervisory authority; 

(c) the rule and procedure for the appointment of the member or member of each 

supervisory authority; 

(d) the duration of the term of the member or member of each supervisory authority of 

no less than four years, except for the first appointment after … [the date of entry 

into force of this Regulation], part of which may take place for a shorter period 

where that be necessary to protect the independence of the supervisory authority by 

mean of a stagger appointment procedure; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 203 
DGD 2 EN 


(e) whether and, if so, for how many term the member or member of each supervisory 

authority be eligible for reappointment; 

(f) the condition govern the obligation of the member or member and staff of each 

supervisory authority, prohibition on actions, occupation and benefit incompatible 

therewith during and after the term of office and rule govern the cessation of 

employment. 

2. The member or member and the staff of each supervisory authority shall, in accordance 

with Union or Member State law, be subject to a duty of professional secrecy both during 

and after their term of office, with regard to any confidential information which have come 

to their knowledge in the course of the performance of their task or exercise of their 

powers. During their term of office, that duty of professional secrecy shall in particular 

apply to reporting by natural person of infringement of this Regulation. 

SECTION 2 

COMPETENCE, TASKS AND POWERS 

Article 55 

Competence 

1. Each supervisory authority shall be competent for the performance of the task assign to 

and the exercise of the power confer on it in accordance with this Regulation on the 

territory of it own Member State. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 204 
DGD 2 EN 


2. Where processing be carry out by public authority or private body act on the basis 

of point (c) or (e) of Article 6(1), the supervisory authority of the Member State 

concerned shall be competent. In such case Article 56 do not apply. 

3. Supervisory authority shall not be competent to supervise processing operation of court 

act in their judicial capacity. 

Article 56 

Competence of the lead supervisory authority 

1. Without prejudice to Article 55, the supervisory authority of the main establishment or of 

the single establishment of the controller or processor shall be competent to act a lead 

supervisory authority for the cross-border processing carry out by that controller or 

processor in accordance with the procedure provide in Article 60. 

2. By derogation from paragraph 1, each supervisory authority shall be competent to handle a 

complaint lodge with it or a possible infringement of this Regulation, if the subject matter 

relates only to an establishment in it Member State or substantially affect data subject 

only in it Member State. 

3. In the case refer to in paragraph 2 of this Article, the supervisory authority shall inform 

the lead supervisory authority without delay on that matter. Within a period of three week 

after be inform the lead supervisory authority shall decide whether or not it will 

handle the case in accordance with the procedure provide in Article 60, take into 

account whether or not there be an establishment of the controller or processor in the 

Member State of which the supervisory authority inform it. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 205 
DGD 2 EN 


4. Where the lead supervisory authority decides to handle the case, the procedure provide in 

Article 60 shall apply. The supervisory authority which inform the lead supervisory 

authority may submit to the lead supervisory authority a draft for a decision. The lead 

supervisory authority shall take utmost account of that draft when prepare the draft 

decision refer to in Article 60(3). 

5. Where the lead supervisory authority decides not to handle the case, the supervisory 

authority which inform the lead supervisory authority shall handle it accord to 

Articles 61 and 62. 

6. The lead supervisory authority shall be the sole interlocutor of the controller or processor 

for the cross-border processing carry out by that controller or processor. 

Article 57 

Tasks 

1. Without prejudice to other task set out under this Regulation, each supervisory authority 

shall on it territory: 

(a) monitor and enforce the application of this Regulation; 

(b) promote public awareness and understand of the risks, rules, safeguard and right 

in relation to processing. Activities address specifically to child shall receive 

specific attention; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 206 
DGD 2 EN 


(c) advise, in accordance with Member State law, the national parliament, the 

government, and other institution and body on legislative and administrative 

measure relate to the protection of natural persons' right and freedom with 

regard to processing; 

(d) promote the awareness of controller and processor of their obligation under this 

Regulation; 

(e) upon request, provide information to any data subject concern the exercise of their 

right under this Regulation and, if appropriate, cooperate with the supervisory 

authority in other Member States to that end; 

(f) handle complaint lodge by a data subject, or by a body, organisation or association 

in accordance with Article 80, and investigate, to the extent appropriate, the subject 

matter of the complaint and inform the complainant of the progress and the outcome 

of the investigation within a reasonable period, in particular if further investigation or 

coordination with another supervisory authority be necessary; 

(g) cooperate with, include share information and provide mutual assistance to, other 

supervisory authority with a view to ensure the consistency of application and 

enforcement of this Regulation; 

(h) conduct investigation on the application of this Regulation, include on the basis of 

information receive from another supervisory authority or other public authority; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 207 
DGD 2 EN 


(i) monitor relevant developments, insofar a they have an impact on the protection of 

personal data, in particular the development of information and communication 

technology and commercial practices; 

(j) adopt standard contractual clause refer to in Article 28(8) and point (d) of 

Article 46(2); 

(k) establish and maintain a list in relation to the requirement for data protection impact 

assessment pursuant to Article 35(4); 

(l) give advice on the processing operation refer to in Article 36(2); 

(m) encourage the draw up of code of conduct pursuant to Article 40 and provide an 

opinion and approve such code of conduct which provide sufficient safeguards, 

pursuant to Article 40(5); 

(n) encourage the establishment of data protection certification mechanism and of data 

protection seal and mark pursuant to Article 42(1), and approve the criterion of 

certification pursuant to Article 42(5); 

(o) where applicable, carry out a periodic review of certification issue in accordance 

with Article 42(7); 

(p) draft and publish the criterion for accreditation of a body for monitoring code of 

conduct pursuant to Article 41 and of a certification body pursuant to Article 43; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 208 
DGD 2 EN 


(q) conduct the accreditation of a body for monitoring code of conduct pursuant to 

Article 41 and of a certification body pursuant to Article 43; 

(r) authorise contractual clause and provision refer to in Article 46(3); 

(s) approve binding corporate rule pursuant to Article 47; 

(t) contribute to the activity of the Board; 

(u) keep internal record of infringement of this Regulation and of measure take in 

accordance with Article 58(2); and 

(v) fulfil any other task related to the protection of personal data. 

2. Each supervisory authority shall facilitate the submission of complaint refer to in 

point (f) of paragraph 1, by measure such a a complaint submission form which may also 

be complete electronically, without exclude other mean of communication. 

3. The performance of the task of each supervisory authority shall be free of charge for the 

data subject and, where applicable, for the data protection officer. 

4. Where request be manifestly unfounded or excessive, in particular because of their 

repetitive character, the supervisory authority may charge a reasonable fee base on 

administrative costs, or refuse to act on the request. The supervisory authority shall bear 

the burden of demonstrate the manifestly unfounded or excessive character of the 

request. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 209 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 58 

Powers 

1. Each supervisory authority shall have all of the follow investigative powers: 

(a) to order the controller and the processor, and, where applicable, the controller's or the 

processor's representative to provide any information it require for the performance 

of it tasks; 

(b) to carry out investigation in the form of data protection audits; 

(c) to carry out a review on certification issue pursuant to Article 42(7); 

(d) to notify the controller or the processor of an allege infringement of this Regulation; 

(e) to obtain, from the controller and the processor, access to all personal data and to all 

information necessary for the performance of it tasks; 

(f) to obtain access to any premise of the controller and the processor, include to any 

data processing equipment and means, in accordance with Union or Member State 

procedural law. 

2. Each supervisory authority shall have all of the follow corrective powers: 

(a) to issue warning to a controller or processor that intend processing operation be 

likely to infringe provision of this Regulation; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 210 
DGD 2 EN 


(b) to issue reprimand to a controller or a processor where processing operation have 

infringe provision of this Regulation; 

(c) to order the controller or the processor to comply with the data subject's request to 

exercise his or her right pursuant to this Regulation; 

(d) to order the controller or processor to bring processing operation into compliance 

with the provision of this Regulation, where appropriate, in a specify manner and 

within a specify period; 

(e) to order the controller to communicate a personal data breach to the data subject; 

(f) to impose a temporary or definitive limitation include a ban on processing; 

(g) to order the rectification or erasure of personal data or restriction of processing 

pursuant to Articles 16, 17 and 18 and the notification of such action to recipient to 

whom the personal data have be disclose pursuant to Articles 17(2) and 19; 

(h) to withdraw a certification or to order the certification body to withdraw a 

certification issue pursuant to Articles 42 and 43, or to order the certification body 

not to issue certification if the requirement for the certification be not or be no 

longer met; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 211 
DGD 2 EN 


(i) to impose an administrative fine pursuant to Article 83, in addition to, or instead of 

measure refer to in this paragraph, depend on the circumstance of each 

individual case; 

(j) to order the suspension of data flow to a recipient in a third country or to an 

international organisation. 

3. Each supervisory authority shall have all of the follow authorisation and advisory 

powers: 

(a) to advise the controller in accordance with the prior consultation procedure refer 

to in Article 36; 

(b) to issue, on it own initiative or on request, opinion to the national parliament, the 

Member State government or, in accordance with Member State law, to other 

institution and body a well a to the public on any issue related to the protection 

of personal data; 

(c) to authorise processing refer to in Article 36(5), if the law of the Member State 

require such prior authorisation; 

(d) to issue an opinion and approve draft code of conduct pursuant to Article 40(5); 

(e) to accredit certification body pursuant to Article 43; 

(f) to issue certification and approve criterion of certification in accordance with 

Article 42(5); 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 212 
DGD 2 EN 


(g) to adopt standard data protection clause refer to in Article 28(8) and in point (d) 

of Article 46(2); 

(h) to authorise contractual clause refer to in point (a) of Article 46(3); 

(i) to authorise administrative arrangement refer to in point (b) of Article 46(3); 

(j) to approve binding corporate rule pursuant to Article 47. 

4. The exercise of the power confer on the supervisory authority pursuant to this Article 

shall be subject to appropriate safeguards, include effective judicial remedy and due 

process, set out in Union and Member State law in accordance with the Charter. 

5. Each Member State shall provide by law that it supervisory authority shall have the power 

to bring infringement of this Regulation to the attention of the judicial authority and 

where appropriate, to commence or engage otherwise in legal proceedings, in order to 

enforce the provision of this Regulation. 

6. Each Member State may provide by law that it supervisory authority shall have additional 

power to those refer to in paragraph 1, 2 and 3. The exercise of those power shall not 

impair the effective operation of Chapter VII. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 213 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 59 

Activity report 

Each supervisory authority shall draw up an annual report on it activities, which may include a list 

of type of infringement notify and type of measure take in accordance with Article 58(2). 

Those report shall be transmit to the national parliament, the government and other authority 

a designate by Member State law. They shall be make available to the public, to the Commission 

and to the Board. 

CHAPTER VII 

COOPERATION AND CONSISTENCY 

SECTION 1 

COOPERATION 

Article 60 

Cooperation between the lead supervisory authority 

and other supervisory authority concerned 

1. The lead supervisory authority shall cooperate with the other supervisory authority 

concerned in accordance with this Article in an endeavour to reach consensus. The lead 

supervisory authority and the supervisory authority concerned shall exchange all relevant 

information with each other. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 214 
DGD 2 EN 


2. The lead supervisory authority may request at any time other supervisory authority 

concerned to provide mutual assistance pursuant to Article 61 and may conduct joint 

operation pursuant to Article 62, in particular for carry out investigation or for 

monitoring the implementation of a measure concern a controller or processor 

establish in another Member State. 

3. The lead supervisory authority shall, without delay, communicate the relevant information 

on the matter to the other supervisory authority concerned. It shall without delay submit a 

draft decision to the other supervisory authority concerned for their opinion and take due 

account of their views. 

4. Where any of the other supervisory authority concerned within a period of four week 

after have be consult in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article, express a 

relevant and reason objection to the draft decision, the lead supervisory authority shall, if 

it do not follow the relevant and reason objection or be of the opinion it be not relevant 

and reasoned, submit the matter to the consistency mechanism refer to in Article 63. 

5. Where the lead supervisory authority intend to follow the relevant and reason objection 

made, it shall submit to the other supervisory authority concerned a revise draft decision 

for their opinion. That revise draft decision shall be subject to the procedure refer to in 

paragraph 4 within a period of two weeks. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 215 
DGD 2 EN 


6. Where none of the other supervisory authority concerned have object to the draft 

decision submit by the lead supervisory authority within the period refer to in 

paragraph 4 and 5, the lead supervisory authority and the supervisory authority 

concerned shall be deem to be in agreement with that draft decision and shall be bound 

by it. 

7. The lead supervisory authority shall adopt and notify the decision to the main 

establishment or single establishment of the controller or processor, a the case may be and 

inform the other supervisory authority concerned and the Board of the decision in 

question, include a summary of the relevant fact and grounds. The supervisory authority 

with which a complaint have be lodge shall inform the complainant on the decision. 

8. By derogation from paragraph 7, where a complaint be dismiss or rejected, the 

supervisory authority with which the complaint be lodge shall adopt the decision and 

notify it to the complainant and shall inform the controller thereof. 

9. Where the lead supervisory authority and the supervisory authority concerned agree to 

dismiss or reject part of a complaint and to act on other part of that complaint, a separate 

decision shall be adopt for each of those part of the matter. The lead supervisory 

authority shall adopt the decision for the part concern action in relation to the 

controller, shall notify it to the main establishment or single establishment of the controller 

or processor on the territory of it Member State and shall inform the complainant thereof, 

while the supervisory authority of the complainant shall adopt the decision for the part 

concern dismissal or rejection of that complaint, and shall notify it to that complainant 

and shall inform the controller or processor thereof. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 216 
DGD 2 EN 


10. After be notify of the decision of the lead supervisory authority pursuant to 

paragraphs7 and 9, the controller or processor shall take the necessary measure to ensure 

compliance with the decision a regard processing activity in the context of all it 

establishment in the Union. The controller or processor shall notify the measure take for 

comply with the decision to the lead supervisory authority, which shall inform the other 

supervisory authority concerned. 

11. Where, in exceptional circumstances, a supervisory authority concerned have reason to 

consider that there be an urgent need to act in order to protect the interest of data subjects, 

the urgency procedure refer to in Article 66 shall apply. 

12. The lead supervisory authority and the other supervisory authority concerned shall supply 

the information require under this Article to each other by electronic means, use a 

standardise format. 

Article 61 

Mutual assistance 

1. Supervisory authority shall provide each other with relevant information and mutual 

assistance in order to implement and apply this Regulation in a consistent manner, and 

shall put in place measure for effective cooperation with one another. Mutual assistance 

shall cover, in particular, information request and supervisory measures, such a request 

to carry out prior authorisation and consultations, inspection and investigations. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 217 
DGD 2 EN 


2. Each supervisory authority shall take all appropriate measure require to reply to a 

request of another supervisory authority without undue delay and no late than one month 

after receive the request. Such measure may include, in particular, the transmission of 

relevant information on the conduct of an investigation. 

3. Requests for assistance shall contain all the necessary information, include the purpose 

of and reason for the request. Information exchange shall be use only for the purpose 

for which it be requested. 

4. The request supervisory authority shall not refuse to comply with the request unless: 

(a) it be not competent for the subject-matter of the request or for the measure it be 

request to execute; or 

(b) compliance with the request would infringe this Regulation or Union or 

Member State law to which the supervisory authority receive the request be subject. 

5. The request supervisory authority shall inform the request supervisory authority of 

the result or, a the case may be, of the progress of the measure take in order to respond 

to the request. The request supervisory authority shall provide reason for any refusal to 

comply with a requestpursuant to paragraph 4. 

6. Requested supervisory authority shall, a a rule, supply the information request by 

other supervisory authority by electronic means, use a standardise format. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 218 
DGD 2 EN 


7. Requested supervisory authority shall not charge a fee for any action take by them 

pursuant to a request for mutual assistance. Supervisory authority may agree on rule to 

indemnify each other for specific expenditure arise from the provision of mutual 

assistance in exceptional circumstances. 

8. Where a supervisory authority do not provide the information refer to in paragraph 5 

within one month of receive the request of another supervisory authority, the request 

supervisory authority may adopt a provisional measure on the territory of it Member State 

in accordance with Article 55(1). In that case, the urgent need to act under Article 66(1) 

shall be presume to be met and require an urgent binding decision from the Board 

pursuant to Article 66(2). 

9. The Commission may, by mean of implement acts, specify the format and procedure 

for mutual assistance refer to in this Article and the arrangement for the exchange of 

information by electronic mean between supervisory authorities, and between supervisory 

authority and the Board, in particular the standardise format refer to in paragraph 6 

of this Article. Those implement act shall be adopt in accordance with the 

examination procedure refer to in Article 93(2). 

Article 62 

Joint operation of supervisory authority 

1. The supervisory authority shall, where appropriate, conduct joint operation include 

joint investigation and joint enforcement measure in which member or staff from the 

supervisory authority of other Member States be involved. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 219 
DGD 2 EN 


2. Where the controller or processor have establishment in several Member States or where a 

significant number of data subject in more than one Member State be likely to be 

substantially affected by processing operations, a supervisory authority of each of those 

Member States shall have the right to participate in joint operations. The supervisory 

authority which be competent pursuant to Article 56 (1) or 56(4) shall invite the supervisory 

authority of each of those Member States to take part in the joint operation and shall 

respond without delay to the request of a supervisory authority to participate. 

3. A supervisory authority may, in accordance with Member State law, and with the 

second supervisory authority's authorisation, confer powers, include investigative 

power on the second supervisory authority's member or staff involve in joint 

operation or, in so far a the law of the Member State of the host supervisory authority 

permits, allow the second supervisory authority's member or staff to exercise their 

investigative power in accordance with the law of the Member State of the second 

supervisory authority. Such investigative power may be exercise only under the guidance 

and in the presence of member or staff of the host supervisory authority. The second 

supervisory authority's member or staff shall be subject to the Member State law of the 

host supervisory authority. 

4. Where, in accordance with paragraph 1, staff of a second supervisory authority operate 

in another Member State, the Member State of the host supervisory authority shall assume 

responsibility for their actions, include liability, for any damage cause by them during 

their operations, in accordance with the law of the Member State in whose territory they 

be operating. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 220 
DGD 2 EN 


5. The Member State in whose territory the damage be cause shall make good such 

damage under the condition applicable to damage cause by it own staff. The 

Member State of the second supervisory authority whose staff have cause damage to 

any person in the territory of another Member State shall reimburse that other 

Member State in full any sum it have paid to the person entitle on their behalf. 

6. Without prejudice to the exercise of it right vis-à-vis third party and with the exception 

of paragraph 5, each Member State shall refrain, in the case provide for in paragraph 1, 

from request reimbursement from another Member State in relation to damage refer 

to in paragraph 4. 

7. Where a joint operation be intend and a supervisory authority do not, within one 

month, comply with the obligation laid down in the second sentence of paragraph 2 of this 

Article, the other supervisory authority may adopt a provisional measure on the territory 

of it Member State in accordance with Article 55. In that case, the urgent need to act 

under Article 66(1) shall be presume to be met and require an opinion or an urgent 

binding decision from the Board pursuant to Article 66(2). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 221 
DGD 2 EN 


SECTION 2 

CONSISTENCY 

Article 63 

Consistency mechanism 

In order to contribute to the consistent application of this Regulation throughout the Union, the 

supervisory authority shall cooperate with each other and, where relevant, with the Commission, 

through the consistency mechanism a set out in this Section. 

Article 64 

Opinion of the Board 

1. The Board shall issue an opinion where a competent supervisory authority intend to adopt 

any of the measure below. To that end, the competent supervisory authority shall 

communicate the draft decision to the Board, when it: 

(a) aim to adopt a list of the processing operation subject to the requirement for a data 

protection impact assessment pursuant to Article 35(4); 

(b) concern a matter pursuant to Article 40(7) whether a draft code of conduct or an 

amendment or extension to a code of conduct complies with this Regulation; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 222 
DGD 2 EN 


(c) aim to approve the criterion for accreditation of a body pursuant to Article 41(3) or a 

certification body pursuant to Article 43(3); 

(d) aim to determine standard data protection clause refer to in point (d) of 

Article 46(2) and Article 28(8); 

(e) aim to authorise contractual clause refer to in point (a) of Article 46(3); or 

(f) aim to approve binding corporate rule within the meaning of Article 47. 

2. Any supervisory authority, the Chair of the Board or the Commission may request that any 

matter of general application or produce effect in more than one Member State be 

examine by the Board with a view to obtain an opinion, in particular where a 

competent supervisory authority do not comply with the obligation for mutual 

assistance in accordance with Article 61 or for joint operation in accordance with 

Article 62. 

3. In the case refer to in paragraph 1 and 2, the Board shall issue an opinion on the 

matter submit to it provide that it have not already issue an opinion on the same matter. 

That opinion shall be adopt within eight week by simple majority of the member of the 

Board. That period may be extend by a further six weeks, take into account the 

complexity of the subject matter. Regarding the draft decision refer to in paragraph 1 

circulate to the member of the Board in accordance with paragraph 5, a member which 

have not object within a reasonable period indicate by the Chair, shall be deem to be 

in agreement with the draft decision. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 223 
DGD 2 EN 


4. Supervisory authority and the Commission shall, without undue delay, communicate by 

electronic mean to the Board, use a standardise format any relevant information, 

include a the case may be a summary of the facts, the draft decision, the ground which 

make the enactment of such measure necessary, and the view of other supervisory 

authority concerned. 

5. The Chair of the Board shall, without undue, delay inform by electronic means: 

(a) the member of the Board and the Commission of any relevant information which 

have be communicate to it use a standardise format. The secretariat of the 

Board shall, where necessary, provide translation of relevant information; and 

(b) the supervisory authority refer to, a the case may be, in paragraph 1 and 2, and 

the Commission of the opinion and make it public. 

6. The competent supervisory authority shall not adopt it draft decision refer to in 

paragraph 1 within the period refer to in paragraph 3. 

7. The supervisory authority refer to in paragraph 1 shall take utmost account of the 

opinion of the Board and shall within two week after receive the opinion, electronically 

communicate to the Chair of the Board whether it maintains or will amend it draft 

decision and, if any, the amend draft decision, use a standardise format. 

8. Where the supervisory authority concerned informs the Chair of the Board within the 

period refer to in paragraph 7 of this Article that it do not intend to follow the opinion 

of the Board, in whole or in part, provide the relevant grounds, Article 65(1) shall apply. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 224 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 65 

Dispute resolution by the Board 

1. In order to ensure the correct and consistent application of this Regulation in individual 

cases, the Board shall adopt a binding decision in the follow cases: 

(a) where, in a case refer to in Article 60(4), a supervisory authority concerned have 

raise a relevant and reason objection to a draft decision of the lead authority or 

the lead authority have reject an objection a be not relevant or reasoned. The 

binding decision shall concern all the matter which be the subject of the relevant 

and reason objection, in particular whether there be an infringement of this 

Regulation; 

(b) where there be conflict view on which of the supervisory authority concerned 

be competent for the main establishment; 

(c) where a competent supervisory authority do not request the opinion of the Board in 

the case refer to in Article 64(1), or do not follow the opinion of the Board 

issue under Article 64. In that case, any supervisory authority concerned or the 

Commission may communicate the matter to the Board. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 225 
DGD 2 EN 


2. The decision refer to in paragraph 1 shall be adopt within one month from the referral 

of the subject-matter by a two-third majority of the member of the Board. This period may 

be extend by a further month on account of the complexity of the subject-matter. The 

decision refer to in paragraph 1 shall be reason and address to the lead supervisory 

authority and all the supervisory authority concerned and binding on them. 

3. Where the Board have be unable to adopt a decision within the period refer to in 

paragraph 2, it shall adopt it decision within two week follow the expiration of the 

second month refer to in paragraph 2 by a simple majority of the member of the Board. 

Where the member of the Board be split, the decision shall by adopt by the vote of it 

Chair. 

4. The supervisory authority concerned shall not adopt a decision on the subject matter 

submit to the Board under paragraph 1 during the period refer to in paragraph 2 

and 3. 

5. The Chair of the Board shall notify, without undue delay, the decision refer to in 

paragraph 1 to the supervisory authority concerned. It shall inform the Commission 

thereof. The decision shall be publish on the website of the Board without delay after the 

supervisory authority have notify the final decision refer to in paragraph 6. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 226 
DGD 2 EN 


6. The lead supervisory authority or, a the case may be, the supervisory authority with which 

the complaint have be lodge shall adopt it final decision on the basis of the decision 

refer to in paragraph 1 of this Article, without undue delay and at the late by one 

month after the Board have notify it decision. The lead supervisory authority or, a the 

case may be, the supervisory authority with which the complaint have be lodged, shall 

inform the Board of the date when it final decision be notify respectively to the 

controller or the processor and to the data subject. The final decision of the supervisory 

authority concerned shall be adopt under the term of Article 60(7), (8) and (9). The 

final decision shall refer to the decision refer to in paragraph 1 of this Article and shall 

specify that the decision refer to in that paragraph will be publish on the website of 

the Board in accordance with paragraph 5 of this Article. The final decision shall attach the 

decision refer to in paragraph 1 of this Article. 

Article 66 

Urgency procedure 

1. In exceptional circumstances, where a supervisory authority concerned considers that there 

be an urgent need to act in order to protect the right and freedom of data subjects, it may, 

by way of derogation from the consistency mechanism refer to in Articles 63, 64 and 65 

or the procedure refer to in Article 60, immediately adopt provisional measure 

intend to produce legal effect on it own territory with a specify period of validity 

which shall not exceed three months. The supervisory authority shall, without delay, 

communicate those measure and the reason for adopt them to the other supervisory 

authority concerned, to the Board and to the Commission. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 227 
DGD 2 EN 


2. Where a supervisory authority have take a measure pursuant to paragraph 1 and considers 

that final measure need urgently be adopted, it may request an urgent opinion or an urgent 

binding decision from the Board, give reason for request such opinion or decision. 

3. Any supervisory authority may request an urgent opinion or an urgent binding decision, a 

the case may be, from the Board where a competent supervisory authority have not take an 

appropriate measure in a situation where there be an urgent need to act, in order to protect 

the right and freedom of data subjects, give reason for request such opinion or 

decision, include for the urgent need to act. 

4. By derogation from Articles 64(3) and 65(2), an urgent opinion or an urgent binding 

decision refer to in paragraph 2 and 3 of this Article shall be adopt within two week 

by simple majority of the member of the Board. 

Article 67 

Exchange of information 

The Commission may adopt implement act of general scope in order to specify the 

arrangement for the exchange of information by electronic mean between supervisory authorities, 

and between supervisory authority and the Board, in particular the standardise format refer to 

in Article 64. 

Those implement act shall be adopt in accordance with the examination procedure refer to 

in Article 93(2). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 228 
DGD 2 EN 


SECTION 3 

EUROPEAN DATA PROTECTION BOARD 

Article 68 

European Data Protection Board 

1. The European Data Protection Board (the 'Board') be hereby establish a a body of the 

Union and shall have legal personality. 

2. The Board shall be represent by it Chair. 

3. The Board shall be compose of the head of one supervisory authority of each 

Member State and of the European Data Protection Supervisor, or their respective 

representatives. 

4. Where in a Member State more than one supervisory authority be responsible for 

monitoring the application of the provision pursuant to this Regulation, a joint 

representative shall be appoint in accordance with that Member State's law. 

5. The Commission shall have the right to participate in the activity and meeting of the 

Board without voting right. The Commission shall designate a representative. The Chair of 

the Board shall communicate to the Commission the activity of the Board. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 229 
DGD 2 EN 


6. In the case refer to in Article 65, the European Data Protection Supervisor shall have 

voting right only on decision which concern principle and rule applicable to the Union 

institutions, bodies, office and agency which correspond in substance to those of this 

Regulation. 

Article 69 

Independence 

1. The Board shall act independently when perform it task or exercise it power 

pursuant to Articles 70 and 71. 

2. Without prejudice to request by the Commission refer to in point (b) of Article 70(1) 

and in Article 70(2), the Board shall, in the performance of it task or the exercise of it 

powers, neither seek nor take instruction from anybody. 

Article 70 

Tasks of the Board 

1. The Board shall ensure the consistent application of this Regulation. To that end, the Board 

shall, on it own initiative or, where relevant, at the request of the Commission, in 

particular: 

(a) monitor and ensure the correct application of this Regulation in the case provide 

for in Articles 64 and 65 without prejudice to the task of national supervisory 

authorities; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 230 
DGD 2 EN 


(b) advise the Commission on any issue related to the protection of personal data in the 

Union, include on any propose amendment of this Regulation; 

(c) advise the Commission on the format and procedure for the exchange of 

information between controllers, processor and supervisory authority for binding 

corporate rules; 

(d) issue guidelines, recommendations, and best practice on procedure for erase 

links, copy or replication of personal data from publicly available communication 

service a refer to in Article 17 (2); 

(e) examine, on it own initiative, on request of one of it member or on request of the 

Commission, any question cover the application of this Regulation and issue 

guidelines, recommendation and best practice in order to encourage consistent 

application of this Regulation; 

(f) issue guidelines, recommendation and best practice in accordance with point (e) of 

this paragraph for further specify the criterion and condition for decision base 

on profile pursuant to Article 22(2); 

(g) issue guidelines, recommendation and best practice in accordance with point (e) of 

this paragraph for establish the personal data breach and determine the undue 

delay refer to in Article 33(1) and (2) and for the particular circumstance in 

which a controller or a processor be require to notify the personal data breach; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 231 
DGD 2 EN 


(h) issue guidelines, recommendation and best practice in accordance with point (e) of 

this paragraph a to the circumstance in which a personal data breach be likely to 

result in a high risk to the right and freedom of the natural person refer to in 

Article 34(1). 

(i) issue guidelines, recommendation and best practice in accordance with point (e) of 

this paragraph for the purpose of further specify the criterion and requirement for 

personal data transfer base on binding corporate rule adhere to by controller and 

binding corporate rule adhere to by processor and on further necessary 

requirement to ensure the protection of personal data of the data subject concerned 

refer to in Article 47; 

(j) issue guidelines, recommendation and best practice in accordance with point (e) of 

this paragraph for the purpose of further specify the criterion and requirement for 

the personal data transfer on the basis of Article 49(1); 

(k) draw up guideline for supervisory authority concern the application of 

measure refer to in Article 58(1), (2) and (3) and the fix of administrative 

fine pursuant to Articles 83; 

(l) review the practical application of the guidelines, recommendation and best 

practice refer to in point (e) and (f); 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 232 
DGD 2 EN 


(m) issue guidelines, recommendation and best practice in accordance with point (e) of 

this paragraph for establish common procedure for reporting by natural person 

of infringement of this Regulation pursuant to Article 54(2); 

(n) encourage the drawing-up of code of conduct and the establishment of data 

protection certification mechanism and data protection seal and mark pursuant to 

Articles 40 and 42; 

(o) carry out the accreditation of certification body and it periodic review pursuant to 

Article 43 and maintain a public register of accredit body pursuant to 

Article 43(6) and of the accredit controller or processor establish in third 

country pursuant to Article 42(7); 

(p) specify the requirement refer to in Article 43(3) with a view to the accreditation 

of certification body under Article 42; 

(q) provide the Commission with an opinion on the certification requirement refer to 

in Article 43(8); 

(r) provide the Commission with an opinion on the the icon refer to in Article 12(7); 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 233 
DGD 2 EN 


(s) provide the Commission with an opinion for the assessment of the adequacy of the 

level of protection in a third country or international organisation, include for the 

assessment whether a third country, a territory or one or more specify sector 

within that third country, or an international organisation no longer ensures an 

adequate level of protection. To that end, the Commission shall provide the Board 

with all necessary documentation, include correspondence with the government of 

the third country, with regard to that third country, territory or specify sector, or 

with the international organisation. 

(t) issue opinion on draft decision of supervisory authority pursuant to the 

consistency mechanism refer to in Article 64(1), on matter submit pursuant to 

Article 64(2) and to issue binding decision pursuant to Article 65, include in case 

refer to in Article 66; 

(u) promote the cooperation and the effective bilateral and multilateral exchange of 

information and best practice between the supervisory authorities; 

(v) promote common training programme and facilitate personnel exchange between 

the supervisory authority and, where appropriate, with the supervisory authority 

of third country or with international organisations; 

(w) promote the exchange of knowledge and documentation on data protection 

legislation and practice with data protection supervisory authority worldwide. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 234 
DGD 2 EN 


(x) issue opinion on code of conduct drawn up at Union level pursuant to 

Article 40(9); and 

(y) maintain a publicly accessible electronic register of decision take by supervisory 

authority and court on issue handle in the consistency mechanism. 

2. Where the Commission request advice from the Board, it may indicate a time limit, take 

into account the urgency of the matter. 

3. The Board shall forward it opinions, guidelines, recommendations, and best practice to 

the Commission and to the committee refer to in Article 93 and make them public. 

4. The Board shall, where appropriate, consult interested party and give them the 

opportunity to comment within a reasonable period. The Board shall, without prejudice to 

Article 76, make the result of the consultation procedure publicly available. 

Article 71 

Reports 

1. The Board shall draw up an annual report regard the protection of natural person with 

regard to processing in the Union and, where relevant, in third country and international 

organisations. The report shall be make public and be transmit to the European 

Parliament, to the Council and to the Commission. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 235 
DGD 2 EN 


2. The annual report shall include a review of the practical application of the guidelines, 

recommendation and best practice refer to in point (l) of Article 70(1) a well a of 

the binding decision refer to in Article 65. 

Article 72 

Procedure 

1. The Board shall take decision by a simple majority of it members, unless otherwise 

provide for in this Regulation. 

2. The Board shall adopt it own rule of procedure by a two-third majority of it member 

and organise it own operational arrangements. 

Article 73 

Chair 

1. The Board shall elect a chair and two deputy chair from amongst it member by simple 

majority. 

2. The term of office of the Chair and of the deputy chair shall be five year and be 

renewable once. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 236 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 74 

Tasks of the Chair 

1. The Chair shall have the follow tasks: 

(a) to convene the meeting of the Board and prepare it agenda; 

(b) to notify decision adopt by the Board pursuant to Article 65 to the lead 

supervisory authority and the supervisory authority concerned; 

(c) to ensure the timely performance of the task of the Board, in particular in relation to 

the consistency mechanism refer to in Article 63. 

2. The Board shall lay down the allocation of task between the Chair and the deputy chair 

in it rule of procedure. 

Article 75 

Secretariat 

1. The Board shall have a secretariat, which shall be provide by the European Data 

Protection Supervisor. 

2. The secretariat shall perform it task exclusively under the instruction of the Chair of the 

Board. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 237 
DGD 2 EN 


3. The staff of the European Data Protection Supervisor involve in carry out the task 

confer on the Board by this Regulation shall be subject to separate reporting line from 

the staff involve in carry out task confer on the European Data Protection 

Supervisor. 

4. Where appropriate, the Board and the European Data Protection Supervisor shall establish 

and publish a Memorandum of Understanding implement this Article, determine the 

term of their cooperation, and applicable to the staff of the European Data Protection 

Supervisor involve in carry out the task confer on the Board by this Regulation. 

5. The secretariat shall provide analytical, administrative and logistical support to the Board. 

6. The secretariat shall be responsible in particular for: 

(a) the day-to-day business of the Board; 

(b) communication between the member of the Board, it Chair and the Commission; 

(c) communication with other institution and the public; 

(d) the use of electronic mean for the internal and external communication; 

(e) the translation of relevant information; 

(f) the preparation and follow-up of the meeting of the Board; 

(g) the preparation, draft and publication of opinions, decision on the settlement of 

dispute between supervisory authority and other text adopt by the Board. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 238 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 76 

Confidentiality 

1. The discussion of the Board shall be confidential where the Board deems it necessary, a 

provide for in it rule of procedure. 

2. Access to document submit to member of the Board, expert and representative of 

third party shall be govern by Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001 of the European 

Parliament and of the Council1. 

CHAPTER VIII 

REMEDIES, LIABILITY AND PENALTIES 

Article 77 

Right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority 

1. Without prejudice to any other administrative or judicial remedy, every data subject shall 

have the right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority, in particular in the 

Member State of his or her habitual residence, place of work or place of the allege 

infringment if the data subject considers that the processing of personal data relate to him 

or her infringes this Regulation. 


1 Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 

30 May 2001 regard public access to European Parliament, Council and Commission 
document (OJ L 145, 31.5.2001, p. 43). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 239 
DGD 2 EN 


2. The supervisory authority with which the complaint have be lodge shall inform the 

complainant on the progress and the outcome of the complaint include the possibility of 

a judicial remedy pursuant to Article 78. 

Article 78 

Right to an effective judicial remedy against a supervisory authority 

1. Without prejudice to any other administrative or non-judicial remedy, each natural or legal 

person shall have the right to an effective judicial remedy against a legally binding 

decision of a supervisory authority concern them. 

2. Without prejudice to any other administrative or non-judicial remedy, each data subject 

shall have the right to a an effective judicial remedy where the supervisory authority which 

be competent pursuant to Article 55 and Article 56 do not handle a complaint or do not 

inform the data subject within three month on the progress or outcome of the complaint 

lodge pursuant to Article 77. 

3. Proceedings against a supervisory authority shall be brought before the court of the 

Member State where the supervisory authority be established. 

4. Where proceeding be brought against a decision of a supervisory authority which be 

precede by an opinion or a decision of the Board in the consistency mechanism, the 

supervisory authority shall forward that opinion or decision to the court. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 240 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 79 

Right to an effective judicial remedy 

against a controller or processor 

1. Without prejudice to any available administrative or non-judicial remedy, include the 

right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority pursuant to Article 77, each data 

subject shall have the right to an effective judicial remedy where he or she considers that 

his or her right under this Regulation have be infringe a a result of the processing of 

his or her personal data in non-compliance with this Regulation. 

2. Proceedings against a controller or a processor shall be brought before the court of the 

Member State where the controller or processor have an establishment. Alternatively, such 

proceeding may be brought before the court of the Member State where the data subject 

have his or her habitual residence, unless the controller or processor be a public authority of 

a Member State act in the exercise of it public powers. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 241 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 80 

Representation of data subject 

1. The data subject shall have the right to mandate a not-for-profit body, organisation or 

association which have be properly constitute in accordance with the law of a 

Member State, have statutory objective which be in the public interest, and be active in the 

field of the protection of data subjects' right and freedom with regard to the protection of 

their personal data to lodge the complaint on his or her behalf, to exercise the right 

refer to in Articles 77, 78 and 79 on his or her behalf, and to exercise the right to 

receive compensation refer to in Article 82 on his or her behalf where provide for by 

Member State law. 

2. Member States may provide that any body, organisation or association refer to in 

paragraph 1 of this Article, independently of a data subject's mandate, have the right to 

lodge, in that Member State, a complaint with the supervisory authority which be 

competent pursuant to Article 77 and to exercise the right refer to in Articles 78 and 79 

if it considers that the right of a data subject under this Regulation have be infringe a 

a result of the processing. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 242 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 81 

Suspension of proceeding 

1. Where a competent court of a Member State have information on proceedings, concern 

the same subject matter a regard processing by the same controller or processor, that be 

pending in a court in another Member State, it shall contact that court in the other 

Member State to confirm the existence of such proceedings. 

2. Where proceeding concern the same subject matter a regard processing of the same 

controller or processor be pending in a court in another Member State, any competent 

court other than the court first seize may suspend it proceedings. 

3. Where those proceeding be pending at first instance, any court other than the court first 

seize may also, on the application of one of the parties, decline jurisdiction if the court 

first seize have jurisdiction over the action in question and it law permit the 

consolidation thereof. 

Article 82 

Right to compensation and liability 

1. Any person who have suffer material or non-material damage a a result of an 

infringement of this Regulation shall have the right to receive compensation from the 

controller or processor for the damage suffered. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 243 
DGD 2 EN 


2. Any controller involve in processing shall be liable for the damage cause by processing 

which infringes this Regulation. A processor shall be liable for the damage cause by 

processing only where it have not comply with obligation of this Regulation specifically 

direct to processor or where it have act outside or contrary to lawful instruction of the 

controller. 

3. A controller or processor shall be exempt from liability under paragraph 2 if it prof that 

it be not in any way responsible for the event give rise to the damage. 

4. Where more than one controller or processor, or both a controller and a processor, be 

involve in the same processing and where they are, under paragraph 2 and 3, responsible 

for any damage cause by processing, each controller or processor shall be held liable for 

the entire damage in order to ensure effective compensation of the data subject. 

5. Where a controller or processor has, in accordance with paragraph 4, paid full 

compensation for the damage suffered, that controller or processor shall be entitle to 

claim back from the other controller or processor involve in the same processing that 

part of the compensation correspond to their part of responsibility for the damage, in 

accordance with the condition set out in paragraph 2. 

6. Court proceeding for exercise the right to receive compensation shall be brought before 

the court competent under the law of the Member State refer to in Article 79(2). 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 244 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 83 

General condition for impose administrative fine 

1. Each supervisory authority shall ensure that the imposition of administrative fine pursuant 

to this Article in respect of infringement of this Regulation refer to in paragraph 4, 5 

and 6 shall in each individual case be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. 

2. Administrative fine shall, depend on the circumstance of each individual case, be 

impose in addition to, or instead of, measure refer to in point (a) to (h) and (j) of 

Article 58(2). When decide whether to impose an administrative fine and decide on the 

amount of the administrative fine in each individual case due regard shall be give to the 

following: 

(a) the nature, gravity and duration of the infringement take into account the nature 

scope or purpose of the processing concerned a well a the number of data subject 

affected and the level of damage suffer by them; 

(b) the intentional or negligent character of the infringement; 

(c) any action take by the controller or processor to mitigate the damage suffer by 

data subjects; 

(d) the degree of responsibility of the controller or processor take into account 

technical and organisational measure implement by them pursuant to Articles 25 

and 32; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 245 
DGD 2 EN 


(e) any relevant previous infringement by the controller or processor; 

(f) the degree of cooperation with the supervisory authority, in order to remedy the 

infringement and mitigate the possible adverse effect of the infringement; 

(g) the category of personal data affected by the infringement; 

(h) the manner in which the infringement become know to the supervisory authority, in 

particular whether, and if so to what extent, the controller or processor notify the 

infringement; 

(i) in case measure refer to in Article 58(2) have previously be order against the 

controller or processor concerned with regard to the same subject-matter, compliance 

with those measures; 

(j) adherence to approve code of conduct pursuant to Article 40 or approve 

certification mechanism pursuant to Article 42; and 

(k) any other aggravate or mitigate factor applicable to the circumstance of the 

case, such a financial benefit gained, or loss avoided, directly or indirectly, from 

the infringement. 

3. If a controller or processor intentionally or negligently, for the same or link processing 

operations, infringes several provision of this Regulation, the total amount of the 

administrative fine shall not exceed the amount specify for the gravest infringement. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 246 
DGD 2 EN 


4. Infringments of the follow provision shall, in acccordance with paragraph 2, be subject 

to administrative fine up to 10 000 000 EUR, or in the case of an undertaking, up to 2 % 

of the total worldwide annual turnover of the precede financial year, whichever be higher: 

(a) the obligation of the controller and the processor pursuant to Articles 8, 11, 25, 26, 

27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 42 and 43; 

(b) the obligation of the certification body pursuant to Articles 42 and 43; 

(c) the obligation of the monitoring body pursuant to Article 41(4). 

5. Infringements of the follow provision shall, in accordance with paragraph 2, be subject 

to administrative fine up to 20 000 000 EUR, or in the case of an undertaking, up to 4 % 

of the total worldwide annual turnover of the precede financial year, whichever be higher: 

(a) the basic principle for processing, include condition for consent, pursuant to 

Articles 5, 6, 7 and 9; 

(b) the data subjects' right pursuant to Articles 12 to 22; 

(c) the transfer of personal data to a recipient in a third country or an international 

organisation pursuant to Articles 44 to 49; 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 247 
DGD 2 EN 


(d) any obligation pursuant to Member State law adopt unter Chapter IX; 

(e) non-compliance with an order or a temporary or definitive limitation on processing 

or the suspension of data flow by the supervisory authority pursuant to Article 58(2) 

or failure to provide access in violation of Article 58(1). 

6. Non-compliance with an order by the supervisory authority a refer to in Article 58(2) 

shall, in acccordance with paragraph 2 of this Article, be subject to administrative fine up 

to 20 000 000 EUR, or in the case of an undertaking, up to 4 % of the total worldwide 

annual turnover of the precede financial year, whichever be higher. 

7. Without prejudice to the corrective power of supervisory authority pursuant to 

Article 58(2), each Member State may lay down the rule on whether and to what extent 

administrative fine may be impose on public authority and body establish in that 

Member State. 

8. The exercise by the supervisory authority of it power under this Article shall be subject 

to appropriate procedural safeguard in accordance with Union and Member State law, 

include effective judicial remedy and due process. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 248 
DGD 2 EN 


9. Where the legal system of the Member State do not provide for administrative fines, this 

Article may be apply in such a manner that the fine be initiate by the competent 

supervisory authority and impose by competent national courts, while ensure that those 

legal remedy be effective and have an equivalent effect to the administrative fine 

impose by supervisory authorities. In any event, the fine impose shall be effective, 

proportionate and dissuasive. Those Member States shall notify to the Commission the 

provision of their law which they adopt pursuant to this paragraph by … [two year from 

the date of entry into force of this Regulation] and, without delay, any subsequent 

amendment law or amendment affect them. 

Article 84 

Penalties 

1. Member States shall lay down the rule on other penalty applicable to infringement of 

this Regulation in particular for infringement which be not subject to administrative fine 

pursuant to Article 83, and shall take all measure necessary to ensure that they be 

implemented. Such penalty shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. 

2. Each Member State shall notify to the Commission the provision of it law which it 

adopts pursuant to paragraph 1, by … [two year from the date of entry into force of this 

Regulation] and, without delay, any subsequent amendment affect them. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 249 
DGD 2 EN 


CHAPTER IX 

PROVISIONS RELATING 

TO SPECIFIC PROCESSING SITUATIONS 

Article 85 

Processing and freedom of expression and information 

1. Member States shall by law reconcile the right to the protection of personal data pursuant 

to this Regulation with the right to freedom of expression and information, include 

processing for journalistic purpose and the purpose of academic, artistic or literary 

expression. 

2. For processing carry out for journalistic purpose or the purpose of academic artistic or 

literary expression, Member States shall provide for exemption or derogation from 

Chapter II (principles), Chapter III (rights of the data subject), Chapter IV (controller and 

processor), Chapter V (transfer of personal data to third country or international 

organisations), Chapter VI (independent supervisory authorities), Chapter VII (cooperation 

and consistency) and Chapter IX (specific data processing situations) if they be necessary 

to reconcile the right to the protection of personal data with the freedom of expression and 

information. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 250 
DGD 2 EN 


3. Each Member State shall notify to the Commission the provision of it law which it have 

adopt pursuant to paragraph 2 and, without delay, any subsequent amendment law or 

amendment affect them. 

Article 86 

Processing and public access to official document 

Personal data in official document held by a public authority or a public body or a private body for 

the performance of a task carry out in the public interest may be disclose by the authority or 

body in accordance with Union or Member State law to which the public authority or body be 

subject in order to reconcile public access to official document with the right to the protection of 

personal data pursuant to this Regulation. 

Article 87 

Processing of the national identification number 

Member States may further determine the specific condition for the processing of a national 

identification number or any other identifier of general application. In that case the national 

identification number or any other identifier of general application shall be use only under 

appropriate safeguard for the right and freedom of the data subject pursuant to this Regulation. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 251 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 88 

Processing in the context of employment 

1. Member States may, by law or by collective agreements, provide for more specific rule to 

ensure the protection of the right and freedom in respect of the processing of employees' 

personal data in the employment context, in particular for the purpose of the recruitment, 

the performance of the contract of employment, include discharge of obligation laid 

down by law or by collective agreements, management, planning and organisation of work, 

equality and diversity in the workplace, health and safety at work, protection of employer's 

or customer's property and for the purpose of the exercise and enjoyment, on an individual 

or collective basis, of right and benefit related to employment, and for the purpose of the 

termination of the employment relationship. 

2. Those rule shall include suitable and specific measure to safeguard the data subject's 

human dignity, legitimate interest and fundamental rights, with particular regard to the 

transparency of processing, the transfer of personal data within a group of undertakings, or 

a group of entreprises engage in a joint economic activity and monitoring system at the 

work place. 

3. Each Member State shall notify to the Commission those provision of it law which it 

adopts pursuant to paragraph 1, by … [two year from the date of entry into force of this 

Regulation] and, without delay, any subsequent amendment affect them. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 252 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 89 

Safeguards and derogation 

relate to processing for archive purpose in the public interest, 

scientific or historical research purpose or statistical purpose 

1. Processing for archive purpose in the public interest, scientific or historical research 

purpose or statistical purposes, shall be subject to appropriate safeguards, in accordance 

with this Regulation, for the right and freedom of the data subject. Those safeguard shall 

ensure that technical and organisational measure be in place in particular in order to 

ensure respect for the principle of data minimisation. Those measure may include 

pseudonymisation provide that those purpose can be fulfil in that manner. Where 

those purpose can be fulfil by further processing which do not permit or no longer 

permit the identification of data subjects, those purpose shall be fulfil in that manner. 

2. Where personal data be process for scientific or historical research purpose or 

statistical purposes, Union or Member State law may provide for derogation from the 

right refer to in Articles 15, 16, 18 and 21 subject to the condition and safeguard 

refer to in paragraph 1 of this Article in so far a such right be likely to render 

impossible or seriously impair the achievement of the specific purposes, and such 

derogation be necessary for the fulfilment of those purposes. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 253 
DGD 2 EN 


3. Where personal data be process for archive purpose in the public interest, Union or 

Member State law may provide for derogation from the right refer to in Articles 15, 

16, 18, 19, 20 and 21 subject to the condition and safeguard refer to in paragraph 1 of 

this Article in so far a such right be likely to render impossible or seriously impair the 

achievement of the specific purposes, and such derogation be necessary for the fulfilment 

of those purposes. 

4. Where processing refer to in paragraph 2 and 3 serf at the same time another 

purpose, the derogation shall apply only to processing for the purpose refer to in those 

paragraphs. 

Article 90 

Obligations of secrecy 

1. Member States may adopt specific rule to set out the power of the supervisory authority 

laid down in point (e) and (f) of Article 58(1) in relation to controller or processor that 

be subject, under Union or Member State law or rule establish by national competent 

bodies, to an obligation of professional secrecy or other equivalent obligation of secrecy 

where this be necessary and proportionate to reconcile the right of the protection of 

personal data with the obligation of secrecy. Those rule shall apply only with regard to 

personal data which the controller or processor have receive a a result ofor have obtain in 

an activity cover by that obligation of secrecy. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 254 
DGD 2 EN 


2. Each Member State shall notify to the Commission the rule adopt pursuant to paragraph 

1, by … [two year from the date of entry into force of this Regulation] and, without delay, 

any subsequent amendment affect them. 

Article 91 

Existing data protection rule of church and religious association 

1. Where in a Member State, church and religious association or community apply, at the 

time of entry into force of this Regulation, comprehensive rule relate to the protection 

of natural person with regard to processing, such rule may continue to apply, provide 

that they be brought into line with this Regulation. 

2. Churches and religious association which apply comprehensive rule in accordance with 

paragraph 1 shall be subject to the supervision of an independent supervisory authority, 

which may be specific, provide that it fulfils the condition laid down in Chapter VI of 

this Regulation. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 255 
DGD 2 EN 


CHAPTER X 

DELEGATED ACTS AND IMPLEMENTING ACTS 

Article 92 

Exercise of the delegation 

1. The power to adopt delegate act be confer on the Commission subject to the 

condition laid down in this Article. 

2. The delegation of power refer to in Article 12(8) and Article 43(8) shall be confer on 

the Commission for an indeterminate period of time from … [the date of entry into force of 

this Regulation]. 

3. The delegation of power refer to in Article 12(8) and Article 43(8) may be revoke at 

any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision of revocation shall put 

an end to the delegation of power specify in that decision. It shall take effect the day 

follow that of it publication in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a late 

date specify therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegate act already in force. 

4. As soon a it adopts a delegate act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the 

European Parliament and to the Council. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 256 
DGD 2 EN 


5. A delegate act adopt pursuant to Article 12(8) and Article 43(8) shall enter into force 

only if no objection have be express by either the European Parliament or the Council 

within a period of three month of notification of that act to the European Parliament and 

the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council 

have both inform the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be 

extend by three month at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council. 

Article 93 

Committee procedure 

1. The Commission shall be assist by a committee. That committee shall be a committee 

within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011. 

2. Where reference be make to this paragraph, Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall 

apply. 

3. Where reference be make to this paragraph, Article 8 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011, in 

conjunction with Article 5 thereof, shall apply. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 257 
DGD 2 EN 


CHAPTER XI 

FINAL PROVISIONS 

Article 94 

Repeal of Directive 95/46/EC 

1. Directive 95/46/EC be repeal with effect from … [two year from the date of entry into 

force of this Regulation]. 

2. References to the repeal Directive shall be construe a reference to this Regulation. 

References to the Working Party on the Protection of Individuals with regard to the 

Processing of Personal Data establish by Article 29 of Directive 95/46/EC shall be 

construe a reference to the European Data Protection Board establish by this 

Regulation. 

Article 95 

Relationship with Directive 2002/58/EC 

This Regulation shall not impose additional obligation on natural or legal person in relation to 

processing in connection with the provision of publicly available electronic communication 

service in public communication network in the Union in relation to matter for which they be 

subject to specific obligation with the same objective set out in Directive 2002/58/EC. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 258 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 96 

Relationship with previously conclude Agreements 

International agreement involve the transfer of personal data to third country or international 

organisation which be conclude by Member States prior to … [the date of entry into force of 

this Regulation], and which be in accordance with Union law applicable prior to … [the date of 

entry into force of this Regulation], shall remain in force until amended, replace or revoked. 

Article 97 

Commission report 

1. By … [4 year after the date of entry into force of this Regulation] and every four year 

thereafter, the Commission shall submit a report on the evaluation and review of this 

Regulation to the European Parliament and to the Council. The report shall be make 

public. 

2. In the context of the evaluation and review refer to in paragraph 1, the Commission 

shall examine, in particular, the application and function of: 

(a) Chapter V on the transfer of personal data to third country or international 

organisation with particular regard to decision adopt pursuant to Article 45(3) of 

this Regulation and decision adopt on the basis of Article 25(6) of 

Directive 95/46/EC; 

(b) Chapter VII on cooperation and consistency. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 259 
DGD 2 EN 


3. For the purpose of paragraph 1, the Commission may request information from 

Member States and supervisory authorities. 

4. In carry out the evaluation and review refer to in paragraph 1 and 2, the 

Commission shall take into account the position and finding of the European Parliament, 

of the Council, and of other relevant body or sources. 

5. The Commission shall, if necessary, submit appropriate proposal to amend this 

Regulation, in particular take into account of development in information technology 

and in the light of the state of progress in the information society. 

Article 98 

Review of other Union legal act on data protection 

The Commission shall, if appropriate, submit legislative proposal with a view to amend other 

Union legal act on the protection of personal data, in order to ensure uniform and consistent 

protection of natural person with regard to processing. This shall in particular concern the rule 

relate to the protection of natural person with regard to processing by Union institutions, bodies, 

office and agency and on the free movement of such data. 







5419/16 AV/NT/sr 260 
DGD 2 EN 


Article 99 

Entry into force and application 

1. This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day follow that of it publication 

in the Official Journal of the European Union. 

2. It shall apply from … [two year from the date of entry into force of this Regulation]. 

This Regulation shall be binding in it entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. 

Done at …, 

For the European Parliament For the Council 

The President The President 




1. This Regulation lay down rule relate to the protection of natural person with regard to the processing of personal data and rule relate to the free movement of personal data. 
2. This Regulation protects fundamental right and freedom of natural person and in particular their right to the protection of personal data. 
3. The free movement of personal data within the Union shall be neither restrict nor prohibit for reason connect with the protection of natural person with regard to the processing of personal data. 
1. This Regulation applies to the processing of personal data wholly or partly by automate mean and to the processing other than by automate mean of personal data which form part of a filing system or be intend to form part of a filing system. 
2. This Regulation do not apply to the processing of personal data: 
(a) in the course of an activity which fall outside the scope of Union law; 
(b) by the Member States when carry out activity which fall within the scope of Chapter 2 of Title V of the TEU; 
(c) by a natural person in the course of a purely personal or household activity; 
(d) by competent authority for the purpose of the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences, the execution of criminal penalties, include the safeguard against and the prevention of threat to public security. 
3. For the processing of personal data by the Union institutions, bodies, office and agencies, Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 applies. Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and other Union legal act applicable to such processing of personal data shall be adapt t... 
4. This Regulation shall be without prejudice to the application of Directive 2000/31/EC, in particular of the liability rule of intermediary service provider in Articles 12 to 15 of that Directive. 
1. This Regulation applies to the processing of personal data in the context of the activity of an establishment of a controller or a processor in the Union, regardless of whether the processing take place in the Union or not. 
2. This Regulation applies to the processing of personal data of data subject who be in the Union by a controller or processor not establish in the Union, where the processing activity be related to: 
(a) the offering of good or services, irrespective of whether a payment of the data subject be required, to such data subject in the Union; or 
(b) the monitoring of their behaviour a far a their behaviour take place within the Union. 
3. This Regulation applies to the processing of personal data by a controller not establish in the Union, but in a place where Member State law applies by virtue of public international law. 
(a) a regard a controller with establishment in more than one Member State, the place of it central administration in the Union, unless the decision on the purpose and mean of the processing of personal data be take in another establishment o... 
(b) a regard a processor with establishment in more than one Member State, the place of it central administration in the Union, or, if the processor have no central administration in the Union, the establishment of the processor in the Union where ... 
(a) the controller or processor be establish on the territory of the Member State of that supervisory authority; 
(b) data subject reside in the Member State of that supervisory authority be substantially affected or likely to be substantially affected by the processing; or 
(c) a complaint have be lodge with that supervisory authority; 
(a) processing of personal data which take place in the context of the activity of establishment in more than one Member State of a controller or processor in the Union where the controller or processor be establish in more than one Member State... 
(b) processing of personal data which take place in the context of the activity of a single establishment of a controller or processor in the Union but which substantially affect or be likely to substantially affect data subject in more than one ... 
1. Personal data shall be: 
(a) process lawfully, fairly and in a transparent manner in relation to the data subject ('lawfulness, fairness and transparency'); 
(b) collect for specified, explicit and legitimate purpose and not further process in a manner that be incompatible with those purposes; further processing for archive purpose in the public interest, scientific or historical research purpose ... 
(c) adequate, relevant and limited to what be necessary in relation to the purpose for which they be process ('data minimisation'); 
(d) accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date; every reasonable step must be take to ensure that personal data that be inaccurate, have regard to the purpose for which they be processed, be erase or rectify without delay ('accuracy'); 
(e) kept in a form which permit identification of data subject for no longer than be necessary for the purpose for which the personal data be processed; personal data may be store for longer period insofar a the personal data will be processed... 
(f) process in a manner that ensures appropriate security of the personal data, include protection against unauthorised or unlawful processing and against accidental loss, destruction or damage, use appropriate technical or organisational measur... 
2. The controller shall be responsible for, and be able to demonstrate compliance with, paragraph 1 ('accountability'). 
1. Processing shall be lawful only if and to the extent that at least one of the follow applies: 
(a) the data subject have give consent to the processing of his or her personal data for one or more specific purposes; 
(b) processing be necessary for the performance of a contract to which the data subject be party or in order to take step at the request of the data subject prior to enter into a contract; 
(c) processing be necessary for compliance with a legal obligation to which the controller be subject; 
(d) processing be necessary in order to protect the vital interest of the data subject or of another natural person; 
(e) processing be necessary for the performance of a task carry out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested in the controller; 
(f) processing be necessary for the purpose of the legitimate interest pursue by the controller or by a third party, except where such interest be overridden by the interest or fundamental right and freedom of the data subject which require pr... 
Point (f) of the first subparagraph shall not apply to processing carry out by public authority in the performance of their tasks. 
2. Member States may maintain or introduce more specific provision to adapt the application of the rule of this Regulation with regard to processing for compliance with point (c) and (e) of paragraph 1 by determine more precisely specific require... 
3. The basis for the processing refer to in point (c) and (e) of paragraph 1 shall be laid down by: 
(a) Union law; or 
(b) Member State law to which the controller be subject. 
The purpose of the processing shall be determine in that legal basis or, a regard the processing refer to in point (e) of paragraph 1, shall be necessary for the performance of a task carry out in the public interest or in the exercise of offi... 
4. Where the processing for a purpose other than that for which the personal data have be collect be not base on the data subject's consent or on a Union or Member State law which constitutes a necessary and proportionate measure in a democratic... 
(a) any link between the purpose for which the personal data have be collect and the purpose of the intend further processing; 
(b) the context in which the personal data have be collected, in particular regard the relationship between data subject and the controller; 
(c) the nature of the personal data, in particular whether special category of personal data be processed, pursuant to Article 9, or whether personal data related to criminal conviction and offence be processed, pursuant to Article 10; 
(d) the possible consequence of the intend further processing for data subjects; 
(e) the existence of appropriate safeguards, which may include encryption or pseudonymisation. 
1. Where processing be base on consent, the controller shall be able to demonstrate that the data subject have consent to processing of his or her personal data. 
2. If the data subject's consent be give in the context of a write declaration which also concern other matters, the request for consent shall be present in a manner which be clearly distinguishable from the other matters, in an intelligible and... 
3. The data subject shall have the right to withdraw his or her consent at any time. The withdrawal of consent shall not affect the lawfulness of processing base on consent before it withdrawal. Prior to give consent, the data subject shall be inf... 
4. When assess whether consent be freely given, utmost account shall be take of whether, inter alia, the performance of a contract, include the provision of a service, be conditional on consent to the processing of personal data that be not nece... 
1. Where point (a) of Article 6(1) applies, in relation to the offer of information society service directly to a child, the processing of the personal data of a child shall be lawful where the child be at least 16 year old. Where the child be below... 
Member States may provide by law for a low age for those purpose provide that such low age be not below 13 years. 
2. The controller shall make reasonable effort to verify in such case that consent be give or authorise by the holder of parental responsibility over the child, take into consideration available technology. 
3. Paragraph 1 shall not affect the general contract law of Member States such a the rule on the validity, formation or effect of a contract in relation to a child. 
1. Processing of personal data reveal racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, religious or philosophical beliefs, or trade-union membership, and the processing of genetic data, biometric data for the purpose of uniquely identify a natural p... 
2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply if one of the follow applies: 
(a) the data subject have give explicit consent to the processing of those personal data for one or more specify purposes, except where Union or Member State law provide that the prohibition refer to in paragraph 1 may not be lift by the data s... 
(b) processing be necessary for the purpose of carry out the obligation and exercise specific right of the controller or of the data subject in the field of employment and social security and social protection law in so far a it be authorised... 
(c) processing be necessary to protect the vital interest of the data subject or of another natural person where the data subject be physically or legally incapable of give consent; 
(d) processing be carry out in the course of it legitimate activity with appropriate safeguard by a foundation, association or any other not-for-profit body with a political, philosophical, religious or trade-union aim and on condition that the ... 
(e) processing relates to personal data which be manifestly make public by the data subject; 
(f) processing be necessary for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claim or whenever court be act in their judicial capacity; 
(g) processing be necessary for reason of substantial public interest, on the basis of Union or Member State law which shall be proportionate to the aim pursued, respect the essence of the right to data protection and provide for suitable and specifi... 
(h) processing be necessary for the purpose of preventive or occupational medicine, for the assessment of the work capacity of the employee, medical diagnosis, the provision of health or social care or treatment or the management of health or soc... 
(i) processing be necessary for reason of public interest in the area of public health, such a protect against serious cross-border threat to health or ensure high standard of quality and safety of health care and of medicinal product or med... 
(j) processing be necessary for archive purpose in the public interest, scientific or historical research purpose or statistical purpose in accordance with Article 89(1) base on Union or Member State law which shall be proportionate to the aim p... 
3. Personal data refer to in paragraph 1 may be process for the purpose refer to in point (h) of paragraph 2 when those data be process by or under the responsibility of a professional subject to the obligation of professional secrecy und... 
4. Member States may maintain or introduce further conditions, include limitations, with regard to the processing of genetic data, biometric data or data concern health. 
1. If the purpose for which a controller process personal data do not or do no longer require the identification of a data subject by the controller, the controller shall not be oblige to maintain, acquire or process additional information in orde... 
2. Where, in case refer to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the controller be able to demonstrate that it be not in a position to identify the data subject, the controller shall inform the data subject accordingly, if possible. In such cases, Artic... 
1. The controller shall take appropriate measure to provide any information refer to in Articles 13 and 14 and any communication under Articles 15 to 22 and 34 relate to processing to the data subject in a concise, transparent, intelligible and ... 
2. The controller shall facilitate the exercise of data subject right under Articles 15 to 22. In the case refer to in Article 11(2), the controller shall not refuse to act on the request of the data subject for exercise his or her right under... 
3. The controller shall provide information on action take on a request under Articles 15 to 22 to the data subject without undue delay and in any event within one month of receipt of the request. That period may be extend by two further month wh... 
4. If the controller do not take action on the request of the data subject, the controller shall inform the data subject without delay and at the late within one month of receipt of the request of the reason for not take action and on the possi... 
5. Information provide under Articles 13 and 14 and any communication and any action take under Articles 15 to 22 and 34 shall be provide free of charge. Where request from a data subject be manifestly unfounded or excessive, in particular becau... 
(a) charge a reasonable fee take into account the administrative cost of provide the information or communication or take the action requested; or 
(b) refuse to act on the request. 
The controller shall bear the burden of demonstrate the manifestly unfounded or excessive character of the request. 
6. Without prejudice to Article 11, where the controller have reasonable doubt concern the identity of the natural person make the request refer to in Articles 15 to 21, the controller may request the provision of additional information neces... 
7. The information to be provide to data subject pursuant to Articles 13 and 14 may be provide in combination with standardise icon in order to give in an easily visible, intelligible and clearly legible manner a meaningful overview of the intend... 
8. The Commission shall be empower to adopt delegate act in accordance with Article 92 for the purpose of determine the information to be present by the icon and the procedure for provide standardise icons. 
1. Where personal data relate to a data subject be collect from the data subject, the controller shall, at the time when personal data be obtained, provide the data subject with all of the follow information: 
(a) the identity and the contact detail of the controller and, where applicable, of the controller's representative; 
(b) the contact detail of the data protection officer, where applicable; 
(c) the purpose of the processing for which the personal data be intend a well a the legal basis for the processing; 
(d) where the processing be base on point (f) of Article 6(1), the legitimate interest pursue by the controller or by a third party; 
(e) the recipient or category of recipient of the personal data, if any; 
(f) where applicable, the fact that the controller intend to transfer personal data to a third country or international organisation and the existence or absence of an adequacy decision by the Commission, or in the case of transfer refer to in Ar... 
2. In addition to the information refer to in paragraph 1, the controller shall, at the time when personal data be obtained, provide the data subject with the follow further information necessary to ensure fair and transparent processing: 
(a) the period for which the personal data will be stored, or if that be not possible, the criterion use to determine that period; 
(b) the existence of the right to request from the controller access to and rectification or erasure of personal data or restriction of processing concern the data subject or to object to processing a well a the right to data portability; 
(c) where the processing be base on point (a) of Article 6(1) or point (a) of Article 9(2), the existence of the right to withdraw consent at any time, without affect the lawfulness of processing base on consent before it withdrawal; 
(d) the right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority; 
(e) whether the provision of personal data be a statutory or contractual requirement, or a requirement necessary to enter into a contract, a well a whether the data subject be oblige to provide the personal data and of the possible consequence of ... 
(f) the existence of automate decision-making, include profiling, refer to in Article 22(1) and (4) and, at least in those cases, meaningful information about the logic involved, a well a the significance and the envisage consequence of such... 
3. Where the controller intend to further process the personal data for a purpose other than that for which the personal data be collected, the controller shall provide the data subject prior to that further processing with information on that othe... 
4. Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall not apply where and insofar a the data subject already have the information. 
1. Where personal data have not be obtain from the data subject, the controller shall provide the data subject with the follow information: 
(a) the identity and the contact detail of the controller and, if any, of the controller's representative; 
(b) the contact detail of the data protection officer, where applicable; 
(c) the purpose of the processing for which the personal data be intend a well a the legal basis for the processing; 
(d) the category of personal data concerned; 
(e) the recipient or category of recipient of the personal data, where applicable; 
(f) where applicable, that the controller intend to transfer personal data to a recipient in a third country or international organisation and the existence or absence of an adequacy decision by the Commission, or in the case of transfer refer to... 
2. In addition to the information refer to in paragraph 1, the controller shall provide the data subject with the follow information necessary to ensure fair and transparent processing in respect of the data subject: 
(a) the period for which the personal data will be stored, or if that be not possible, the criterion use to determine that period; 
(b) where the processing be base on point (f) of Article 6(1), the legitimate interest pursue by the controller or by a third party; 
(c) the existence of the right to request from the controller access to and rectification or erasure of personal data or restriction of processing concern the data subject and to object to processing a well a the right to data portability; 
(d) where processing be base on point (a) of Article 6(1) or point (a) of Article 9(2), the existence of the right to withdraw consent at any time, without affect the lawfulness of processing base on consent before it withdrawal; 
(e) the right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority; 
(f) from which source the personal data originate, and if applicable, whether it come from publicly accessible sources; 
(g) the existence of automate decision-making, include profiling, refer to in Article 22(1) and (4) and, at least in those cases, meaningful information about the logic involved, a well a the significance and the envisage consequence of such... 
3. The controller shall provide the information refer to in paragraph 1 and 2: 
(a) within a reasonable period after obtain the personal data, but at the late within one month, have regard to the specific circumstance in which the personal data be processed; 
(b) if the personal data be to be use for communication with the data subject, at the late at the time of the first communication to that data subject; or 
(c) if a disclosure to another recipient be envisaged, at the late when the personal data be first disclosed. 
4. Where the controller intend to further process the personal data for a purpose other than that for which the personal data be obtained, the controller shall provide the data subject prior to that further processing with information on that other... 
5. Paragraphs 1 to 4 shall not apply where and insofar as: 
(a) the data subject already have the information; 
(b) the provision of such information prof impossible or would involve a disproportionate effort, in particular for processing for archive purpose in the public interest, scientific or historical research purpose or statistical purposes, subjec... 
(c) obtain or disclosure be expressly laid down by Union or Member State law to which the controller be subject and which provide appropriate measure to protect the data subject's legitimate interests; or 
(d) where the personal data must remain confidential subject to an obligation of professional secrecy regulate by Union or Member State law, include a statutory obligation of secrecy. 
1. The data subject shall have the right to obtain from the controller confirmation a to whether or not personal data concern him or her be be processed, and where that be the case, access to the personal data and the follow information: 
(a) the purpose of the processing; 
(b) the category of personal data concerned; 
(c) the recipient or category of recipient to whom the personal data have be or will be disclosed, in particular recipient in third country or international organisations; 
(d) where possible, the envisage period for which the personal data will be stored, or, if not possible, the criterion use to determine that period; 
(e) the existence of the right to request from the controller rectification or erasure of personal data or restriction of processing of personal data concern the data subject or to object to such processing; 
(f) the right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority; 
(g) where the personal data be not collect from the data subject, any available information a to their source; 
(h) the existence of automate decision-making, include profiling, refer to in Article 22(1) and (4) and, at least in those cases, meaningful information about the logic involved, a well a the significance and the envisage consequence of suc... 
2. Where personal data be transfer to a third country or to an international organisation, the data subject shall have the right to be inform of the appropriate safeguard pursuant to Article 46 relate to the transfer. 
3. The controller shall provide a copy of the personal data undergo processing. For any further copy request by the data subject, the controller may charge a reasonable fee base on administrative costs. Where the data subject make the request... 
4. The right to obtain a copy refer to in paragraph 3 shall not adversely affect the right and freedom of others. 
1. The data subject shall have the right to obtain from the controller the erasure of personal data concern him or her without undue delay and the controller shall have the obligation to erase personal data without undue delay where one of the foll... 
(a) the personal data be no longer necessary in relation to the purpose for which they be collect or otherwise processed; 
(b) the data subject withdraws consent on which the processing be base accord to point (a) of Article 6(1), or point (a) of Article 9(2), and where there be no other legal ground for the processing; 
(c) the data subject object to the processing pursuant to Article 21(1) and there be no override legitimate ground for the processing, or the data subject object to the processing pursuant to Article 21(2); 
(d) the personal data have be unlawfully processed; 
(e) the personal data have to be erase for compliance with a legal obligation in Union or Member State law to which the controller be subject; 
(f) the personal data have be collect in relation to the offer of information society service refer to in Article 8(1). 
2. Where the controller have make the personal data public and be oblige pursuant to paragraph 1 to erase the personal data, the controller, take account of available technology and the cost of implementation, shall take reasonable steps, include ... 
3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to the extent that processing be necessary: 
(a) for exercise the right of freedom of expression and information; 
(b) for compliance with a legal obligation which require processing by Union or Member State law to which the controller be subject or for the performance of a task carry out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested in... 
(c) for reason of public interest in the area of public health in accordance with point (h) and (i) of Article 9(2) a well a Article 9(3); 
(d) for archive purpose in the public interest, scientific or historical research purpose or statistical purpose in accordance with Article 89(1) in so far a the right refer to in paragraph 1 be likely to render impossible or seriously impair... 
(e) for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims. 
1. The data subject shall have the right to obtain from the controller restriction of processing where one of the follow applies: 
(a) the accuracy of the personal data be contest by the data subject, for a period enable the controller to verify the accuracy of the personal data; 
(b) the processing be unlawful and the data subject opposes the erasure of the personal data and request the restriction of their use instead; 
(c) the controller no longer need the personal data for the purpose of the processing, but they be require by the data subject for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims; 
(d) the data subject have object to processing pursuant to Article 21(1) pending the verification whether the legitimate ground of the controller override those of the data subject. 
2. Where processing have be restrict under paragraph 1, such personal data shall, with the exception of storage, only be process with the data subject's consent or for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claim or for the protection o... 
3. A data subject who have obtain restriction of processing pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be inform by the controller before the restriction of processing be lifted. 
1. The data subject shall have the right to receive the personal data concern him or her, which he or she have provide to a controller, in a structured, commonly use and machine-readable format and have the right to transmit those data to another ... 
(a) the processing be base on consent pursuant to point (a) of Article 6(1) or point (a) of Article 9(2) or on a contract pursuant to point (b) of Article 6(1); and 
(b) the processing be carry out by automate means. 
2. In exercise his or her right to data portability pursuant to paragraph 1, the data subject shall have the right to have the personal data transmit directly from one controller to another, where technically feasible. 
3. The exercise of the right refer to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be without prejudice to Article 17. That right shall not apply to processing necessary for the performance of a task carry out in the public interest or in the exercise of... 
4. The right refer to in paragraph 1 shall not adversely affect the right and freedom of others. 
1. The data subject shall have the right to object, on ground relate to his or her particular situation, at any time to processing of personal data concern him or her which be base on point (e) or (f) of Article 6(1), include profile based... 
2. Where personal data be process for direct marketing purposes, the data subject shall have the right to object at any time to processing of personal data concern him or her for such marketing, which include profile to the extent that it be ... 
3. Where the data subject object to processing for direct marketing purposes, the personal data shall no longer be process for such purposes. 
4. At the late at the time of the first communication with the data subject, the right refer to in paragraph 1 and 2 shall be explicitly brought to the attention of the data subject and shall be present clearly and separately from any other in... 
5. In the context of the use of information society services, and notwithstanding Directive 2002/58/EC, the data subject may exercise his or her right to object by automate mean use technical specifications. 
6. Where personal data be process for scientific or historical research purpose or statistical purpose pursuant to Article 89(1), the data subject, on ground relate to his or her particular situation, shall have the right to object to processi... 
1. The data subject shall have the right not to be subject to a decision base solely on automate processing, include profiling, which produce legal effect concern him or her or similarly significantly affect him or her. 
2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply if the decision: 
(a) be necessary for enter into, or performance of, a contract between the data subject and a data controller; 
(b) be authorise by Union or Member State law to which the controller be subject and which also lay down suitable measure to safeguard the data subject's right and freedom and legitimate interests; or 
(c) be base on the data subject's explicit consent. 
3. In the case refer to in point (a) and (c) of paragraph 2, the data controller shall implement suitable measure to safeguard the data subject's right and freedom and legitimate interests, at least the right to obtain human intervention on t... 
4. Decisions refer to in paragraph 2 shall not be base on special category of personal data refer to in Article 9(1), unless point (a) or (g) of Article 9(2) apply and suitable measure to safeguard the data subject's right and freedom and ... 
1. Union or Member State law to which the data controller or processor be subject may restrict by way of a legislative measure the scope of the obligation and right provide for in Articles 12 to 22 and Article 34, a well a Article 5 in so far a ... 
(a) national security; 
(b) defence; 
(c) public security; 
(d) the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offence or the execution of criminal penalties, include the safeguard against and the prevention of threat to public security; 
(e) other important objective of general public interest of the Union or of a Member State, in particular an important economic or financial interest of the Union or of a Member State, include monetary, budgetary and taxation a matters, public heal... 
(f) the protection of judicial independence and judicial proceedings; 
(g) the prevention, investigation, detection and prosecution of breach of ethic for regulate professions; 
(h) a monitoring, inspection or regulatory function connected, even occasionally, to the exercise of official authority in the case refer to in point (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (g); 
(i) the protection of the data subject or the right and freedom of others; 
(j) the enforcement of civil law claims. 
2. In particular, any legislative measure refer to in paragraph 1 shall contain specific provision at least, where relevant, a to: 
(a) the purpose of the processing or category of processing; 
(b) the category of personal data; 
(c) the scope of the restriction introduced; 
(d) the safeguard to prevent abuse or unlawful access or transfer; 
(e) the specification of the controller or category of controllers; 
(f) the storage period and the applicable safeguard take into account the nature, scope and purpose of the processing or category of processing; 
(g) the risk to the right and freedom of data subjects; and 
(h) the right of data subject to be inform about the restriction, unless that may be prejudicial to the purpose of the restriction. 
1. Taking into account the nature, scope, context and purpose of processing a well a the risk of vary likelihood and severity for the right and freedom of natural persons, the controller shall implement appropriate technical and organisationa... 
2. Where proportionate in relation to processing activities, the measure refer to in paragraph 1 shall include the implementation of appropriate data protection policy by the controller. 
3. Adherence to approve code of conduct a refer to in Article 40 or approve certification mechanism a refer to in Article 42 may be use a an element by which to demonstrate compliance with the obligation of the controller. 
1. Taking into account the state of the art, the cost of implementation and the nature, scope, context and purpose of processing a well a the risk of vary likelihood and severity for right and freedom of natural person pose by the processin... 
2. The controller shall implement appropriate technical and organisational measure for ensure that, by default, only personal data which be necessary for each specific purpose of the processing be processed. That obligation applies to the amount ... 
3. An approve certification mechanism pursuant to Article 42 may be use a an element to demonstrate compliance with the requirement set out in paragraph 1 and 2 of this Article. 
1. Where two or more controller jointly determine the purpose and mean of processing, they shall be joint controllers. They shall in a transparent manner determine their respective responsibility for compliance with the obligation under this Reg... 
2. The arrangement refer to in paragraph 1 shall duly reflect the respective role and relationship of the joint controller vis-à-vis the data subjects. The essence of the arrangement shall be make available to the data subject. 
3. Irrespective of the term of the arrangement refer to in paragraph 1, the data subject may exercise his or her right under this Regulation in respect of and against each of the controllers. 
1. Where Article 3(2) applies, the controller or the processor shall designate in write a representative in the Union. 
2. This obligation shall not apply to: 
(a) processing which be occasional, do not include, on a large scale, processing of special category of data a refer to in Article 9(1) or processing of personal data relate to criminal conviction and offence refer to in Article 10, and... 
(b) a public authority or body. 
3. The representative shall be establish in one of those Member States where the data subject be and whose personal data be process in relation to the offering of good or service to them, or whose behaviour be monitored. 
4. The representative shall be mandate by the controller or processor to be address in addition to or instead of the controller or the processor by, in particular, supervisory authority and data subjects, on all issue related to processing, for ... 
5. The designation of a representative by the controller or processor shall be without prejudice to legal action which could be initiate against the controller or the processor themselves. 
1. Where processing be to be carry out on behalf of a controller, the controller shall use only processor provide sufficient guarantee to implement appropriate technical and organisational measure in such a manner that processing will meet the ... 
2. The processor shall not engage another processor without prior specific or general write authorisation of the controller. In the case of general write authorisation, the processor shall inform the controller of any intend change concern t... 
3. Processing by a processor shall be govern by a contract or other legal act under Union or Member State law, that be binding on the processor with regard to the controller and that set out the subject-matter and duration of the processing, the na... 
(a) process the personal data only on document instruction from the controller, include with regard to transfer of personal data to a third country or an international organisation, unless require to do so by Union or Member State law to whic... 
(b) ensures that person authorise to process the personal data have commit themselves to confidentiality or be under an appropriate statutory obligation of confidentiality; 
(c) take all measure require pursuant to Article 32; 
(d) respect the condition refer to in paragraph 2 and 4 for engage another processor; 
(e) take into account the nature of the processing, assist the controller by appropriate technical and organisational measures, insofar a this be possible, for the fulfilment of the controller's obligation to respond to request for exercise the... 
(f) assist the controller in ensure compliance with the obligation pursuant to Articles 32 to 36 take into account the nature of processing and the information available to the processor; 
(g) at the choice of the controller, deletes or return all the personal data to the controller after the end of the provision of service relate to processing, and deletes exist copy unless Union or Member State law require storage of the per... 
(h) make available to the controller all information necessary to demonstrate compliance with the obligation laid down in this Article and allow for and contribute to audits, include inspections, conduct by the controller or another auditor man... 
With regard to point (h) of the first subparagraph, the processor shall immediately inform the controller if, in it opinion, an instruction infringes this Regulation or other Union or Member State data protection provisions. 
4. Where a processor engages another processor for carry out specific processing activity on behalf of the controller, the same data protection obligation a set out in the contract or other legal act between the controller and the processor a ... 
5. Adherence of a processor to an approve code of conduct a refer to in Article 40 or an approve certification mechanism a refer to in Article 42 may be use a an element by which to demonstrate sufficient guarantee a refer to in parag... 
6. Without prejudice to an individual contract between the controller and the processor, the contract or the other legal act refer to in paragraph 3 and 4 of this Article may be based, in whole or in part, on standard contractual clause referred... 
7. The Commission may lay down standard contractual clause for the matter refer to in paragraph 3 and 4 of this Article and in accordance with the examination procedure refer to in Article 93(2). 
8. A supervisory authority may adopt standard contractual clause for the matter refer to in paragraph 3 and 4 of this Article and in accordance with the consistency mechanism refer to in Article 63. 
9. The contract or the other legal act refer to in paragraph 3 and 4 shall be in writing, include in electronic form. 
10. Without prejudice to Articles 82, 83 and 84, if a processor infringes this Regulation by determine the purpose and mean of processing, the processor shall be consider to be a controller in respect of that processing. 
1. Each controller and, where applicable, the controller's representative, shall maintain a record of processing activity under it responsibility. That record shall contain all of the follow information: 
(a) the name and contact detail of the controller and, where applicable, the joint controller, the controller's representative and the data protection officer; 
(b) the purpose of the processing; 
(c) a description of the category of data subject and of the category of personal data; 
(d) the category of recipient to whom the personal data have be or will be disclose include recipient in third country or international organisations; 
(e) where applicable, transfer of personal data to a third country or an international organisation, include the identification of that third country or international organisation and, in the case of transfer refer to in the second subparagraph... 
(f) where possible, the envisage time limit for erasure of the different category of data; 
(g) where possible, a general description of the technical and organisational security measure refer to in Article 32(1). 
2. Each processor and, where applicable, the processor's representative shall maintain a record of all category of processing activity carry out on behalf of a controller, containing: 
(a) the name and contact detail of the processor or processor and of each controller on behalf of which the processor be acting, and, where applicable, of the controller's or the processor's representative, and the data protection officer; 
(b) the category of processing carry out on behalf of each controller; 
(c) where applicable, transfer of personal data to a third country or an international organisation, include the identification of that third country or international organisation and, in the case of transfer refer to in the second subparagraph... 
(d) where possible, a general description of the technical and organisational security measure refer to in Article 32(1). 
3. The record refer to in paragraph 1 and 2 shall be in writing, include in electronic form. 
4. The controller or the processor and, where applicable, the controller's or the processor's representative, shall make the record available to the supervisory authority on request. 
5. The obligation refer to in paragraph 1 and 2 shall not apply to an enterprise or an organisation employ few than 250 person unless the processing it carry out be likely to result in a risk to the right and freedom of data subjects, ... 
1. Taking into account the state of the art, the cost of implementation and the nature, scope, context and purpose of processing a well a the risk of vary likelihood and severity for the right and freedom of natural persons, the controller an... 
(a) the pseudonymisation and encryption of personal data; 
(b) the ability to ensure the ongoing confidentiality, integrity, availability and resilience of processing system and services; 
(c) the ability to restore the availability and access to personal data in a timely manner in the event of a physical or technical incident; 
(d) a process for regularly testing, assess and evaluate the effectiveness of technical and organisational measure for ensure the security of the processing. 
2. In assess the appropriate level of security account shall be take in particular of the risk that be present by processing, in particular from accidental or unlawful destruction, loss, alteration, unauthorised disclosure of, or access to per... 
3. Adherence to an approve code of conduct a refer to in Article 40 or an approve certification mechanism a refer to in Article 42 may be use a an element by which to demonstrate compliance with the requirement set out in paragraph 1 of t... 
4. The controller and processor shall take step to ensure that any natural person act under the authority of the controller or the processor who have access to personal data do not process them except on instruction from the controller, unless h... 
1. In the case of a personal data breach, the controller shall without undue delay and, where feasible, not late than 72 hour after have become aware of it, notify the personal data breach to the supervisory authority competent in accordance with ... 
2. The processor shall notify the controller without undue delay after become aware of a personal data breach. 
3. The notification refer to in paragraph 1 shall at least: 
(a) describe the nature of the personal data breach include where possible, the category and approximate number of data subject concerned and the category and approximate number of personal data record concerned; 
(b) communicate the name and contact detail of the data protection officer or other contact point where more information can be obtained; 
(c) describe the likely consequence of the personal data breach; 
(d) describe the measure take or propose to be take by the controller to address the personal data breach, including, where appropriate, measure to mitigate it possible adverse effects. 
4. Where, and in so far as, it be not possible to provide the information at the same time, the information may be provide in phase without undue further delay. 
5. The controller shall document any personal data breaches, comprise the fact relate to the personal data breach, it effect and the remedial action taken. That documentation shall enable the supervisory authority to verify compliance with this... 
1. When the personal data breach be likely to result in a high risk to the right and freedom of natural persons, the controller shall communicate the personal data breach to the data subject without undue delay. 
2. The communication to the data subject refer to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall describe in clear and plain language the nature of the personal data breach and contain at least the information and the recommendation provide for in point (... 
3. The communication to the data subject refer to in paragraph 1 shall not be require if any of the follow condition be met: 
(a) the controller have implement appropriate technical and organisational protection measures, and that those measure be apply to the personal data affected by the personal data breach, in particular those that render the personal data unintell... 
(b) the controller have take subsequent measure which ensure that the high risk to the right and freedom of data subject refer to in paragraph 1 be no longer likely to materialise; 
(c) it would involve disproportionate effort. In such a case, there shall instead be a public communication or similar measure whereby the data subject be inform in an equally effective manner. 
4. If the controller have not already communicate the personal data breach to the data subject, the supervisory authority, have consider the likelihood of the personal data breach result in a high risk, may require it to do so or may decide tha... 
1. Where a type of processing in particular use new technologies, and take into account the nature, scope, context and purpose of the processing, be likely to result in a high risk to the right and freedom of natural persons, the controller sha... 
2. The controller shall seek the advice of the data protection officer, where designated, when carry out a data protection impact assessment. 
3. A data protection impact assessment refer to in paragraph 1 shall in particular be require in the case of: 
(a) a systematic and extensive evaluation of personal aspect relate to natural person which be base on automate processing, include profiling, and on which decision be base that produce legal effect concern the natural person or similar... 
(b) processing on a large scale of special category of data refer to in Article 9(1), or of personal data relate to criminal conviction and offence refer to in Article 10; or 
(c) a systematic monitoring of a publicly accessible area on a large scale. 
4. The supervisory authority shall establish and make public a list of the kind of processing operation which be subject to the requirement for a data protection impact assessment pursuant to paragraph 1. The supervisory authority shall communicate ... 
5. The supervisory authority may also establish and make public a list of the kind of processing operation for which no data protection impact assessment be required. The supervisory authority shall communicate those list to the Board. 
6. Prior to the adoption of the list refer to in paragraph 4 and 5, the competent supervisory authority shall apply the consistency mechanism refer to in Article 63 where such list involve processing activity which be related to the offer... 
7. The assessment shall contain at least: 
(a) a systematic description of the envisage processing operation and the purpose of the processing, including, where applicable, the legitimate interest pursue by the controller; 
(b) an assessment of the necessity and proportionality of the processing operation in relation to the purposes; 
(c) an assessment of the risk to the right and freedom of data subject refer to in paragraph 1; and 
(d) the measure envisage to address the risks, include safeguards, security measure and mechanism to ensure the protection of personal data and to demonstrate compliance with this Regulation take into account the right and legitimate interest... 
8. Compliance with approve code of conduct refer to in Article 40 by the relevant controller or processor shall be take into due account in assess the impact of the processing operation perform by such controller or processors, in part... 
9. Where appropriate, the controller shall seek the view of data subject or their representative on the intend processing, without prejudice to the protection of commercial or public interest or the security of processing operations. 
10. Where processing pursuant to point (c) or (e) of Article 6(1) have a legal basis in Union law or in the law of the Member State to which the controller be subject, that law regulates the specific processing operation or set of operation in questio... 
11. Where necessary, the controller shall carry out a review to ass if processing be perform in accordance with the data protection impact assessment at least when there be a change of the risk represent by processing operations. 
1. The controller shall consult the supervisory authority prior to processing where a data protection impact assessment under Article 35 indicates that the processing would result in a high risk in the absence of measure take by the controller to mi... 
2. Where the supervisory authority be of the opinion that the intend processing refer to in paragraph 1 would infringe this Regulation, in particular where the controller have insufficiently identify or mitigate the risk, the supervisory author... 
3. When consult the supervisory authority pursuant to paragraph 1, the controller shall provide the supervisory authority with: 
(a) where applicable, the respective responsibility of the controller, joint controller and processor involve in the processing, in particular for processing within a group of undertakings; 
(b) the purpose and mean of the intend processing; 
(c) the measure and safeguard provide to protect the right and freedom of data subject pursuant to this Regulation; 
(d) where applicable, the contact detail of the data protection officer; 
(e) the data protection impact assessment provide for in Article 35; and 
(f) any other information request by the supervisory authority. 
4. Member States shall consult the supervisory authority during the preparation of a proposal for a legislative measure to be adopt by a national parliament, or of a regulatory measure base on such a legislative measure, which relates to processing. 
5. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, Member State law may require controller to consult with, and obtain prior authorisation from, the supervisory authority in relation to processing by a controller for the performance of a task carry out by the control... 
1. The controller and the processor shall designate a data protection officer in any case where: 
(a) the processing be carry out by a public authority or body, except for court act in their judicial capacity; 
(b) the core activity of the controller or the processor consist of processing operation which, by virtue of their nature, their scope and/or their purposes, require regular and systematic monitoring of data subject on a large scale; or 
(c) the core activity of the controller or the processor consist of processing on a large scale of special category of data pursuant to Article 9 and personal data relate to criminal conviction and offence refer to in Article 10. 
2. A group of undertaking may appoint a single data protection officer provide that a data protection officer be easily accessible from each establishment. 
3. Where the controller or the processor be a public authority or body, a single data protection officer may be designate for several such authority or bodies, take account of their organisational structure and size. 
4. In case other than those refer to in paragraph 1, the controller or processor or association and other body represent category of controller or processor may or, where require by Union or Member State law shall, designate a data pro... 
5. The data protection officer shall be designate on the basis of professional quality and, in particular, expert knowledge of data protection law and practice and the ability to fulfil the task refer to in Article 39. 
6. The data protection officer may be a staff member of the controller or processor, or fulfil the task on the basis of a service contract. 
7. The controller or the processor shall publish the contact detail of the data protection officer and communicate them to the supervisory authority. 
1. The controller and the processor shall ensure that the data protection officer be involved, properly and in a timely manner, in all issue which relate to the protection of personal data. 
2. The controller and processor shall support the data protection officer in perform the task refer to in Article 39 by provide resource necessary to carry out those task and access to personal data and processing operations, and to mainta... 
3. The controller and processor shall ensure that the data protection officer do not receive any instruction regard the exercise of those tasks. He or she shall not be dismiss or penalise by the controller or the processor for perform his ... 
4. Data subject may contact the data protection officer with regard to all issue related to processing of their personal data and to the exercise of their right under this Regulation. 
5. The data protection officer shall be bound by secrecy or confidentiality concern the performance of his or her tasks, in accordance with Union or Member State law. 
6. The data protection officer may fulfil other task and duties. The controller or processor shall ensure that any such task and duty do not result in a conflict of interests. 
1. The data protection officer shall have at least the follow tasks: 
(a) to inform and advise the controller or the processor and the employee who carry out processing of their obligation pursuant to this Regulation and to other Union or Member State data protection provisions; 
(b) to monitor compliance with this Regulation, with other Union or Member State data protection provision and with the policy of the controller or processor in relation to the protection of personal data, include the assignment of responsibiliti... 
(c) to provide advice where request a regard the data protection impact assessment and monitor it performance pursuant to Article 35; 
(d) to cooperate with the supervisory authority; 
(e) to act a the contact point for the supervisory authority on issue relate to processing, include the prior consultation refer to in Article 36, and to consult, where appropriate, with regard to any other matter. 
2. The data protection officer shall in the performance of his or her task have due regard to the risk associate with processing operations, take into account the nature, scope, context and purpose of processing. 
1. The Member States, the supervisory authorities, the Board and the Commission shall encourage the draw up of code of conduct intend to contribute to the proper application of this Regulation, take account of the specific feature of the vari... 
2. Associations and other body represent category of controller or processor may prepare code of conduct, or amend or extend such codes, for the purpose of specify the application of this Regulation, such a with regard to: 
(a) fair and transparent processing; 
(b) the legitimate interest pursue by controller in specific contexts; 
(c) the collection of personal data; 
(d) the pseudonymisation of personal data; 
(e) the information provide to the public and to data subjects; 
(f) the exercise of the right of data subjects; 
(g) the information provide to, and the protection of, children, and the manner in which the consent of the holder of parental responsibility over child be to be obtained; 
(h) the measure and procedure refer to in Articles 24 and 25 and the measure to ensure security of processing refer to in Article 32; 
(i) the notification of personal data breach to supervisory authority and the communication of such personal data breach to data subjects; 
(j) the transfer of personal data to third country or international organisations; or 
(k) out-of-court proceeding and other dispute resolution procedure for resolve dispute between controller and data subject with regard to processing, without prejudice to the right of data subject pursuant to Articles 77 and 79. 
3. In addition to adherence by controller or processor subject to this Regulation, code of conduct approve pursuant to paragraph 5 of this Article and have general validity pursuant to paragraph 9 of this Article may also be adhere to by contr... 
4. A code of conduct refer to in paragraph 2 of this Article shall contain mechanism which enable the body refer to in Article 41(1) to carry out the mandatory monitoring of compliance with it provision by the controller or processor which ... 
5. Associations and other body refer to in paragraph 2 of this Article which intend to prepare a code of conduct or to amend or extend an exist code shall submit the draft code, amendment or extension to the supervisory authority which be comp... 
6. Where the draft code, or amendment or extension be approve in accordance with paragraph 5, and where the code of conduct concerned do not relate to processing activity in several Member States, the supervisory authority shall register and pub... 
7. Where a draft code of conduct relates to processing activity in several Member States, the supervisory authority which be competent pursuant to Article 55 shall, before approve the draft code, amendment or extension, submit it in the procedure ... 
8. Where the opinion refer to in paragraph 7 confirms that the draft code, amendment or extension complies with this Regulation, or, in the situation refer to in paragraph 3, provide appropriate safeguards, the Board shall submit it opinion to... 
9. The Commission may, by way of implement acts, decide that the approve code of conduct, amendment or extension submit to it pursuant to paragraph 8 have general validity within the Union. Those implement act shall be adopt in accordance... 
10. The Commission shall ensure appropriate publicity for the approve code which have be decide a have general validity in accordance with paragraph 9. 
11. The Board shall collate all approve code of conduct, amendment and extension in a register and shall make them publicly available by way of appropriate means. 
1. Without prejudice to the task and power of the competent supervisory authority under Articles 57 and 58, the monitoring of compliance with a code of conduct pursuant to Article 40 may be carry out by a body which have an appropriate level of exp... 
2. A body a refer to in paragraph 1 may be accredit to monitor compliance with a code of conduct where that body has: 
(a) demonstrate it independence and expertise in relation to the subject-matter of the code to the satisfaction of the competent supervisory authority; 
(b) establish procedure which allow it to ass the eligibility of controller and processor concerned to apply the code, to monitor their compliance with it provision and to periodically review it operation; 
(c) establish procedure and structure to handle complaint about infringement of the code or the manner in which the code have been, or be being, implement by a controller or processor, and to make those procedure and structure transparent to... 
(d) demonstrate to the satisfaction of the competent supervisory authority that it task and duty do not result in a conflict of interests. 
3. The competent supervisory authority shall submit the draft criterion for accreditation of a body a refer to in paragraph 1 of this Article to the Board pursuant to the consistency mechanism refer to in Article 63. 
4. Without prejudice to the task and power of the competent supervisory authority and the provision of Chapter VIII, a body a refer to in paragraph 1 shall, subject to appropriate safeguards, take appropriate action in case of infringement of ... 
5. The competent supervisory authority shall revoke the accreditation of a body a refer to in paragraph 1 if the condition for accreditation be not, or be no longer, met or where action take by the body infringe this Regulation. 
6. This Article shall not apply to processing carry out by public authority and bodies. 
1. The Member States, the supervisory authorities, the Board and the Commission shall encourage, in particular at Union level, the establishment of data protection certification mechanism and of data protection seal and marks, for the purpose of dem... 
2. In addition to adherence by controller or processor subject to this Regulation, data protection certification mechanisms, seal or mark approve pursuant to paragraph 5 of this Article may be establish for the purpose of demonstrate the exis... 
3. The certification shall be voluntary and available via a process that be transparent. 
4. A certification pursuant to this Article do not reduce the responsibility of the controller or the processor for compliance with this Regulation and be without prejudice to the task and power of the supervisory authority which be competent ... 
5. A certification pursuant to this Article shall be issue by the certification body refer to in Article 43 or by the competent supervisory authority, on the basis of criterion approve by that competent supervisory authority pursuant to Article ... 
6. The controller or processor which submits it processing to the certification mechanism shall provide the certification body refer to in Article 43, or where applicable, the competent supervisory authority, with all information and access to its... 
7. Certification shall be issue to a controller or processor for a maximum period of three year and may be renewed, under the same conditions, provide that the relevant requirement continue to be met. Certification shall be withdrawn, a applicabl... 
8. The Board shall collate all certification mechanism and data protection seal and mark in a register and shall make them publicly available by any appropriate means. 
1. Without prejudice to the task and power of the competent supervisory authority under Articles 57 and 58, certification body which have an appropriate level of expertise in relation to data protection shall, after inform the supervisory autho... 
(a) the supervisory authority which be competent pursuant to Article 55 or 56; 
(b) the national accreditation body name in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council21F in accordance with EN-ISO/IEC 17065/2012 and with the additional requirement establish by the supervisory aut... 
2. Certification body refer to in paragraph 1 shall be accredit in accordance with paragraph 1 only where they have: 
(a) demonstrate their independence and expertise in relation to the subject-matter of the certification to the satisfaction of the competent supervisory authority; 
(b) undertaken to respect the criterion refer to in Article 42(5) and approve by the supervisory authority which be competent pursuant to Article 55 or 56 or by the Board pursuant to Article 63; 
(c) establish procedure for the issuing, periodic review and withdrawal of data protection certification, seal and marks; 
(d) establish procedure and structure to handle complaint about infringement of the certification or the manner in which the certification have been, or be being, implement by the controller or processor, and to make those procedure and struct... 
(e) demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the competent supervisory authority, that their task and duty do not result in a conflict of interests. 
3. The accreditation of certification body a refer to in paragraph 1 and 2 shall take place on the basis of criterion approve by the supervisory authority which be competent pursuant to Article 55 or 56 or by the Board pursuant to Article 63. I... 
4. The certification body refer to in paragraph 1 shall be responsible for the proper assessment lead to the certification or the withdrawal of such certification without prejudice to the responsibility of the controller or processor for comp... 
5. The certification body refer to in paragraph 1 shall provide the competent supervisory authority with the reason for grant or withdraw the request certification. 
6. The requirement refer to in paragraph 3 of this Article and the criterion refer to in Article 42(5) shall be make public by the supervisory authority in an easily accessible form. The supervisory authority shall also transmit those requirem... 
7. Without prejudice to Chapter VIII, the competent supervisory authority or the national accreditation body shall revoke an accreditation of a certification body pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article where the condition for the accreditation be n... 
8. The Commission shall be empower to adopt delegate act in accordance with Article 92 for the purpose of specify the requirement to be take into account for the data protection certification mechanism refer to in Article 42(1). 
9. The Commission may adopt implement act lay down technical standard for certification mechanism and data protection seal and marks, and mechanism to promote and recognise those certification mechanisms, seal and marks. Those implementin... 
1. A transfer of personal data to a third country or an international organisation may take place where the Commission have decide that the third country, a territory or one or more specify sector within that third country, or the international org... 
2. When assess the adequacy of the level of protection, the Commission shall, in particular, take account of the follow elements: 
(a) the rule of law, respect for human right and fundamental freedoms, relevant legislation, both general and sectoral, include concern public security, defence, national security and criminal law and the access of public authority to personal... 
(b) the existence and effective function of one or more independent supervisory authority in the third country or to which an international organisation be subject, with responsibility for ensure and enforce compliance with the data protecti... 
(c) the international commitment the third country or international organisation concerned have enter into, or other obligation arise from legally binding convention or instrument a well a from it participation in multilateral or regional sy... 
3. The Commission, after assess the adequacy of the level of protection, may decide, by mean of implement act, that a third country, a territory or one or more specify sector within a third country, or an international organisation ensures a... 
4. The Commission shall, on an ongoing basis, monitor development in third country and international organisation that could affect the function of decision adopt pursuant to paragraph 3 of this Article and decision adopt on the basis of... 
5. The Commission shall, where available information reveals, in particular follow the review refer to in paragraph 3 of this Article, that a third country, a territory or one or more specify sector within a third country, or an international... 
On duly justified imperative ground of urgency, the Commission shall adopt immediately applicable implement act in accordance with the procedure refer to in Article 93(3). 
6. The Commission shall enter into consultation with the third country or international organisation with a view to remedy the situation give rise to the decision make pursuant to paragraph 5. 
7. A decision pursuant to paragraph 5 of this Article be without prejudice to transfer of personal data to the third country, a territory or one or more specify sector within that third country, or the international organisation in question pursua... 
8. The Commission shall publish in the Official Journal of the European Union and on it website a list of the third countries, territory and specify sector within a third country and international organisation for which it have decide that an ... 
9. Decisions adopt by the Commission on the basis of Article 25(6) of Directive 95/46/EC shall remain in force until amended, replace or repeal by a Commission Decision adopt in accordance with paragraph 3 or 5 of this Article. 
1. In the absence of a decision pursuant to Article 45(3), a controller or processor may transfer personal data to a third country or an international organisation only if the controller or processor have provide appropriate safeguards, and on conditi... 
2. The appropriate safeguard refer to in paragraph 1 may be provide for, without require any specific authorisation from a supervisory authority, by: 
(a) a legally binding and enforceable instrument between public authority or bodies; 
(b) binding corporate rule in accordance with Article 47; 
(c) standard data protection clause adopt by the Commission in accordance with the examination procedure refer to in Article 93(2); 
(d) standard data protection clause adopt by a supervisory authority and approve by the Commission pursuant to the examination procedure refer to in Article 93(2); 
(e) an approve code of conduct pursuant to Article 40 together with binding and enforceable commitment of the controller or processor in the third country to apply the appropriate safeguards, include a regard data subjects' rights; or 
(f) an approve certification mechanism pursuant to Article 42 together with binding and enforceable commitment of the controller or processor in the third country to apply the appropriate safeguards, include a regard data subjects' rights. 
3. Subject to the authorisation from the competent supervisory authority, the appropriate safeguard refer to in paragraph 1 may also be provide for, in particular, by: 
(a) contractual clause between the controller or processor and the controller, processor or the recipient of the personal data in the third country or international organisation; or 
(b) provision to be insert into administrative arrangement between public authority or body which include enforceable and effective data subject rights. 
4. The supervisory authority shall apply the consistency mechanism refer to in Article 63 in the case refer to in paragraph 3 of this Article. 
5. Authorisations by a Member State or supervisory authority on the basis of Article 26(2) of Directive 95/46/EC shall remain valid until amended, replace or repealed, if necessary, by that supervisory authority. Decisions adopt by the Commission ... 
1. The competent supervisory authority shall approve binding corporate rule in accordance with the consistency mechanism set out in Article 63, provide that they: 
(a) be legally binding and apply to and be enforce by every member concerned of the group of undertakings, or group of enterprise engage in a joint economic activity, include their employees; 
(b) expressly confer enforceable right on data subject with regard to the processing of their personal data; and 
(c) fulfil the requirement laid down in paragraph 2. 
2. The binding corporate rule refer to in paragraph 1 shall specify at least: 
(a) the structure and contact detail of the group of undertakings, or group of enterprise engage in a joint economic activity and of each of it members; 
(b) the data transfer or set of transfers, include the category of personal data, the type of processing and it purposes, the type of data subject affected and the identification of the third country or country in question; 
(c) their legally binding nature, both internally and externally; 
(d) the application of the general data protection principles, in particular purpose limitation, data minimisation, limited storage periods, data quality, data protection by design and by default, legal basis for processing, processing of special cate... 
(e) the right of data subject in regard to processing and the mean to exercise those rights, include the right not to be subject to decision base solely on automate processing, include profile in accordance with Article 22, the right to lo... 
(f) the acceptance by the controller or processor establish on the territory of a Member State of liability for any breach of the binding corporate rule by any member concerned not establish in the Union; the controller or the processor shall b... 
(g) how the information on the binding corporate rules, in particular on the provision refer to in point (d), (e) and (f) of this paragraph be provide to the data subject in addition to Articles 13 and 14; 
(h) the task of any data protection officer designate in accordance with Article 37 or any other person or entity in charge of the monitoring compliance with the binding corporate rule within the group of undertakings, or group of enterprise engag... 
(i) the complaint procedures; 
(j) the mechanism within the group of undertakings, or group of enterprise engage in a joint economic activity for ensure the verification of compliance with the binding corporate rules. Such mechanism shall include data protection audit and me... 
(k) the mechanism for reporting and record change to the rule and reporting those change to the supervisory authority; 
(l) the cooperation mechanism with the supervisory authority to ensure compliance by any member of the group of undertakings, or group of enterprise engage in a joint economic activity, in particular by make available to the supervisory authority... 
(m) the mechanism for reporting to the competent supervisory authority any legal requirement to which a member of the group of undertakings, or group of enterprise engage in a joint economic activity be subject in a third country which be likely ... 
(n) the appropriate data protection training to personnel have permanent or regular access to personal data. 
3. The Commission may specify the format and procedure for the exchange of information between controllers, processor and supervisory authority for binding corporate rule within the meaning of this Article. Those implement act shall be adopte... 
1. In the absence of an adequacy decision pursuant to Article 45(3), or of appropriate safeguard pursuant to Article 46, include binding corporate rules, a transfer or a set of transfer of personal data to a third country or an international organ... 
(a) the data subject have explicitly consent to the propose transfer, after have be inform of the possible risk of such transfer for the data subject due to the absence of an adequacy decision and appropriate safeguards; 
(b) the transfer be necessary for the performance of a contract between the data subject and the controller or the implementation of pre-contractual measure take at the data subject's request; 
(c) the transfer be necessary for the conclusion or performance of a contract conclude in the interest of the data subject between the controller and another natural or legal person; 
(d) the transfer be necessary for important reason of public interest; 
(e) the transfer be necessary for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims; 
(f) the transfer be necessary in order to protect the vital interest of the data subject or of other persons, where the data subject be physically or legally incapable of give consent; 
(g) the transfer be make from a register which accord to Union or Member State law be intend to provide information to the public and which be open to consultation either by the public in general or by any person who can demonstrate a legitimate ... 
Where a transfer could not be base on a provision in Articles 45 or 46, include the provision on binding corporate rules, and none of the derogation for a specific situation pursuant to point (a) to (g) of this paragraph be applicable, a transf... 
2. A transfer pursuant to point (g) of paragraph 1 shall not involve the entirety of the personal data or entire category of the personal data contain in the register. Where the register be intend for consultation by person have a legitimate ... 
3. Points (a), (b) and (c) of the first subparagraph and the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 shall not apply to activity carry out by public authority in the exercise of their public powers. 
4. The public interest refer to in point (d) of paragraph 1 shall be recognise in Union law or in the law of the Member State to which the controller be subject. 
5. In the absence of an adequacy decision, Union or Member State law may, for important reason of public interest, expressly set limit to the transfer of specific category of personal data to a third country or an international organisation. Memb... 
6. The controller or processor shall document the assessment a well a the suitable safeguard refer to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article in the record refer to in Article 30. 
1. Each Member State shall provide for one or more independent public authority to be responsible for monitoring the application of this Regulation, in order to protect the fundamental right and freedom of natural person in relation to processing... 
2. Each supervisory authority shall contribute to the consistent application of this Regulation throughout the Union. For that purpose, the supervisory authority shall cooperate with each other and the Commission in accordance with Chapter VII. 
3. Where more than one supervisory authority be establish in a Member State, that Member State shall designate the supervisory authority which be to represent those authority in the Board and shall set out the mechanism to ensure compliance by the... 
4. Each Member State shall notify to the Commission the provision of it law which it adopts pursuant to this Chapter, by … [two year from the date of entry into force of this Regulation] at the late and, without delay, any subsequent amendment a... 
1. Each supervisory authority shall act with complete independence in perform it task and exercise it power in accordance with this Regulation. 
2. The member or member of each supervisory authority shall, in the performance of their task and exercise of their power in accordance with this Regulation, remain free from external influence, whether direct or indirect, and shall neither seek no... 
3. Member or member of each supervisory authority shall refrain from any action incompatible with their duty and shall not, during their term of office, engage in any incompatible occupation, whether gainful or not. 
4. Each Member State shall ensure that each supervisory authority be provide with the human, technical and financial resources, premise and infrastructure necessary for the effective performance of it task and exercise of it powers, include tho... 
5. Each Member State shall ensure that each supervisory authority chooses and have it own staff which shall be subject to the exclusive direction of the member or member of the supervisory authority concerned. 
6. Each Member State shall ensure that each supervisory authority be subject to financial control which do not affect it independence and that it have separate, public annual budgets, which may be part of the overall state or national budget. 
1. Member States shall provide for each member of their supervisory authority to be appoint by mean of a transparent procedure by: 
– their parliament; 
– their government; 
– their head of State; or 
– an independent body entrust with the appointment under Member State law. 
2. Each member shall have the qualifications, experience and skills, in particular in the area of the protection of personal data, require to perform it duty and exercise it powers. 
3. The duty of a member shall end in the event of the expiry of the term of office, resignation or compulsory retirement, in accordance with the law of the Member State concerned. 
4. A member shall be dismiss only in case of serious misconduct or if the member no longer fulfils the condition require for the performance of the duties. 
1. Each Member State shall provide by law for all of the following: 
(a) the establishment of each supervisory authority; 
(b) the qualification and eligibility condition require to be appoint a member of each supervisory authority; 
(c) the rule and procedure for the appointment of the member or member of each supervisory authority; 
(d) the duration of the term of the member or member of each supervisory authority of no less than four years, except for the first appointment after … [the date of entry into force of this Regulation], part of which may take place for a shorter peri... 
(e) whether and, if so, for how many term the member or member of each supervisory authority be eligible for reappointment; 
(f) the condition govern the obligation of the member or member and staff of each supervisory authority, prohibition on actions, occupation and benefit incompatible therewith during and after the term of office and rule govern the cessati... 
2. The member or member and the staff of each supervisory authority shall, in accordance with Union or Member State law, be subject to a duty of professional secrecy both during and after their term of office, with regard to any confidential informat... 
1. Each supervisory authority shall be competent for the performance of the task assign to and the exercise of the power confer on it in accordance with this Regulation on the territory of it own Member State. 
2. Where processing be carry out by public authority or private body act on the basis of point (c) or (e) of Article 6(1), the supervisory authority of the Member State concerned shall be competent. In such case Article 56 do not apply. 
3. Supervisory authority shall not be competent to supervise processing operation of court act in their judicial capacity. 
1. Without prejudice to Article 55, the supervisory authority of the main establishment or of the single establishment of the controller or processor shall be competent to act a lead supervisory authority for the cross-border processing carry out b... 
2. By derogation from paragraph 1, each supervisory authority shall be competent to handle a complaint lodge with it or a possible infringement of this Regulation, if the subject matter relates only to an establishment in it Member State or substant... 
3. In the case refer to in paragraph 2 of this Article, the supervisory authority shall inform the lead supervisory authority without delay on that matter. Within a period of three week after be inform the lead supervisory authority shall de... 
4. Where the lead supervisory authority decides to handle the case, the procedure provide in Article 60 shall apply. The supervisory authority which inform the lead supervisory authority may submit to the lead supervisory authority a draft for a d... 
5. Where the lead supervisory authority decides not to handle the case, the supervisory authority which inform the lead supervisory authority shall handle it accord to Articles 61 and 62. 
6. The lead supervisory authority shall be the sole interlocutor of the controller or processor for the cross-border processing carry out by that controller or processor. 
1. Without prejudice to other task set out under this Regulation, each supervisory authority shall on it territory: 
(a) monitor and enforce the application of this Regulation; 
(b) promote public awareness and understand of the risks, rules, safeguard and right in relation to processing. Activities address specifically to child shall receive specific attention; 
(c) advise, in accordance with Member State law, the national parliament, the government, and other institution and body on legislative and administrative measure relate to the protection of natural persons' right and freedom with regard to p... 
(d) promote the awareness of controller and processor of their obligation under this Regulation; 
(e) upon request, provide information to any data subject concern the exercise of their right under this Regulation and, if appropriate, cooperate with the supervisory authority in other Member States to that end; 
(f) handle complaint lodge by a data subject, or by a body, organisation or association in accordance with Article 80, and investigate, to the extent appropriate, the subject matter of the complaint and inform the complainant of the progress and the... 
(g) cooperate with, include share information and provide mutual assistance to, other supervisory authority with a view to ensure the consistency of application and enforcement of this Regulation; 
(h) conduct investigation on the application of this Regulation, include on the basis of information receive from another supervisory authority or other public authority; 
(i) monitor relevant developments, insofar a they have an impact on the protection of personal data, in particular the development of information and communication technology and commercial practices; 
(j) adopt standard contractual clause refer to in Article 28(8) and point (d) of Article 46(2); 
(k) establish and maintain a list in relation to the requirement for data protection impact assessment pursuant to Article 35(4); 
(l) give advice on the processing operation refer to in Article 36(2); 
(m) encourage the draw up of code of conduct pursuant to Article 40 and provide an opinion and approve such code of conduct which provide sufficient safeguards, pursuant to Article 40(5); 
(n) encourage the establishment of data protection certification mechanism and of data protection seal and mark pursuant to Article 42(1), and approve the criterion of certification pursuant to Article 42(5); 
(o) where applicable, carry out a periodic review of certification issue in accordance with Article 42(7); 
(p) draft and publish the criterion for accreditation of a body for monitoring code of conduct pursuant to Article 41 and of a certification body pursuant to Article 43; 
(q) conduct the accreditation of a body for monitoring code of conduct pursuant to Article 41 and of a certification body pursuant to Article 43; 
(r) authorise contractual clause and provision refer to in Article 46(3); 
(s) approve binding corporate rule pursuant to Article 47; 
(t) contribute to the activity of the Board; 
(u) keep internal record of infringement of this Regulation and of measure take in accordance with Article 58(2); and 
(v) fulfil any other task related to the protection of personal data. 
2. Each supervisory authority shall facilitate the submission of complaint refer to in point (f) of paragraph 1, by measure such a a complaint submission form which may also be complete electronically, without exclude other mean of communica... 
3. The performance of the task of each supervisory authority shall be free of charge for the data subject and, where applicable, for the data protection officer. 
4. Where request be manifestly unfounded or excessive, in particular because of their repetitive character, the supervisory authority may charge a reasonable fee base on administrative costs, or refuse to act on the request. The supervisory authori... 
1. Each supervisory authority shall have all of the follow investigative powers: 
(a) to order the controller and the processor, and, where applicable, the controller's or the processor's representative to provide any information it require for the performance of it tasks; 
(b) to carry out investigation in the form of data protection audits; 
(c) to carry out a review on certification issue pursuant to Article 42(7); 
(d) to notify the controller or the processor of an allege infringement of this Regulation; 
(e) to obtain, from the controller and the processor, access to all personal data and to all information necessary for the performance of it tasks; 
(f) to obtain access to any premise of the controller and the processor, include to any data processing equipment and means, in accordance with Union or Member State procedural law. 
2. Each supervisory authority shall have all of the follow corrective powers: 
(a) to issue warning to a controller or processor that intend processing operation be likely to infringe provision of this Regulation; 
(b) to issue reprimand to a controller or a processor where processing operation have infringe provision of this Regulation; 
(c) to order the controller or the processor to comply with the data subject's request to exercise his or her right pursuant to this Regulation; 
(d) to order the controller or processor to bring processing operation into compliance with the provision of this Regulation, where appropriate, in a specify manner and within a specify period; 
(e) to order the controller to communicate a personal data breach to the data subject; 
(f) to impose a temporary or definitive limitation include a ban on processing; 
(g) to order the rectification or erasure of personal data or restriction of processing pursuant to Articles 16, 17 and 18 and the notification of such action to recipient to whom the personal data have be disclose pursuant to Articles 17(2) and 19; 
(h) to withdraw a certification or to order the certification body to withdraw a certification issue pursuant to Articles 42 and 43, or to order the certification body not to issue certification if the requirement for the certification be not or ar... 
(i) to impose an administrative fine pursuant to Article 83, in addition to, or instead of measure refer to in this paragraph, depend on the circumstance of each individual case; 
(j) to order the suspension of data flow to a recipient in a third country or to an international organisation. 
3. Each supervisory authority shall have all of the follow authorisation and advisory powers: 
(a) to advise the controller in accordance with the prior consultation procedure refer to in Article 36; 
(b) to issue, on it own initiative or on request, opinion to the national parliament, the Member State government or, in accordance with Member State law, to other institution and body a well a to the public on any issue related to the protecti... 
(c) to authorise processing refer to in Article 36(5), if the law of the Member State require such prior authorisation; 
(d) to issue an opinion and approve draft code of conduct pursuant to Article 40(5); 
(e) to accredit certification body pursuant to Article 43; 
(f) to issue certification and approve criterion of certification in accordance with Article 42(5); 
(g) to adopt standard data protection clause refer to in Article 28(8) and in point (d) of Article 46(2); 
(h) to authorise contractual clause refer to in point (a) of Article 46(3); 
(i) to authorise administrative arrangement refer to in point (b) of Article 46(3); 
(j) to approve binding corporate rule pursuant to Article 47. 
4. The exercise of the power confer on the supervisory authority pursuant to this Article shall be subject to appropriate safeguards, include effective judicial remedy and due process, set out in Union and Member State law in accordance with the... 
5. Each Member State shall provide by law that it supervisory authority shall have the power to bring infringement of this Regulation to the attention of the judicial authority and where appropriate, to commence or engage otherwise in legal procee... 
6. Each Member State may provide by law that it supervisory authority shall have additional power to those refer to in paragraph 1, 2 and 3. The exercise of those power shall not impair the effective operation of Chapter VII. 
1. The lead supervisory authority shall cooperate with the other supervisory authority concerned in accordance with this Article in an endeavour to reach consensus. The lead supervisory authority and the supervisory authority concerned shall excha... 
2. The lead supervisory authority may request at any time other supervisory authority concerned to provide mutual assistance pursuant to Article 61 and may conduct joint operation pursuant to Article 62, in particular for carry out investigatio... 
3. The lead supervisory authority shall, without delay, communicate the relevant information on the matter to the other supervisory authority concerned. It shall without delay submit a draft decision to the other supervisory authority concerned fo... 
4. Where any of the other supervisory authority concerned within a period of four week after have be consult in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article, express a relevant and reason objection to the draft decision, the lead superviso... 
5. Where the lead supervisory authority intend to follow the relevant and reason objection made, it shall submit to the other supervisory authority concerned a revise draft decision for their opinion. That revise draft decision shall be subject... 
6. Where none of the other supervisory authority concerned have object to the draft decision submit by the lead supervisory authority within the period refer to in paragraph 4 and 5, the lead supervisory authority and the supervisory author... 
7. The lead supervisory authority shall adopt and notify the decision to the main establishment or single establishment of the controller or processor, a the case may be and inform the other supervisory authority concerned and the Board of the deci... 
8. By derogation from paragraph 7, where a complaint be dismiss or rejected, the supervisory authority with which the complaint be lodge shall adopt the decision and notify it to the complainant and shall inform the controller thereof. 
9. Where the lead supervisory authority and the supervisory authority concerned agree to dismiss or reject part of a complaint and to act on other part of that complaint, a separate decision shall be adopt for each of those part of the matter. ... 
10. After be notify of the decision of the lead supervisory authority pursuant to paragraphs7 and 9, the controller or processor shall take the necessary measure to ensure compliance with the decision a regard processing activity in the con... 
11. Where, in exceptional circumstances, a supervisory authority concerned have reason to consider that there be an urgent need to act in order to protect the interest of data subjects, the urgency procedure refer to in Article 66 shall apply. 
12. The lead supervisory authority and the other supervisory authority concerned shall supply the information require under this Article to each other by electronic means, use a standardise format. 
1. Supervisory authority shall provide each other with relevant information and mutual assistance in order to implement and apply this Regulation in a consistent manner, and shall put in place measure for effective cooperation with one another. Mut... 
2. Each supervisory authority shall take all appropriate measure require to reply to a request of another supervisory authority without undue delay and no late than one month after receive the request. Such measure may include, in particular, t... 
3. Requests for assistance shall contain all the necessary information, include the purpose of and reason for the request. Information exchange shall be use only for the purpose for which it be requested. 
4. The request supervisory authority shall not refuse to comply with the request unless: 
(a) it be not competent for the subject-matter of the request or for the measure it be request to execute; or 
(b) compliance with the request would infringe this Regulation or Union or Member State law to which the supervisory authority receive the request be subject. 
5. The request supervisory authority shall inform the request supervisory authority of the result or, a the case may be, of the progress of the measure take in order to respond to the request. The request supervisory authority shall provide... 
6. Requested supervisory authority shall, a a rule, supply the information request by other supervisory authority by electronic means, use a standardise format. 
7. Requested supervisory authority shall not charge a fee for any action take by them pursuant to a request for mutual assistance. Supervisory authority may agree on rule to indemnify each other for specific expenditure arise from the provisi... 
8. Where a supervisory authority do not provide the information refer to in paragraph 5 within one month of receive the request of another supervisory authority, the request supervisory authority may adopt a provisional measure on the territ... 
9. The Commission may, by mean of implement acts, specify the format and procedure for mutual assistance refer to in this Article and the arrangement for the exchange of information by electronic mean between supervisory authorities, and bet... 
1. The supervisory authority shall, where appropriate, conduct joint operation include joint investigation and joint enforcement measure in which member or staff from the supervisory authority of other Member States be involved. 
2. Where the controller or processor have establishment in several Member States or where a significant number of data subject in more than one Member State be likely to be substantially affected by processing operations, a supervisory authority of... 
3. A supervisory authority may, in accordance with Member State law, and with the second supervisory authority's authorisation, confer powers, include investigative power on the second supervisory authority's member or staff involve in join... 
4. Where, in accordance with paragraph 1, staff of a second supervisory authority operate in another Member State, the Member State of the host supervisory authority shall assume responsibility for their actions, include liability, for any damage... 
5. The Member State in whose territory the damage be cause shall make good such damage under the condition applicable to damage cause by it own staff. The Member State of the second supervisory authority whose staff have cause damage to any p... 
6. Without prejudice to the exercise of it right vis-à-vis third party and with the exception of paragraph 5, each Member State shall refrain, in the case provide for in paragraph 1, from request reimbursement from another Member State in rela... 
7. Where a joint operation be intend and a supervisory authority do not, within one month, comply with the obligation laid down in the second sentence of paragraph 2 of this Article, the other supervisory authority may adopt a provisional measur... 
1. The Board shall issue an opinion where a competent supervisory authority intend to adopt any of the measure below. To that end, the competent supervisory authority shall communicate the draft decision to the Board, when it: 
(a) aim to adopt a list of the processing operation subject to the requirement for a data protection impact assessment pursuant to Article 35(4); 
(b) concern a matter pursuant to Article 40(7) whether a draft code of conduct or an amendment or extension to a code of conduct complies with this Regulation; 
(c) aim to approve the criterion for accreditation of a body pursuant to Article 41(3) or a certification body pursuant to Article 43(3); 
(d) aim to determine standard data protection clause refer to in point (d) of Article 46(2) and Article 28(8); 
(e) aim to authorise contractual clause refer to in point (a) of Article 46(3); or 
(f) aim to approve binding corporate rule within the meaning of Article 47. 
2. Any supervisory authority, the Chair of the Board or the Commission may request that any matter of general application or produce effect in more than one Member State be examine by the Board with a view to obtain an opinion, in particular wh... 
3. In the case refer to in paragraph 1 and 2, the Board shall issue an opinion on the matter submit to it provide that it have not already issue an opinion on the same matter. That opinion shall be adopt within eight week by simple majorit... 
4. Supervisory authority and the Commission shall, without undue delay, communicate by electronic mean to the Board, use a standardise format any relevant information, include a the case may be a summary of the facts, the draft decision, the... 
5. The Chair of the Board shall, without undue, delay inform by electronic means: 
(a) the member of the Board and the Commission of any relevant information which have be communicate to it use a standardise format. The secretariat of the Board shall, where necessary, provide translation of relevant information; and 
(b) the supervisory authority refer to, a the case may be, in paragraph 1 and 2, and the Commission of the opinion and make it public. 
6. The competent supervisory authority shall not adopt it draft decision refer to in paragraph 1 within the period refer to in paragraph 3. 
7. The supervisory authority refer to in paragraph 1 shall take utmost account of the opinion of the Board and shall within two week after receive the opinion, electronically communicate to the Chair of the Board whether it maintains or will ame... 
8. Where the supervisory authority concerned informs the Chair of the Board within the period refer to in paragraph 7 of this Article that it do not intend to follow the opinion of the Board, in whole or in part, provide the relevant grounds, A... 
1. In order to ensure the correct and consistent application of this Regulation in individual cases, the Board shall adopt a binding decision in the follow cases: 
(a) where, in a case refer to in Article 60(4), a supervisory authority concerned have raise a relevant and reason objection to a draft decision of the lead authority or the lead authority have reject an objection a be not relevant or reason... 
(b) where there be conflict view on which of the supervisory authority concerned be competent for the main establishment; 
(c) where a competent supervisory authority do not request the opinion of the Board in the case refer to in Article 64(1), or do not follow the opinion of the Board issue under Article 64. In that case, any supervisory authority concerned or ... 
2. The decision refer to in paragraph 1 shall be adopt within one month from the referral of the subject-matter by a two-third majority of the member of the Board. This period may be extend by a further month on account of the complexity of t... 
3. Where the Board have be unable to adopt a decision within the period refer to in paragraph 2, it shall adopt it decision within two week follow the expiration of the second month refer to in paragraph 2 by a simple majority of the memb... 
4. The supervisory authority concerned shall not adopt a decision on the subject matter submit to the Board under paragraph 1 during the period refer to in paragraph 2 and 3. 
5. The Chair of the Board shall notify, without undue delay, the decision refer to in paragraph 1 to the supervisory authority concerned. It shall inform the Commission thereof. The decision shall be publish on the website of the Board without ... 
6. The lead supervisory authority or, a the case may be, the supervisory authority with which the complaint have be lodge shall adopt it final decision on the basis of the decision refer to in paragraph 1 of this Article, without undue delay a... 
1. In exceptional circumstances, where a supervisory authority concerned considers that there be an urgent need to act in order to protect the right and freedom of data subjects, it may, by way of derogation from the consistency mechanism refer t... 
2. Where a supervisory authority have take a measure pursuant to paragraph 1 and considers that final measure need urgently be adopted, it may request an urgent opinion or an urgent binding decision from the Board, give reason for request such... 
3. Any supervisory authority may request an urgent opinion or an urgent binding decision, a the case may be, from the Board where a competent supervisory authority have not take an appropriate measure in a situation where there be an urgent need to a... 
4. By derogation from Articles 64(3) and 65(2), an urgent opinion or an urgent binding decision refer to in paragraph 2 and 3 of this Article shall be adopt within two week by simple majority of the member of the Board. 
1. The European Data Protection Board (the 'Board') be hereby establish a a body of the Union and shall have legal personality. 
2. The Board shall be represent by it Chair. 
3. The Board shall be compose of the head of one supervisory authority of each Member State and of the European Data Protection Supervisor, or their respective representatives. 
4. Where in a Member State more than one supervisory authority be responsible for monitoring the application of the provision pursuant to this Regulation, a joint representative shall be appoint in accordance with that Member State's law. 
5. The Commission shall have the right to participate in the activity and meeting of the Board without voting right. The Commission shall designate a representative. The Chair of the Board shall communicate to the Commission the activity of the B... 
6. In the case refer to in Article 65, the European Data Protection Supervisor shall have voting right only on decision which concern principle and rule applicable to the Union institutions, bodies, office and agency which correspond in su... 
1. The Board shall act independently when perform it task or exercise it power pursuant to Articles 70 and 71. 
2. Without prejudice to request by the Commission refer to in point (b) of Article 70(1) and in Article 70(2), the Board shall, in the performance of it task or the exercise of it powers, neither seek nor take instruction from anybody. 
1. The Board shall ensure the consistent application of this Regulation. To that end, the Board shall, on it own initiative or, where relevant, at the request of the Commission, in particular: 
(a) monitor and ensure the correct application of this Regulation in the case provide for in Articles 64 and 65 without prejudice to the task of national supervisory authorities; 
(b) advise the Commission on any issue related to the protection of personal data in the Union, include on any propose amendment of this Regulation; 
(c) advise the Commission on the format and procedure for the exchange of information between controllers, processor and supervisory authority for binding corporate rules; 
(d) issue guidelines, recommendations, and best practice on procedure for erase links, copy or replication of personal data from publicly available communication service a refer to in Article 17 (2); 
(e) examine, on it own initiative, on request of one of it member or on request of the Commission, any question cover the application of this Regulation and issue guidelines, recommendation and best practice in order to encourage consistent ap... 
(f) issue guidelines, recommendation and best practice in accordance with point (e) of this paragraph for further specify the criterion and condition for decision base on profile pursuant to Article 22(2); 
(g) issue guidelines, recommendation and best practice in accordance with point (e) of this paragraph for establish the personal data breach and determine the undue delay refer to in Article 33(1) and (2) and for the particular circumstanc... 
(h) issue guidelines, recommendation and best practice in accordance with point (e) of this paragraph a to the circumstance in which a personal data breach be likely to result in a high risk to the right and freedom of the natural person refer... 
(i) issue guidelines, recommendation and best practice in accordance with point (e) of this paragraph for the purpose of further specify the criterion and requirement for personal data transfer base on binding corporate rule adhere to by cont... 
(j) issue guidelines, recommendation and best practice in accordance with point (e) of this paragraph for the purpose of further specify the criterion and requirement for the personal data transfer on the basis of Article 49(1); 
(k) draw up guideline for supervisory authority concern the application of measure refer to in Article 58(1), (2) and (3) and the fix of administrative fine pursuant to Articles 83; 
(l) review the practical application of the guidelines, recommendation and best practice refer to in point (e) and (f); 
(m) issue guidelines, recommendation and best practice in accordance with point (e) of this paragraph for establish common procedure for reporting by natural person of infringement of this Regulation pursuant to Article 54(2); 
(n) encourage the drawing-up of code of conduct and the establishment of data protection certification mechanism and data protection seal and mark pursuant to Articles 40 and 42; 
(o) carry out the accreditation of certification body and it periodic review pursuant to Article 43 and maintain a public register of accredit body pursuant to Article 43(6) and of the accredit controller or processor establish in third c... 
(p) specify the requirement refer to in Article 43(3) with a view to the accreditation of certification body under Article 42; 
(q) provide the Commission with an opinion on the certification requirement refer to in Article 43(8); 
(r) provide the Commission with an opinion on the the icon refer to in Article 12(7); 
(s) provide the Commission with an opinion for the assessment of the adequacy of the level of protection in a third country or international organisation, include for the assessment whether a third country, a territory or one or more specify sect... 
(t) issue opinion on draft decision of supervisory authority pursuant to the consistency mechanism refer to in Article 64(1), on matter submit pursuant to Article 64(2) and to issue binding decision pursuant to Article 65, include in cas... 
(u) promote the cooperation and the effective bilateral and multilateral exchange of information and best practice between the supervisory authorities; 
(v) promote common training programme and facilitate personnel exchange between the supervisory authority and, where appropriate, with the supervisory authority of third country or with international organisations; 
(w) promote the exchange of knowledge and documentation on data protection legislation and practice with data protection supervisory authority worldwide. 
(x) issue opinion on code of conduct drawn up at Union level pursuant to Article 40(9); and 
(y) maintain a publicly accessible electronic register of decision take by supervisory authority and court on issue handle in the consistency mechanism. 
2. Where the Commission request advice from the Board, it may indicate a time limit, take into account the urgency of the matter. 
3. The Board shall forward it opinions, guidelines, recommendations, and best practice to the Commission and to the committee refer to in Article 93 and make them public. 
4. The Board shall, where appropriate, consult interested party and give them the opportunity to comment within a reasonable period. The Board shall, without prejudice to Article 76, make the result of the consultation procedure publicly available. 
1. The Board shall draw up an annual report regard the protection of natural person with regard to processing in the Union and, where relevant, in third country and international organisations. The report shall be make public and be transmit ... 
2. The annual report shall include a review of the practical application of the guidelines, recommendation and best practice refer to in point (l) of Article 70(1) a well a of the binding decision refer to in Article 65. 
1. The Board shall take decision by a simple majority of it members, unless otherwise provide for in this Regulation. 
2. The Board shall adopt it own rule of procedure by a two-third majority of it member and organise it own operational arrangements. 
1. The Board shall elect a chair and two deputy chair from amongst it member by simple majority. 
2. The term of office of the Chair and of the deputy chair shall be five year and be renewable once. 
1. The Chair shall have the follow tasks: 
(a) to convene the meeting of the Board and prepare it agenda; 
(b) to notify decision adopt by the Board pursuant to Article 65 to the lead supervisory authority and the supervisory authority concerned; 
(c) to ensure the timely performance of the task of the Board, in particular in relation to the consistency mechanism refer to in Article 63. 
2. The Board shall lay down the allocation of task between the Chair and the deputy chair in it rule of procedure. 
1. The Board shall have a secretariat, which shall be provide by the European Data Protection Supervisor. 
2. The secretariat shall perform it task exclusively under the instruction of the Chair of the Board. 
3. The staff of the European Data Protection Supervisor involve in carry out the task confer on the Board by this Regulation shall be subject to separate reporting line from the staff involve in carry out task confer on the European ... 
4. Where appropriate, the Board and the European Data Protection Supervisor shall establish and publish a Memorandum of Understanding implement this Article, determine the term of their cooperation, and applicable to the staff of the European Da... 
5. The secretariat shall provide analytical, administrative and logistical support to the Board. 
6. The secretariat shall be responsible in particular for: 
(a) the day-to-day business of the Board; 
(b) communication between the member of the Board, it Chair and the Commission; 
(c) communication with other institution and the public; 
(d) the use of electronic mean for the internal and external communication; 
(e) the translation of relevant information; 
(f) the preparation and follow-up of the meeting of the Board; 
(g) the preparation, draft and publication of opinions, decision on the settlement of dispute between supervisory authority and other text adopt by the Board. 
1. The discussion of the Board shall be confidential where the Board deems it necessary, a provide for in it rule of procedure. 
2. Access to document submit to member of the Board, expert and representative of third party shall be govern by Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council22F . 
1. Without prejudice to any other administrative or judicial remedy, every data subject shall have the right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority, in particular in the Member State of his or her habitual residence, place of work or place ... 
2. The supervisory authority with which the complaint have be lodge shall inform the complainant on the progress and the outcome of the complaint include the possibility of a judicial remedy pursuant to Article 78. 
1. Without prejudice to any other administrative or non-judicial remedy, each natural or legal person shall have the right to an effective judicial remedy against a legally binding decision of a supervisory authority concern them. 
2. Without prejudice to any other administrative or non-judicial remedy, each data subject shall have the right to a an effective judicial remedy where the supervisory authority which be competent pursuant to Article 55 and Article 56 do not handle ... 
3. Proceedings against a supervisory authority shall be brought before the court of the Member State where the supervisory authority be established. 
4. Where proceeding be brought against a decision of a supervisory authority which be precede by an opinion or a decision of the Board in the consistency mechanism, the supervisory authority shall forward that opinion or decision to the court. 
1. Without prejudice to any available administrative or non-judicial remedy, include the right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority pursuant to Article 77, each data subject shall have the right to an effective judicial remedy where he ... 
2. Proceedings against a controller or a processor shall be brought before the court of the Member State where the controller or processor have an establishment. Alternatively, such proceeding may be brought before the court of the Member State wher... 
1. The data subject shall have the right to mandate a not-for-profit body, organisation or association which have be properly constitute in accordance with the law of a Member State, have statutory objective which be in the public interest, and be ... 
2. Member States may provide that any body, organisation or association refer to in paragraph 1 of this Article, independently of a data subject's mandate, have the right to lodge, in that Member State, a complaint with the supervisory authority whi... 
1. Where a competent court of a Member State have information on proceedings, concern the same subject matter a regard processing by the same controller or processor, that be pending in a court in another Member State, it shall contact that court... 
2. Where proceeding concern the same subject matter a regard processing of the same controller or processor be pending in a court in another Member State, any competent court other than the court first seize may suspend it proceedings. 
3. Where those proceeding be pending at first instance, any court other than the court first seize may also, on the application of one of the parties, decline jurisdiction if the court first seize have jurisdiction over the action in question and ... 
1. Any person who have suffer material or non-material damage a a result of an infringement of this Regulation shall have the right to receive compensation from the controller or processor for the damage suffered. 
2. Any controller involve in processing shall be liable for the damage cause by processing which infringes this Regulation. A processor shall be liable for the damage cause by processing only where it have not comply with obligation of this Regu... 
3. A controller or processor shall be exempt from liability under paragraph 2 if it prof that it be not in any way responsible for the event give rise to the damage. 
4. Where more than one controller or processor, or both a controller and a processor, be involve in the same processing and where they are, under paragraph 2 and 3, responsible for any damage cause by processing, each controller or processor shall... 
5. Where a controller or processor has, in accordance with paragraph 4, paid full compensation for the damage suffered, that controller or processor shall be entitle to claim back from the other controller or processor involve in the same processi... 
6. Court proceeding for exercise the right to receive compensation shall be brought before the court competent under the law of the Member State refer to in Article 79(2). 
1. Each supervisory authority shall ensure that the imposition of administrative fine pursuant to this Article in respect of infringement of this Regulation refer to in paragraph 4, 5 and 6 shall in each individual case be effective, proportiona... 
2. Administrative fine shall, depend on the circumstance of each individual case, be impose in addition to, or instead of, measure refer to in point (a) to (h) and (j) of Article 58(2). When decide whether to impose an administrative fine... 
(a) the nature, gravity and duration of the infringement take into account the nature scope or purpose of the processing concerned a well a the number of data subject affected and the level of damage suffer by them; 
(b) the intentional or negligent character of the infringement; 
(c) any action take by the controller or processor to mitigate the damage suffer by data subjects; 
(d) the degree of responsibility of the controller or processor take into account technical and organisational measure implement by them pursuant to Articles 25 and 32; 
(e) any relevant previous infringement by the controller or processor; 
(f) the degree of cooperation with the supervisory authority, in order to remedy the infringement and mitigate the possible adverse effect of the infringement; 
(g) the category of personal data affected by the infringement; 
(h) the manner in which the infringement become know to the supervisory authority, in particular whether, and if so to what extent, the controller or processor notify the infringement; 
(i) in case measure refer to in Article 58(2) have previously be order against the controller or processor concerned with regard to the same subject-matter, compliance with those measures; 
(j) adherence to approve code of conduct pursuant to Article 40 or approve certification mechanism pursuant to Article 42; and 
(k) any other aggravate or mitigate factor applicable to the circumstance of the case, such a financial benefit gained, or loss avoided, directly or indirectly, from the infringement. 
3. If a controller or processor intentionally or negligently, for the same or link processing operations, infringes several provision of this Regulation, the total amount of the administrative fine shall not exceed the amount specify for the grav... 
4. Infringments of the follow provision shall, in acccordance with paragraph 2, be subject to administrative fine up to 10 000 000 EUR, or in the case of an undertaking, up to 2 % of the total worldwide annual turnover of the precede financial... 
(a) the obligation of the controller and the processor pursuant to Articles 8, 11, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 42 and 43; 
(b) the obligation of the certification body pursuant to Articles 42 and 43; 
(c) the obligation of the monitoring body pursuant to Article 41(4). 
5. Infringements of the follow provision shall, in accordance with paragraph 2, be subject to administrative fine up to 20 000 000 EUR, or in the case of an undertaking, up to 4 % of the total worldwide annual turnover of the precede financial ... 
(a) the basic principle for processing, include condition for consent, pursuant to Articles 5, 6, 7 and 9; 
(b) the data subjects' right pursuant to Articles 12 to 22; 
(c) the transfer of personal data to a recipient in a third country or an international organisation pursuant to Articles 44 to 49; 
(d) any obligation pursuant to Member State law adopt unter Chapter IX; 
(e) non-compliance with an order or a temporary or definitive limitation on processing or the suspension of data flow by the supervisory authority pursuant to Article 58(2) or failure to provide access in violation of Article 58(1). 
6. Non-compliance with an order by the supervisory authority a refer to in Article 58(2) shall, in acccordance with paragraph 2 of this Article, be subject to administrative fine up to 20 000 000 EUR, or in the case of an undertaking, up to 4 % o... 
7. Without prejudice to the corrective power of supervisory authority pursuant to Article 58(2), each Member State may lay down the rule on whether and to what extent administrative fine may be impose on public authority and body established... 
8. The exercise by the supervisory authority of it power under this Article shall be subject to appropriate procedural safeguard in accordance with Union and Member State law, include effective judicial remedy and due process. 
9. Where the legal system of the Member State do not provide for administrative fines, this Article may be apply in such a manner that the fine be initiate by the competent supervisory authority and impose by competent national courts, while en... 
1. Member States shall lay down the rule on other penalty applicable to infringement of this Regulation in particular for infringement which be not subject to administrative fine pursuant to Article 83, and shall take all measure necessary to ... 
2. Each Member State shall notify to the Commission the provision of it law which it adopts pursuant to paragraph 1, by … [two year from the date of entry into force of this Regulation] and, without delay, any subsequent amendment affect them. 
1. Member States shall by law reconcile the right to the protection of personal data pursuant to this Regulation with the right to freedom of expression and information, include processing for journalistic purpose and the purpose of academic, arti... 
2. For processing carry out for journalistic purpose or the purpose of academic artistic or literary expression, Member States shall provide for exemption or derogation from Chapter II (principles), Chapter III (rights of the data subject), Chapt... 
3. Each Member State shall notify to the Commission the provision of it law which it have adopt pursuant to paragraph 2 and, without delay, any subsequent amendment law or amendment affect them. 
1. Member States may, by law or by collective agreements, provide for more specific rule to ensure the protection of the right and freedom in respect of the processing of employees' personal data in the employment context, in particular for the pur... 
2. Those rule shall include suitable and specific measure to safeguard the data subject's human dignity, legitimate interest and fundamental rights, with particular regard to the transparency of processing, the transfer of personal data within a gr... 
3. Each Member State shall notify to the Commission those provision of it law which it adopts pursuant to paragraph 1, by … [two year from the date of entry into force of this Regulation] and, without delay, any subsequent amendment affect them. 
1. Processing for archive purpose in the public interest, scientific or historical research purpose or statistical purposes, shall be subject to appropriate safeguards, in accordance with this Regulation, for the right and freedom of the data su... 
2. Where personal data be process for scientific or historical research purpose or statistical purposes, Union or Member State law may provide for derogation from the right refer to in Articles 15, 16, 18 and 21 subject to the condition and ... 
3. Where personal data be process for archive purpose in the public interest, Union or Member State law may provide for derogation from the right refer to in Articles 15, 16, 18, 19, 20 and 21 subject to the condition and safeguard refer... 
4. Where processing refer to in paragraph 2 and 3 serf at the same time another purpose, the derogation shall apply only to processing for the purpose refer to in those paragraphs. 
1. Member States may adopt specific rule to set out the power of the supervisory authority laid down in point (e) and (f) of Article 58(1) in relation to controller or processor that be subject, under Union or Member State law or rule establi... 
2. Each Member State shall notify to the Commission the rule adopt pursuant to paragraph 1, by … [two year from the date of entry into force of this Regulation] and, without delay, any subsequent amendment affect them. 
1. Where in a Member State, church and religious association or community apply, at the time of entry into force of this Regulation, comprehensive rule relate to the protection of natural person with regard to processing, such rule may conti... 
2. Churches and religious association which apply comprehensive rule in accordance with paragraph 1 shall be subject to the supervision of an independent supervisory authority, which may be specific, provide that it fulfils the condition laid down... 
1. The power to adopt delegate act be confer on the Commission subject to the condition laid down in this Article. 
2. The delegation of power refer to in Article 12(8) and Article 43(8) shall be confer on the Commission for an indeterminate period of time from … [the date of entry into force of this Regulation]. 
3. The delegation of power refer to in Article 12(8) and Article 43(8) may be revoke at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision of revocation shall put an end to the delegation of power specify in that decision. It shal... 
4. As soon a it adopts a delegate act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council. 
5. A delegate act adopt pursuant to Article 12(8) and Article 43(8) shall enter into force only if no objection have be express by either the European Parliament or the Council within a period of three month of notification of that act to the ... 
1. The Commission shall be assist by a committee. That committee shall be a committee within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011. 
2. Where reference be make to this paragraph, Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply. 
3. Where reference be make to this paragraph, Article 8 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011, in conjunction with Article 5 thereof, shall apply. 
1. Directive 95/46/EC be repeal with effect from … [two year from the date of entry into force of this Regulation]. 
2. References to the repeal Directive shall be construe a reference to this Regulation. References to the Working Party on the Protection of Individuals with regard to the Processing of Personal Data establish by Article 29 of Directive 95/46/E... 
1. By … [4 year after the date of entry into force of this Regulation] and every four year thereafter, the Commission shall submit a report on the evaluation and review of this Regulation to the European Parliament and to the Council. The report sh... 
2. In the context of the evaluation and review refer to in paragraph 1, the Commission shall examine, in particular, the application and function of: 
(a) Chapter V on the transfer of personal data to third country or international organisation with particular regard to decision adopt pursuant to Article 45(3) of this Regulation and decision adopt on the basis of Article 25(6) of Directive ... 
(b) Chapter VII on cooperation and consistency. 
3. For the purpose of paragraph 1, the Commission may request information from Member States and supervisory authorities. 
4. In carry out the evaluation and review refer to in paragraph 1 and 2, the Commission shall take into account the position and finding of the European Parliament, of the Council, and of other relevant body or sources. 
5. The Commission shall, if necessary, submit appropriate proposal to amend this Regulation, in particular take into account of development in information technology and in the light of the state of progress in the information society. 
1. This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day follow that of it publication in the Official Journal of the European Union. 
2. It shall apply from … [two year from the date of entry into force of this Regulation]. 

