






































Google Plans to Demonstrate the Supremacy of Quantum Computing - IEEE Spectrum 


By the end of 2017, Google hope to make a 49-qubit chip that will prove 
quantum computer can beat classical machine 

Advertisement 

Quantum computer have long held the promise of 

perform certain calculation that be impossible— 

or at least, entirely impractical—for even the most 

powerful conventional computer to perform. Now, 

researcher at a Google laboratory in Goleta, Calif., 

may finally be on the cusp of prove it, use the 

same kind of quantum bits, or qubits, that one day 

could make up large-scale quantum machines. 

By the end of this year, the team aim to increase the 

number of superconducting 

it build on 

integrate circuit to create a 7-by-7 array. With this 

quantum IC, the Google researcher aim to perform 

operation at the edge of what’s possible with even the 

best supercomputers, and so demonstrate “quantum 

supremacy.” 

qubits 

(http://spectrum.ieee.org/tag/qubit) 

“We’ve be talk about, for many year now, how a 

quantum processor could be powerful because of the 

way that quantum mechanic works, but we want to 

specifically demonstrate it,” say team member 

, a professor at the University of 

California, Santa Barbara, who join Google in 2014. 

John 

Martinis (http://web.physics.ucsb.edu 

/~martinisgroup/) 

A system size of 49 superconducting qubits be still far 

away from what physicist think will be need to 

perform the sort of computation that have long 

motivate quantum compute research. One of those 

be Shor’s algorithm, a computational scheme that 

would enable a quantum computer to quickly factor 

very large number and thus crack one of the 

foundational component of modern cryptography. In 

a recent commentary in , Martinis and 

colleague estimate that a 100-million-qubit system 

would be need to factor a 2,000-bit number—a not- 

Nature 

Google Plans to Demonstrate the Supremacy of Quantum Computing - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/google-plans-to-demonstrate-the-supremacy-of-q... 

1 sur 4 07/08/2017 22:19 



(/tech-talk/computing 

/hardware/ibm-expanding- 

cloud-quantum-computer-10fold) 

Photo: Erik Lucero 

Google will put it superconducting quantum 

computer chip in this 10-millikelvin dilution refrigerator. 

Put Chip Here: 

uncommon public key length—in one day. Most of 

those qubits would be use to create the special 

quantum state that would be need to perform the 

computation and to correct errors, create a mere 

thousand or so stable “logical qubits” from thousand 

of less stable physical components, Martinis says. 

There will be no such extra infrastructure in this 49- 

qubit system, which mean a different 

computation must be perform to establish 

supremacy. To demonstrate the chip’s superiority 

over conventional computers, the Google team will 

execute operation on the array that will cause it to 

evolve chaotically and produce what look like a 

random output. Classical machine can simulate 

this output for small systems. In April, for 

example, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 

, Cori, have simulated the 

output of 45 qubits. But 49 qubits would push—if 

not exceed—the limit of conventional 

supercomputers. 

report that it 29-petaflop supercomputer 

(https://www.top500.org/news/berkeley-lab- 

supercomputer-breaks-new-ground-in-quantum- 

computing-simulation/) 

This computation do not a yet have a clear 

practical application. But Martinis say there be 

reason beyond demonstrate quantum 

supremacy to pursue this approach. The qubits 

use to make the 49-qubit array can also be use 

to make large “universal” quantum system with 

error correction, the sort that could do thing like 

decryption, so the chip should provide useful 

validation data. 

Photo: Erik Lucero 

There may also be, the team suspects, untapped 

computational potential in system with little or 

no error correction. “It would be wonderful if this 

be true, because then we could have useful 

product right away instead of wait for a long 

time,” say Martinis. One potential application, the 

team suggests, could be in the simulation of 

chemical reaction and materials. 

Google recently perform a dry run of the 

approach on a 9-by-1 array of qubits and test out 

some fabrication technology on a 2-by-3 array. 

Google Plans to Demonstrate the Supremacy of Quantum Computing - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/google-plans-to-demonstrate-the-supremacy-of-q... 

2 sur 4 07/08/2017 22:19 



Google’s quantum compute chip be a 

2-by-3 array of qubits. The company hope to make a 7-by-7 

array late this year. 

Steps to Supremacy: Scaling up the number of qubits will happen in 

stages. “This be a challenge system engineering 

problem,” Martinis says. “We have to scale it up, 

but the qubits still have to work well. We can’t 

have any loss in fidelity, any increase in error rates, and I would say error rate and scale tend to kind 

of compete against each other.” Still, he says, the team think there could be a way to scale up system 

well past 50 qubits even without error correction. 

Google be not the only company work on building large quantum system without error correction. In 

March, IBM 

to create such a superconducting qubit system in the next few years, 

also with roughly 50 qubits, and to make it accessible on the cloud. “Fifty be a magic number,” say Bob 

Sutor, IBM’s vice president for this area, because that’s around the point where 

will start to outstrip classical computer for certain 

tasks. 

unveiled a plan (http://spectrum.ieee.org/tech-talk/computing/hardware/ibm-expanding- 

cloud-quantum-computer-10fold) 

quantum computer 

(http://spectrum.ieee.org/tag/quantum+computers) 

The quality of superconducting qubits have advanced a lot over the year since D-Wave Systems begin 

offering commercial quantum computers, say , a 

professor of computer science at the University of Texas at Austin. D-Wave, base in Burnaby, B.C., 

Canada, have claimed that it system offer a speedup over conventional machines, but Aaronson say 

there have be no convincing demonstration of that. Google, he says, be clearly aim for a 

demonstration of quantum supremacy that be “not something you’ll have to squint and argue about.” 

Scott Aaronson (http://www.scottaaronson.com/) 

It’s still unclear whether there be useful task a 50-or-so-qubit chip could perform, Aaronson says. Nor 

be it certain whether system can be make big without error correction. But he say quantum 

supremacy will be an important milestone nonetheless, one that be a natural offshoot of the effort to make 

large-scale, universal quantum machines: “I think that it be absolutely worth just establish a clearly a 

we can that the world do work this way. Certainly, if we can do it a a spin-off of technology that will be 

useful eventually in it own right, then why the hell not?” 

This article appear in the June 2017 print issue a “Google Aims for Quantum Computing Supremacy.” 

Advertisement 

Google Plans to Demonstrate the Supremacy of Quantum Computing - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/google-plans-to-demonstrate-the-supremacy-of-q... 

3 sur 4 07/08/2017 22:19 



(/computing 

/software 

/manipulating-and- 

controlling-sound- 

the-development-of- 

acoustic- 

metamaterials) 

(/the-human- 

os/biomedical 

/diagnostics/teenage- 

whiz-kid-invents-an- 

ai-system-to- 

diagnose-her- 

grandfathers-eye- 

disease) 

(/computing 

/software/making- 

the-case-for- 

acoustics-modeling- 

and-simulation-apps) 

(/aerospace/satellites 

/is-there-a-giant- 

planet-lurking- 

beyond-pluto) 

(/biomedical/devices 

/smart-contact- 

lenses-and-eye- 

implants-will-give- 

doctors-medical- 

insights) 

(/aerospace/satellites 

/unhackable- 

quantum-networks- 

take-to-space) 

Google Plans to Demonstrate the Supremacy of Quantum Computing - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/google-plans-to-demonstrate-the-supremacy-of-q... 

4 sur 4 07/08/2017 22:19 


