






































Inequality and household debt: New evidence | VOX, CEPRâ•Žs Policy Portal 


Columns Video Vox Vox Talks Publications People Debates Events About 

VOX CEPR's Policy Portal 
Research-based policy analysis and commentary from lead economist 

Create account | Login | Subscribe 

7 A A 

Related 

Does inequality lead to a financial crisis? 
Michael Bordo, Christopher Meissner 

Inequality, leverage and crisis 
Romain Rancière, Michael Kumhof 

Economic inequality during recession 
Jonathan Heathcote, Gianluca Violante, Fabrizio 
Perri 

Greater inequality and household borrowing? New 
evidence from household data 

Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Marianna Kudlyak, John Mondragon 29 January 2014 

One popular explanation for the increase in US household debt in the year before the subprime mortgage 

crisis be that household with stagnate income borrow more to ‘keep up with the Joneses’. This column 

present recent research that question this explanation. Low-income household in high-inequality region in 

fact borrow relatively little compare to similar household in low-inequality regions. A theoretical model in 

which great local income inequality facilitates the screen of loan applicant make prediction that be 

consistent with the data. 

The financial crisis of 2008–09 be precede by an 
exceptional rise in borrowing by US households, 
account for primarily by a rise in mortgage debt. 
There be two main view about the source of this 
‘great leveraging’: 

The rise in borrowing reflect ‘credit supply’ 
factors. 

Olivier Coibion 
Assistant Professor, UT Austin 

Yuriy Gorodnichenko 
Associate Professor in the 

Department of Economics, 

University of California – Berkeley 

Marianna Kudlyak 
Economist, Federal Reserve Bank 

By Topic By Date By Reads By Tag 

Inequality and household debt: New evidence | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evidence 

1 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31 



Proponents point to progress in information technology (Sanchez 2009) and rise financialisation of 
debt (especially mortgages) a increase the supply of credit, particularly to low-income and high- 
risk household (Drozd and Serrano-Padial 2013). 

The rise be driven by political motivation for expand credit supply. 

For example, Rajan (2010) argues that, in response to rise income inequality, credit be make 
increasingly available to lower-income group to support their consumption level in the face of 
stagnant incomes. 

According to the second view (‘demand for credit’), there be a rise in the demand for borrowing on 
the part of US households, especially low-income households. One possible motivation for rise 
demand for borrowing again stem from rise income inequality. Specifically, high consumption 
on the part of wealthy household could have increase the demand for borrowing by lower-income 
household in their attempt to ‘keep up’ with their wealthier neighbours. Indeed, there be a positive 
correlation between income inequality in the US and household debt relative to GDP a illustrate in 
Figure 1 below. The correlation be certainly consistent with the possibility of a causal relationship 
run from inequality to household borrowing. 

New evidence on inequality and debt 

In a recent work paper (Coibion et al. 2014), we examine the link between inequality and 
household borrowing. In particular, we investigate whether borrowing pattern on the part of low-, 
middle- and high-income household differ depend on the level of local income inequality. To 
measure both debt and inequality, we use unique data from the New York Federal Reserve Bank 
Consumer Credit Panel/Equifax which provide comprehensive debt measure for million of US 
household since 1999, include detailed decomposition of debt by type. Because this dataset 
do not include household income, we use the relationship between household debt and income, 
conditional on observable household characteristics, in the Survey of Consumer Finances to predict 
initial household income in 2001. From these impute level of income, we construct measure of 
local inequality (which be highly correlate with alternative measure of local inequality construct 
from either Census or IRS income data) at the ZIP code, county, and state levels, a well a 
measure of household debt-to-income ratios. 

Figure 1. Inequality and debt in the US 

Trilemma redux: Evidence 
from emerge market 
economy 

Risk, return, and skill in the 
portfolio of the wealthy 

Transition to clean 
technology 

Economics of the populist 
backlash 

China’s WTO entry benefit 
US consumer 

Introducing VoxDev 

Globalisation and executive 

of Richmond 

John Mondragon 
PhD candidate in the Economics 

department, UC Berkeley 

Don't Miss 

Obstfeld, Ostry, Qureshi 

Bach, Calvet, Sodini 

Acemoglu, Akcigit, Hanley, Kerr 

Rodrik 

Amiti, Dai, Feenstra, Romalis 

Editors 

Inequality and household debt: New evidence | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evidence 

2 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31 



Source: Coibion et al. (2014). The figure plot the income share of the top 5% of US household (source: IRS) and the 

ratio of household (and non-profit) total liability to GDP (source: Federal Reserve). 

Figure 2 below plot county-level inequality across the US from 2001. Inequality be on average 
high in the southern states, a well a California and the Pacific Northwest. Midwestern states, in 
contrast, stand out for have some of the low level of inequality on average. The map also 
show that inequality tends to be high in large city than in more rural areas. There be even 
great regional heterogeneity in inequality at the ZIP code level – the standard deviation of 
inequality at the ZIP code level be twice a high a at the state or county level. 

To ass how borrowing pattern differ with local inequality levels, we characterise the evolution 
of household debt levels, relative to initial income levels, across income group in area with 
different level of income inequality. Our main find be that low-income household in high- 
inequality region borrow relatively less than similar household in low-inequality regions. We 
illustrate this in Figure 3 below, which plot non-parametric estimate of the evolution of household 
debt-to-income ratio across the 2000s for ‘low-income’ and ‘high-income’ household living in low- 

compensation 

Economics and policy in the 
Age of Trump 

Keller, Olney 

Bown 

Events 

Shadow Banking: Financial 
Intermediation beyond Banks 
14 - 15 September 2017 / 
Helsinki, Finland / SUERF - 
The European Money and 
Finance Forum and Bank of 
Finland 

Corporate Finance Theory 
Symposium 
15 September - 16 January 
2017 / Cambridge / Cambridge 
Judge Business School 

IMF Eighteenth Jacques 
Polak Annual Research 
Conference: The Global 
Financial Cycle 
2 - 3 November 2017 / 
Washington DC, USA / 
International Monetary Fund 

SNB Research Conference: 
Monetary Policy Design, 
Conduct and Effects 
22 - 23 September 2017 / 
Zurich, Switzerland / The Swiss 
National Bank 

Call for Papers: ADBI-World 
Economy Workshop on 
Globalization and the 
Environment 
26 - 27 September 2017 / 
Tokyo, Japan / Asian 
Development Bank Institute 

Inequality and household debt: New evidence | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evidence 

3 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31 



inequality, medium-inequality, or high-inequality ZIP code relative to those of ‘medium-income’ 
households. While the difference across inequality region for high-ranked household be small, 
low-ranked household display much large difference in debt accumulation pattern across low- 
and high-inequality regions, reach around 15% of initial income level by 2008. These 
difference be precisely the opposite of what one would have expect if ‘keeping up with the 
Joneses’ drove the rise in household debt during the 2000s. As we document in the text, these 
result survive an extensive array of robustness checks. 

Figure 2. Inequality across US county 

Source: Coibion et al. (2014). The figure plot inequality in 2001 at the county level. Darker county be more unequal, 

with each bin represent a quintile of the distribution across counties. 

Figure 3. Debt accumulation across household and local inequality 

@VoxEU 

RSS Feeds 

Weekly Digest 

CEPR Policy Research 

Discussion Papers Insights 

Homeownership of 
immigrant in France: 
selection effect related to 
international migration flow 
Gobillon, Solignac 

Climate Change and Long- 
Run Discount Rates: 
Evidence from Real Estate 
Giglio, Maggiori, Stroebel, 
Weber 

The Permanent Effects of 
Fiscal Consolidations 
Summers, Fatás 

Demographics and the 
Secular Stagnation 
Hypothesis in Europe 
Favero, Galasso 

QE and the Bank Lending 
Channel in the United 
Kingdom 
Butt, Churm, McMahon, 
Morotz, Schanz 

Subscribe 

Inequality and household debt: New evidence | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evidence 

4 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31 



Source: Coibion et al. (2014). The figure show non-parametric estimate of the evolution of debt to initial income ratio for 

household in different income group living in region with different level of inequality. The dot line show the 95%- 

confidence interval. 

Because our data provide disaggregated information on household debt, we ass the link 
between local inequality and different form of debt: mortgage debt, auto debt, and credit-card debt. 
We find strong evidence that low-income household in high-inequality region borrow less in 
term of both mortgage and auto debt than those in low-inequality regions. A unique feature of the 
data be that we have information on both credit-card balance and credit-card limits. This be 
particularly useful because the latter can be interpret a largely represent credit supply, 
whereas the former primarily reflect the demand for credit. We find that low-income household in 

Inequality and household debt: New evidence | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evidence 

5 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31 



high-inequality region saw their credit limit rise by less than those in lower-inequality region – a 
be the case with mortgage and auto debt. At the same time, no economically significant difference 
be observe in term of credit card balances. This contrast point to supply-side factor a be at 
the root of the differential debt accumulation pattern in the data. 

Income inequality and credit ration 

We present a model that provide one potential supply-side explanation for why differential 
borrowing behaviour could be related to regional inequality. Each region be compose of two type 
of households, such that ‘high-type’ household have high income on average than ‘low-type’ 
households, and be also less likely to (exogenously) default on debt. Banks in each region lend to 
these households, but do not observe households’ type – only their income and another signal 
correlate with the underlie type. The key mechanism in the model be that a local income 
inequality rises, bank treat an applicant’s income a an increasingly precise signal about their type, 
and therefore target lending toward higher-income household on average. We show how the latter 
can be accomplish via differential rejection rate (in monopoly banking settings) or differential 
interest rate (in competitive banking settings). In both cases, bank will make credit more readily 
accessible (or cheaper) to high-income household when local inequality be higher, because the 
latter implies that income be a more precise signal of applicant types. 

We test these additional theoretical prediction use detailed mortgage application information from 
the publicly available Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data. These data track mortgage application 
a they go through the origination process, and contain information on applicant – include their 
income, the amount of the loan requested, their locale, and whether the loan be deny or originated. 
We document that high-income household in high-inequality region be both less likely to be 
deny and less likely to be charge high interest rate than their counterpart in low-inequality 
regions, precisely a suggest by the theory. Thus, both theoretical prediction from the model be 
confirm in the data. 

Conclusions 

In summary, we document a systematic relationship between local inequality and differential 
borrowing pattern across richer and poorer household in the US that contradicts prediction 
base on ‘keeping up with the Joneses’ motives. We argue that these result can instead be 

Inequality and household debt: New evidence | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evidence 

6 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31 



explain through an information channel. Applicants’ income be a strong signal of their 
underlie quality when local inequality be high, so bank be likely to channel relatively more credit 
to low-income applicant when the level of local inequality be low. The absence of ‘keeping up with 
Joneses’ effect support the notion that the growth in household borrowing during the mid-2000s 
be driven in large part by credit supply expansion target at lower-income households. 

However, to the extent that this expansion in the supply of credit to lower-income household be 
unlikely to continue (for example if it reflect a one-time securitisation of household debt), our 
result suggest that a continuation of recent trend toward rise inequality be likely to reduce access 
to credit for lower-income households. Because limited access to credit restricts households’ ability 
to smooth their consumption and engage in long-term investment (e.g. send child to college, 
retrain for different careers) that likely have positive societal externalities, such differential access 
to credit could ultimately have negative long-term consequence and important policy implications. 

Disclaimer: The view express here be those of the author and do not reflect those of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond or the Federal Reserve System or any other institution with 
which the author be affiliated. 

References 

Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Marianna Kudlyak, and John Mondragon (2014), “Does 
Greater Inequality Lead to More Household Borrowing? New Evidence from Household Data”, 
NBER Working Paper 19850. 

Drozd, Lukasz A and Ricardo Serrano-Padial (2013), “Modeling the Credit Card Revolution: The 
Role of Debt Collection and Informal Bankruptcy”, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working 
Paper 13-12. 

Rajan, Raghuram G (2010), Fault Lines: How Hidden Fault Lines Still Threaten the World Economy, 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Sanchez, Juan M (2009), “The IT Revolution and the Unsecured Credit Market”, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Richmond Working Paper 09-4. 

Inequality and household debt: New evidence | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evidence 

7 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31 



7 A A 

Topics: Financial market Poverty and income inequality 

Tags: US, Inequality, debt, credit rationing, subprime mortgage crisis 

Related 

Does inequality lead to a financial crisis? 
Michael Bordo, Christopher Meissner 

Inequality, leverage and crisis 
Romain Rancière, Michael Kumhof 

Economic inequality during recession 
Jonathan Heathcote, Gianluca Violante, Fabrizio Perri 

23,304 read 
Printer-friendly version 

Inequality and household debt: New evidence | VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evidence 

8 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31 


