









































Income inequality in the process of economic development 


Research Reports 
Kansantaloustieteen tutkimuksia, No. 125:2011 

Dissertationes Oeconomicae 

TUOMAS MALINEN 

INCOME INEQUALITY IN THE PROCESS OF 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: AN EMPIRICAL 

APPROACH 

ISBN: 978-952-10-7223-9 (nid) 
ISBN: 978-952-10-7224-6 (pdf) 

ISSN: 0357-3257 





Contents 

1 Introduction 1 
1.1 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 
1.2 Income inequality: the wisdom of economic thought and global 

trend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 
1.2.1 What determines the division of product among the 

factor of land, labor, and capital? . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 
1.2.2 Measuring income inequality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 

1.3 The process of income variation and the distribution of income 11 
1.4 Theoretical effect of income inequality on economic growth . 13 

1.4.1 The origin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 
1.4.2 Modern theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 

1.5 Analyzing panel data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 
1.5.1 Basic estimator of panel data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 
1.5.2 Estimation in cointegrated panel data . . . . . . . . . . 21 

1.6 Contributions of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 
1.6.1 The effect of income inequality on economic growth in 

the short run . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 
1.6.2 The long-run relationship between income inequality 

and economic development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 
1.6.3 The relationship between inequality and saving . . . . 26 

A Random walk and I(1) nonstationary process 37 

2 Inequality and growth: another look at the subject with a 
new measure and method 39 
2.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40 

i 



2.2 The theoretical effect of inequality on growth . . . . . . . . . . 42 

2.2.1 Credit market imperfection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 

2.2.2 Political economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 

2.2.3 Unrest related to social policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 

2.2.4 Saving rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 

2.3 Summary of the main problem encounter in the field of study 44 

2.3.1 Problems with the Deininger and Squire (1996) Gini 
index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44 

2.3.2 Estimation of group-related elasticity . . . . . . . . . 48 

2.4 Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50 

2.5 Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50 

2.6 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59 

B Country list 65 

3 Estimating the long-run relationship between income inequal- 
ity and economic development 67 

3.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68 

3.2 The main theoretical relationship between inequality and growth 70 

3.2.1 The income approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70 

3.2.2 The credit-market imperfection and combine approach 71 

3.2.3 The political economy approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72 

3.3 Time series analysis of panel data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73 

3.3.1 Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73 

3.3.2 Unit root test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74 

3.3.3 Cointegration test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77 

3.4 Estimation of the cointegrating coefficient of inequality . . . . 82 

3.4.1 Estimation and inference in cointegrated panel . . . . 82 

3.4.2 Estimation result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83 

3.4.3 Estimation of income group-related elasticity of growth 85 

3.5 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91 

C Panel unit root test 99 

ii 



D Pedroni’s and Banerjee & Carrion-i-Silvestre’s panel cointe- 
gration test 101 

E Panel DOLS and panel DSUR estimator 105 

E.1 Panel DOLS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105 

E.2 Panel DSUR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106 

F Country list 107 

4 Income inequality and savings: a reassessment of the rela- 
tionship in cointegrated panel 111 

4.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112 

4.2 Theoretical and empirical consideration . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114 

4.3 Data and unit root test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117 

4.3.1 Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117 

4.3.2 Unit root test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121 

4.4 Cointegration test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123 

4.4.1 Testing with the whole data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123 

4.4.2 Testing for the cointegration rank . . . . . . . . . . . . 127 

4.5 Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132 

4.6 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137 

G Panel cointegration test by Banerjee and Carrion-i-Silvestre 
(2006) 147 

H Panel trace cointegration test statistic by Larsson and Lyha- 
gen (2007) 149 

I Panel DSUR and Panel VAR estimator 151 

I.1 Panel DSUR estimator by Mark et al. (2005) . . . . . . . . . . 151 

I.2 Panel VAR estimator by Breitung (2005) . . . . . . . . . . . . 152 



iv 



Acknowledgements 

As with so many thing in life, also this thesis be not a product of linearity. 
As a teenager I start to work against this goal by choose venture of 
puberty over book smarts. This force me to choose commercial school over 
high school, a path which be unlikely to lead to university degree in Finland. 
Fortunately, during the exuberant economic course taught by Jussi Hieva- 
nen at the commercial school of Hyvinkää, I become greatly interested about 
economics. Despite the enthusiasm, it still take me several year of, liter- 
ally, hard labor until the motivation be set for a no-nonsense effort to pas 
the university entrance examination. The motivation be mostly gather in 
work a a packaging machine attendant at the Saint-Gobain Isover Ltd. 
in Hyvinkää. 

My first academic stop be the Department of Economics at the Univer- 
sity of Oulu. Winters spent in Oulu taught me the meaning of the phrase 
"freaking cold", but also under the encourage care of Professor Mikko 
Puhakka the idea of write a doctoral dissertation grew. With the help 
of Prof. Puhakka the project be also put in motion as, after graduate in 
late fall 2005, his contact grant me a mid-term passage to FDPE’s first 
year PhD econometrics course.1 Personal reason take me back down south 
for the rest of my PhD study and I end up in the (late) Department of 
Economics at the University of Helsinki. There Professors Tapio Palokangas 
and Markku Lanne become my tutors. 

Like with most PhD students, this be not the last stop for me, a there 
be an almost mandatory visit to a foreign university expect at some point 
of studies. During a road trip through eastern coastal state of the US in 
the spring of 2008, I become convince that US would be the place of my 

1FDPE=Finnish Doctoral Programme in Economics 

v 



visit. As our road trip reach New York city, I also knew the exact location 
of the visit. This be fortunate, a my six month stay at the New York 
University become the best time of my academic studies, both professionally 
and personally. The rouse academic environment at the NYU also renew 
my interest for economics, which at that point be almost completely lost. 
After return to Finland, this thesis be finalize within nine months. 

During my academic journey, I have come across many people and in- 
stitutions that I owe gratitude. First, my humble word of thanks go to my 
colleague and co-students in the University of Oulu, HECER and the NYU. 
This thesis would not have be make final without the overall support that 
I have receive from you. I’m also grateful to Jussi Hievanen for set this 
thesis on it way all those many year ago. 

There be many professor I would like to thank. Markku Lanne for his 
guidance and for his tireless support on econometric and spell issues. 
Tapio Palokangas for accept me a a PhD student in the University of 
Helsinki and for his guidance especially in the begin of my PhD stud- 
ies. Mikko Puhakka for give me the "push" to strive for the dissertation. 
Markku Rahiala for his indispensable help with my Master’s thesis, which 
late become the first article of this thesis. Raquel Fernandez for give me 
the opportunity to come to visit the NYU and for her guidance during my 
visit there. And, I be indebted to my preliminary examiner Jörg Breitung 
and Jesper Roine for their insightful comment and suggestions. 

I would like to thank my financial benefactor the Yrjö Jahnsson Foun- 
dation, Osuuspankki Foundation, Säästöpankki Foundation and the Com- 
memorative Fund of the University of Helsinki for their research grants. I’m 
especially grateful to the Academy of Finland for provide the majority of 
the funding for my 6 month visit to the NYU, and to the FDPE for the 
graduate school fellowship. 

I would also like to express my gratitude to certain people who have 
make an indispensable contribution on the completion of this thesis. With- 
out Henri Nyberg and Leena Kalliovirta this thesis would have never reach 
the standard in econometrics a it now hopefully does. Jenni Pääkkönen be 
an invaluable asset on show me the way of the academia and provide 
outspoken comment on the article include in this thesis. Jenni Rytkönen 

vi 



make the red tape at the FDPE seem almost humane. Marjorie Lesser con- 
tributed heavily on make my visit to the NYU possible. Leena and Pekka 
Heikkilä support me in way that be too numerous to name throughout 
my academic studies. And, a humble thanks go to my friend for their 
support especially in time of dire straits. 

Finally, I be most grateful to my mother, Anna-Liisa, my aunts, Arja, 
Pirjo and Tuula, my uncles, Erkki and Veli-Matti, and to the rest of my ex- 
tend family for their unconditional love and support during this quest. 

Helsinki, December 2011 

Tuomas Malinen 

vii 



viii 



Chapter 1 

Introduction 

1.1 Background 

Income inequality have become one of the closely follow societal subject in 
global medium within the last few years. For example, the New York Times 
launch a noticeable campaign on income inequality last year.1 The Finan- 
cial time a well a the Economist have also report on development in 
income inequality numerously in recent times.2 

Why be income inequality cause medium interest then? One factor con- 
tributing to this interest be that income inequality seem to be increase in 
developed economy after contract for a nearly of a century (see Figure 1 
in Section 1.2.2). From history, we know that the concentration of wealth on 
the hand of those who be already rich can cause social unrest or even coup 
d’état (Acemoglu and Robinson 2001). Income inequality also infringes the 
ideal of the foundation of (most) western economies, i.e. that all men (and 
women) be born equal. In addition, income inequality may low the level 
of human capital by diminish education opportunity for low income 
households, inflict additional cost to producer by increase illegal rent- 
seeking, and cause financial instability by increase the leverage among the 
not-so-fortunate citizen (Fishman and Simhon 2002; Kumhof and Ranciére 
2010; Shaw and McKay 1969). Thus, besides the rather obvious societal ram- 

1See the New York Times Topics and income inequality. 
2For the Economist, see the issue of 20th of April and 24th of March 2011. For FT, 

see issue of 5th and 12th of May 2011. 

1 



ifications, income inequality may have a subtler negative effect on the growth 
prospect of a country. 

Within the last two decade or so, the relationship between income in- 
equality and economic growth have be widely debate and it have emerge 
one of the major field in economics.3 At the same time, the literature on 
this relationship have become concentrate on assess the effect empirically 
typically by use data that consists on time series observation from several 
countries. This have be due to the fact that the theoretical literature have 
produce result support both side of the "aisle", i.e. both the negative 
and the positive effect of inequality on growth (Galor and Moav 2004; Stiglitz 
1969).4 Unfortunately, the result of empirical study have also be contro- 
versial (Barro 2000; Banerjee and Duflo 2003; Castelló-Climent 2010; Forbes 
2000; Persson and Tabellini 1994). 

Many modern study have use panel data consist only on a handful of 
time series observation on several countries, i.e. ’short panels’, to study the 
relationship between inequality and growth (Barro 2000; Forbes 2000; Li and 
Zou 1998; Persson and Tabellini 1994). This thesis make an effort to resolve 
the above mention discrepancy by analyze data from both short panel 
a well a from panel with long time series from several countries. By use 
panel with a long time series dimension, this thesis also look for a possible 
long-run relationship between inequality and growth, which be a topic that 
have not be study almost at all previously. Thesis also contributes on one 
of the classic question in economics, i.e. do the propensity to save increase 
with income? This be another field within the growth literature that tends to 
lack consensus even on the direction of the effect of inequality (Cook 1995; 
Leigh and Posso 2009; Li and Zou 2004; Schmidt-Hebbel and Servén 2000). 

The rest of this introductory chapter present the theory and method 
apply in this thesis. Summaries of the three study present in Chap- 
ters 2-4 be also given. Section 1.2 open with a historical introduction to 
the distributional aspect advanced by economic theory. It also present the 

3A simple search for "income inequality economic growth" on Google Scholar produce 
over 746.000 result on the 16th of May 2011. 

4Naturally there be also a third effect or a non-effect meaning that inequality could also 
have no effect on growth. But, such result would lack theoretical interest which return 
the question on the (possible) effect of inequality on growth a an empirical one. 

2 



measure of income inequality use in this study and give an overview to 
the recent global trend in the inequality of income. The model of income 
variation and the distribution of income be discuss in Section 1.3. Section 
1.4 present the general economic theory developed to explain the effect of 
income inequality on economic growth. Issues related to the analysis of panel 
data be discuss in Section 1.5. Section 1.6 summarizes the finding of this 
thesis. 

1.2 Income inequality: the wisdom of economic 
thought and global trend 

Money be like muck, not good except that it be spread. 
- Francis Bacon (1625) 

1.2.1 What determines the division of product among 
the factor of land, labor, and capital? 

The classical query pose in the title of this section have basically govern the 
economic science throughout it entire existence. This be because economics 
was, in principle, found to answer two questions: how can we achieve devel- 
opment and what determines the distribution of product among the factor of 
land, labor and capital? They be the two main theme discuss in Adam 
Smith’s (1776) seminal book on the wealth of nation and both of them be 
contribute by several classical authors, include Malthus (1815), Ricardo 
(1817), and Mill (1845). As it turn out, neither of these question have 
be easy to answer. The distribution of product amongst the factor of pro- 
duction have divide the economic science for the last two century while the 
literature on economic growth has, during the same period of time, produce 
only few fact about the factor behind economic development. 

As the history of the last 200 year have show us, economic progress 
brings in it train an indispensable array of benefits. We know that economic 
development promotes health, increase the life expectancy, and increase the 
overall quality of life of individual (Doepke 2004; Galor and Weil 2000). Most 
of these gain have be produce by follow the idea of market capitalism, 

3 



namely an economic system where the mean of production be privatively 
own and use to make profit. However, a put forth by Schumpeter (1942), 
capitalism be a way of creation through destruction. What this mean be that 
a market economy be engage in a process of competition which constantly 
creates new through the destruction of the old and inefficient. This endoge- 
nous creative process of innovation and economic development enables the 
growth in productivity and drive the technological progress, which raise our 
quality of life. What this process also creates, however, be a continue cycle 
of creation-destruction-creation, where some individual and business be 
thrown out of profit and sufficient income for a short or possible extend 
period of time. This process of capitalist market economy further complicates 
the issue of distribution, a the individual who be thrown out of income be 
no longer factor of production, at least in the strict sense of production, for 
the time they remain outside the productive workforce. Market economy 
also tend to go through different phase of development that may increase or 
decrease the level of inequality accordingly. 

Kuznets (1955) construct a theory to explain the change in the dis- 
tribution of income during the process of development in capitalist market 
economies. According to the so call Kuznet’s relation, the inequality of 
income will first increase and then decrease in the course of economic devel- 
opment. Inequality will increase in the begin of industrialization due to 
a grow wage disparity between agricultural and factory pay. Lower mor- 
tality rates, great fertility rates, and investment in new technology will 
also increase the inequality of income during the first phase of industrial- 
ization. Growth of inequality be necessary because an egalitarian agrarian 
economy cannot accumulate enough saving so that capital creation would 
be sufficient for production growth. Later on, a the economy industrializes, 
the distribution of income will even out a a large portion of people move 
to a high industry pay. 

Kuznets (1955) make a respectable effort to describe the (natural) divi- 
sion of product among the factor of production in different stage of eco- 
nomic development. Unfortunately, empirical research follow his seminal 
paper on the curvilinear relation between the distribution of income and the 
level of development have produce some mixed result (Frazer 2006; Gagliani 

4 



1987; Nielsen 1994). Moreover, current trend in income inequality in devel- 
oped economy stand in stark contrast against the Kuznet’s relation (see 
Figure 1 below). So, even if the Kuznet’s relation would describe the evolu- 
tion of the distribution of income during industrialization, it do not seem 
to fit very well on the post-industrialized economies. In economic theory, the 
"great divide" have also already occur before Kuznet’s publish his the- 
ory. Growing income inequality in major newly industrialize economy in 
the late 18th and early 19th century have create a divide within the eco- 
nomic science on how society should determine the distribution of product 
among it citizens. These two end of the spectrum where (are) the Socialist 
economic theory put forth by Marx and Engels (1848) and Marx (1887), and 
the Austrian school create by Menger (1871). 

Marx (1887), a the father of the Socialist economic system, saw the cap- 
italist economy a an exploiter of the work class in benefit of the rich. 
He argue that strip down the right that give the capitalist the power 
to oppress the work class, i.e. the right to own capital and land, equality 
both in income and prominence among individual would follow suit.5 How- 
ever, the fall of the Soviet Bloc in the late 20th century show that apply 
Marx’s theory to practice be extremely difficult, if not impossible.6 Marx’s 
idea of collective governance over the production factor lead to inefficiency in 
production due to centrally govern division of product among the factor 
of production (Walder 1991; Weitzman 1991). Thus, in a Socialist economic 
system, the redistribution of income be do by government officials, not by 
market signals. This, naturally, lead to a serious incentive problem amongst 
the worker a return to their production factor, the labor, be not deter- 
mine by their effort.7 Wages and private consumption be also held back 
which cause the living standard to remain very low (Åslund 2007). In ad- 

5This refers to the whole production of Marx, not just The Capital and Manifesto of 
the Communist Party . 

6It should be noted, however, that Marx never mention revolution (Ekelund and 
Hébert 1990). It be thus possible that Marx thought that socialism would be the end-point 
of capitalism, meaning that after certain stage of development capitalism would lead to 
socialism. 

7In socialistic system labor force usually include also the land-owners, or the kolkhoz 
and sovkhoz, because own of land be prohibited. Government jurisdiction be the 
owner of the capital (Walder 1991). 

5 



dition, centrally plan economy be plague by shortage of good and 
services. Regardless of the obvious problem face by Communist economies, 
the actual economic reason for the collapse of Socialist economic system 
be still somewhat debate (see Åslund (2007); Easterly and Fischer (1995); 
Harrison (2002); Zubok (2008)). 

At the other end of the spectrum, the Austrian school of economics saw 
the price mechanism and, thus, the free ownership of the factor of pro- 
duction a the best (the most efficient) way to allocate income among in- 
dividuals (Hayek 1945; Mises 1969). The economic doctrine of the Austrian 
school oppose government intervention to the "self-efficient" market mech- 
anism. Therefore, the Austrian school advanced the idea of a free market, or 
laissez-faire, economic doctrine. Despite the fact that the idea of free-market 
economics have be fairly popular within the economic sciences, no country 
have actually adopt the economic doctrine of the Austrian school literally 
(Stringman and Hummel 2010). 

Within the last 50 year or so, a model that can be see a a hybrid of 
these two end have also emerged.8 In accordance with the Stockholm eco- 
nomic school, the so call Nordic economic model, which incorporates free 
market ideology in a society with a highly developed structure of social insur- 
ance, be developed. This "hybrid" have be able to combine relatively high 
growth rate to reasonably flat distribution of income. Especially within the 
last 20 years, the Nordic model have also show it resilience to many shock 
commonly associate with capitalist systems, include financial crisis and 
recession (Aaberge et al. 2002; Mayes 2009). 

1.2.2 Measuring income inequality 

How have the income inequality evolve in country with different economic 
systems? In this thesis two different measure of income inequality be used, 
which can be use to shed some light on this matter. These measure be the 

8Before the Nordic model be developed, many European country have also create 
system that incorporate aspect from both Socialism and free-markets. Nordic model is, 
however, probably the prime example of a economic doctrine that incorporates the best 
features, i.e. free market think and extensive social security, of both of these economic 
models. 

6 



EHII inequality measure, which be base on the Gini index by Deininger and 
Squire (1996), and the income share of the top 1% of income earners. 

Probably the most common measure of income inequality have be the 
Gini index or the Gini coefficient. Formally, the Gini coefficient be define as: 

Gini = 1 
2n2µ 

Σni=1Σ 
n 
j=1∣yi − yj ∣, (1.1) 

where n be the number of households, µ be the mean household income, and 
yi and yj be income of any two of the n household (Culyer 1980). Thus, 
the Gini index give the relative position of different household within the 
income distribution. One of the problem of the Gini index be that it re- 
quire quite a lot of information. To calculate it accurately one need the 
mean household (or person) income within a country, which in many case 
be very hard to come by. This have also cause problem with the compara- 
bility of the data, a income data be usually gather differently in different 
countries. Some countries, for example, gather income data from household 
while others gather it from individuals. This, naturally, can lead to serious 
comparability problem across countries. 

To overcome these problem there have be a grow interest towards 
use taxation statistic to estimate the level of income inequality within 
the last decade or so. This have open up a possibility to construct lengthy 
time series on the evolution of the top income share of population from 
several different countries. Top income share data us the same raw data 
from all country and it be construct use the same methodology for every 
country (Piketty 2007). This should make the series comparable. The long 
time series also make it easy to ass possible structural changes. However, 
some disadvantage remain. First and foremost, fully homogenuous cross- 
country data just do not exist, although the tax statistic may be the 
closest we can get to a data that be homogeneous across countries. It be also 
possible that the top income share follow different process in time than 
the overall inequality does. Furthermore, the possibility of tax avoidance may 
have bias the results. Nevertheless, top income share have be found to 
track broader measure of income inequality, like the Gini index, very well 
(Leigh 2007). 

Figure 1 present the evolution of the top 1% income share within 11 

7 



developed economy during the 20th century. In spite of somewhat different 

0 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

1875 1900 1925 1950 1975 2000 

Australia Canada 
Finland France 
Japan Netherlands 
New Zealand Norway 
Sweden UK 
United States 

Figure 1. The share of income of the top 1% of population in 11 developed country 

1880-2009. Source: Alvaredo et al. (2011) 

social policy among these 11 developed nations, income inequality have fol- 
low a strikingly similar pattern during the last century or so. In accordance 
with the Kuznet’s relation, income inequality have follow a fall trend al- 
most all country through the 20th century, but in the end of the 20th century 
the trend seem to have reversed. Roine and Waldenström (2011) have exam- 
ined the question that do the series of top income of developed country 
include structural breaks, i.e. break in the mean and/or trend of the series. 
They found that there be evidence of a common trend-break in the series of 

8 



top 1% income share in the year 1945 and 1980.9 The break in 1945 show 
a shift from faster decline of income inequality to a more slow decline. The 
break in 1980, however, constitutes a shift after which the decline trend 
either change to increase trend or to a stable non-increasing/-decreasing 
trend. That is, in this sub-sample of developed countries, the share of income 
of the top 1% have be grow or remain stable since the 1980s. 

To get a big picture of what have happen within the last 20 years, 
Figure 2 present the mean value of the EHII2008 inequality measure for 96 
countries.10 This measure be create use the Gini index by Deininger and 
Squire (1996), the annual data on wage on the manufacturing sector and 
the manufacturing share of population publish by the United Nations In- 
dustrial Development Organization (Galbraith and Kum 2006).11 The figure 

36 

38 

40 

42 

44 

46 

1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 

Mean of EHII2008 

Figure 2. The mean of the EHII2008 inequality measure for 96 country 1963-2002. Source: 

Galbraith and Kum (2006) 

9The number of country include in the stydy by Roine and Waldenström (2011) be 
9. 

10EHII stand for Estimated Household Income Inequality. 
11For more detailed description of the EHII2008 inequality measure see Section 2.3.1. 

9 



endorses the find by Roine and Waldenström (2011). The mean of income 
inequality have clearly increase since the 1980. 

What country then have contribute the most for the increase of the 
mean after the 1980s? Figure 3 present the mean value of the EHII2008 
inequality measure for group of former Communist and Nordic countries, the 
mean value for the group of 9 out of the 11 developed country present 
in Figure 1, and the mean value for the remain 69 country present in 
Figure 2.12 According to Figure 3, the big increase in income inequality 

25.0 

27.5 

30.0 

32.5 

35.0 

37.5 

40.0 

42.5 

45.0 

1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 

Mean COMMUNIST Mean DEVELOPED 

Mean NORDIC Mean 69 

Figure 3. The mean value of the EHII2008 inequality measure for Communist, Nordic, 

and developed country 1963-2002. Source: Galbraith and Kum (2006) 

have occur in the former Communist countries, where the inequality also 
12Former Communist country include: Bulgaria, China, Croatia, Cuba, Czech Re- 

public, Hungary, Kyrgyz Republic, Macedonia, Poland, Romania, Slovenia, Soviet 
Union/Russia, and Yugoslavia. Values of Croatia and Slovenia overlap with the value 
of Yugoslavia for three year from 1986 to 1989. Nordic country include: Denmark, Fin- 
land, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden. 

10 



seem to have be at the low level during the Communist era.13 In Nordic 
countries, the trend seem quite stable although there be an upward kink in 
the graph in 2001. Income inequality in the remain 69 out of 96 country 
seem quite stable although it also have risen from the 1980s. Thus, the reversal 
of the downward trend in inequality in developed economy and the raise in 
income inequality in transition economy seem to have contribute the most 
on the global trend of increase inequality during the last two decades. 

1.3 The process of income variation and the 
distribution of income 

The force determine the distribution of income in any com- 
munity be so varied and complex, and interact and fluctuate so 
continuously, that any theoretical model must either be unrealis- 
tically simplify or hopelessly complicated. 
-D. G. Chambernowne (1953) 

The very first formal model on the distribution of income by Chambernowne 
(1953) and Mandelbrot (1961) be base on the assumption that the process 
of income variation be stochastic. Intuitively this seem like a very reasonable 
assumption as, at least, some part of the individual income be usually deem 
to fluctuate randomly from year to year. 

Later on, for example, Deaton (1991) have use random walk to approx- 
imate the development in labor income through time in his study on how 
liquidity constraint affect national savings. Deaton assume that the labor 
income of an individual follow an AR(1) process of the form: 

log(yt+1) = δ + log(yt) + log(zt+1), (1.2) 
13It should be note that due to data quality and political issue concern income 

distribution, the income distribution data obtain under the Communist rule be likely 
to be quite unreliable (Åslund 2007). However, it be also true that in many transition 
economy poverty rise after transition due to fall output and wages. At the same 
time, the middle-class emerged. These two contract development have be likely to 
contribute to the rapid rise of income inequality in the former Communist countries. Still, 
the actual magnitude of the dispersion of income be more or less unclear. 

11 



where yt be labor income, zt+1 be stochastic random variable, and δ > 0 be a con- 
stant. When zt+1 be assume to be identically and independently distributed, 
the labor income process, log(yt), be I(1) non-stationary and, specifically, 
it follow a random walk with drift (see Section A.1 for a more detailed 
definition of the random walk and I(1) nonstationary processes). An I(1) 
nonstationary process have a infinite memory, i.e. they be highly persis- 
tent. Assuming some degree of persistence in the evolution of the income 
series (yt) of an individual be quite intuitive, a shock (e.g., wage raise) to 
the income process of an individual may have permanent effect on the future 
income of the individual. Therefore, the random walk model (1.2) appear to 
be a good description of labor income. 

However, it be also likely that some deterministic factor like education 
affect on the labor income. In a recent study on the evolution of consumption 
and income inequality, Blundell et al. (2008) model the income of household 
to be vary accord to: 

logYit = Zitδt + Pit + vit, (1.3) 

where Zit be a set of income characteristic that be observable and know 
by consumer at time t,14 vit follow a move average process of order q (a 
MA(q) process), and Pi,t = Pi,t−1+ϵit with ϵit serially uncorrelated, indicate 
that the process {P} be I(1) nonstationary. Several study in the micro 
literature tend to find that also empirically the permanent component Pit 
be a random walk, and hence it can be model a an I(1) nonstationary 
process (Meghir and Pistaferri 2004; Hall and Mishkin 1982; Blundell et al. 
2008). 

When individual income series be affected by a random walk component, 
their aggregate time series be likely to be characterize by a random walk 
(Rossanan and Seater 1995). However, the distribution of income be often 
measure use some bound measure, like the Gini index or the share 
of income. This issue a question on the random walk hypothesis, a any 
measure that varies within some boundary like the income share, cannot, by 
definition, be an I(1) nonstationary process. This be because the variance of 

14These include demographic, education, employment status, ethnic, etc. factor (Blun- 
dell et al. 2008) 

12 



such a series cannot grow infinitely, which be one property of the random walk 
process. However, it be possible that the distribution can have stochastic trend 
in it other moments, like the mean, skewness, and kurtosis, than variance 
(White and Granger 2010). This way the measure of income inequality, be 
a functional of some income distribution have a stochastic trend in one or 
several of it high moments, may exhibit such high level of persistence 
that it be good approximate by an I(1) process than a stationary process. 

1.4 Theoretical effect of income inequality on 
economic growth 

You cannot have the benefit of capitalist market growth without 
the support of, virtually, all the people. 
-Alan Greenspan (C-Span, September 2007) 

1.4.1 The origin 

The question, how do the distribution of product affect the production was, 
for some time, a more infrequently study subject in economics, although 
the relation between the distribution of income and income growth be com- 
mented already by Smith (1776). Smith argue that because national saving 
govern the accumulation of capital, and because only the rich people saved, 
the accumulation of capital require that there be enough rich people in 
the society. However, Smith also argue that production growth would not be 
possible without sufficient demand. He state that every man should be able 
to provide for himself and his family. This would constitute the threshold of 
sustainable inequality, and it would also assure a sufficient level of demand 
in the economy. 

Despite the fact that the classical doctrine generally argue that invest- 
ment be a result of savings, not much emphasis be put on how the distri- 
bution of income would affect saving after Smith (1776). This be because 
classical economic thought rely quite often to the Say’s law. What Say’s 
law state be that supply creates it own demand, imply that save be the 
potential demand (a "promise" of consumption) that be just work through 

13 



investments. There was, however, one loud critic of the Say’s law among the 
Classics. Malthus (1836) argue that saving ex ante need not to always equal 
investment ex ante. That is, consumption can exceed production result 
to an over-demand, which will lead to diminish wealth of a nation due 
to excessive use of productive capital. But, Malthus (1836) never developed 
his critique to explain how market force maintain the optimum rate of sav- 
ings, and the monetary cause of overproduction (Ekelund and Hébert 1990). 
Thus, Say’s law remain the cornerstone in classical economic thinking. 

It take a century before Keynes (1936) finalize the critique of the Say’s 
law put forth by Malthus (1836).15 Keynes present his theory of aggre- 
gate demand and consumption in his principal work, The General Theory 
of Employment, Interest, and Money, which also state that inequality of 
income will lead to slow economic growth. Keynes argue that marginal 
consumption decrease a the income of an individual increases, and thus 
aggregate consumption depends on change in aggregate income. According 
to Keynes, demand be the basis of investments, and because inequality low- 
er aggregate consumption, the inequality of income will diminish economic 
growth by diminish investments. 

Stiglitz (1969) summarizes the finding of the classical economic theory 
a follows. In classical economic theory, inequality of income be assume 
to influence economic growth rate through saving and consumption. When 
the save function be linear, e.g. si =myi + b, where yi be output per capita, 
m be the marginal propensity to save, and b be the per caput saving at 
zero income, aggregate save behavior in an economy be not affected by the 
distribution of income. However, if the save function be nonlinear, aggregate 
saving become dependent on the distribution of income. 

When the save function be linear or concave, distribution of income 
and wealth converge toward equality (Stiglitz 1969). If the save function 
be convex, i.e. the marginal propensity to save increase with income, more 
unequal distribution of income result in high capital intensity through 
great aggregate savings. Thus, in a steady-state equilibrium, where income 
be distribute unevenly, the wealth of a nation be great than in the steady- 

15Note: the second edition of Principles of Political Economy generally cite from 
Malthus, be publish posthumously. 

14 



state equilibrium, where income be distribute evenly. However, these steady- 
state equilibrium exist only when all individual have positive wealth. Thus, 
result may not apply, for example, to develop countries. 

1.4.2 Modern theory 

There be basically three main strain of modern theory on the effect of 
income inequality on economic growth. These include the political economy 
model by Perotti (1993), a model of division of labor and specialization by 
Fishman and Simhon (2002), and the two-regime model by Galor and Moav 
(2004), which combine the classical approach with human capital theory by 
Becker (1965) and Mincer (1974). All these strand of theoretical literature 
rely on the human capital theory and on the assumption of credit restrictions. 
Human capital theory explains the role of human capital in the production 
process a specialization (schooling) and on-the-job investment (training) 
(Acemoglu 2009). Credit-market imperfection refer to the situation in which 
people’s access to credit be restricted. These restriction can originate from 
the regulation of legislative institutions, credit ration impose by central 
banks, or from underdeveloped banking sector. Further, credit-market im- 
perfection be present when acquire credit in return for expect future 
profit be gravely limited. 

Political economy model assume that preference of individual be ag- 
gregated through political process. Therefore, redistribution of income and 
economic growth be driven by the political process. Political process can be 
driven by a median voter or by organize social groups. In the model by Per- 
otti (1993), the equilibrium reach by the economy depends on the initial 
distribution of income. If the aggregate capital be very small, redistribution 
of income through tax and subsidy will result in a poverty trap where 
no one be able to acquire education. In this case, a more unequal distribu- 
tion of income will support the economy because at least some individual 
be able to acquire education and increase the level of human capital. As 
economy becomes more developed, very unequal income distribution may 
diminish growth because the accumulation of human capital would require 
that middle-income and poor individual acquire education, a the rich have 
already educate themselves. In a rich economy, only the poor may increase 

15 



the level of human capital, and therefore high steady-state growth path 
require that income be distribute evenly. 

If an economy’s aggregate capital be small, unevenly distribute income 
urge capital owner to invest in specialization (Fishman and Simhon 2002). 
In this case, inequality result to a high level of human capital, a high 
division of labor, and thus to faster economic growth. When an economy’s 
aggregate capital be large, the more equal distribution of income encour- 
age household to invest in specialization and entrepreneurship. In this case, 
equality of income will create a more risk-free environment and wide-based 
demand for goods. This will lead to high employment, great division of 
labor, and to faster economic growth. 

In the model by Galor and Moav (2004), the engine of economic growth 
change from physical capital to physical and human capital in the process of 
economic development. The process of economic development be divide into 
two regimes, which have their own steady-state growth paths. Economies in 
the first regime be underdeveloped, aggregate physical capital be small, and 
the rate of return to human capital be low than the rate of return to physical 
capital. In this regime inequality increase aggregate saving by increase 
the income of the rich and great aggregate saving fuel physical capital 
accumulation. 

In the second regime, economy be rich and the rate of return to hu- 
man capital be so high that it induces human capital accumulation (Galor 
and Moav 2004). Therefore, both human and physical capital be engine 
for economic development. Since individuals’ investment in human capital be 
subject to diminish marginal returns, the return to human capital in- 
vestment be maximize when investment in human capital be widely spread 
among the population. Because access to credit be constrained, human capital 
investment be maximize when income in the economy be distribute evenly. 

1.5 Analyzing panel data 

I be oblige at the outset to draw attention to the fact that 
analysis of variance can be, and is, use to provide solution to 
problem of two fundamentally different types. These two distinct 

16 



class of problem are: class I: detection and estimation of fix 
(constant) relation among the mean of sub-sets of the universe 
of object concerned; class II: detection and estimation of compo- 
nents of (random) variation associate with a composite popula- 
tion. 
- Churchill Eisenhart (1947) 

A panel or a longitudinal data set consists of several time series, indexed 
t = 1, ..., T , for several cross-sectional units, indexed i = 1, ..., n, where i can 
be country, a municipality, a firm, and so on. Therefore, the observation can 
be collect to a single vector, for example: 

Yi = (yi,1 ... yi,T i)′ i = 1, ..., n 
Y = (Y ′1 ... Y ′n)′, 

where the vector (Y ′1 ...Y ′n) include the time series observation of the n 
statistical unit or individuals. 

The use of panel data posse several major advantage over cross-sectional 
or time-series data. Panel data usually give a large number of data points, 
which increase the degree of freedom and reduces collinearity among ex- 
planatory variables, thus improve the efficiency of estimates. Dynamics of 
change or the dynamic coefficient cannot usually be estimate use cross- 
sectional or single time series data (Hsiao 2003). Cross-section estimation 
also usually fail on make inference about the dynamic of change a their 
estimate tend to reflect inter-individual difference inherent in comparison 
of different people, firms, or countries. That is, cross-sectional data be un- 
able to distinguish between individual or country in different regions, for 
example, a it cannot use the information on subject that change between 
regions. With panel data, this can be done, a it include information on the 
subject from a long(er) period of time. 

In time series analysis, analyze some dynamic model require that the 
lag coefficient need to be assumed, a priori, to be a function of only a 
very small number of parameter (Hsiao 2003). Otherwise, multicollinearity 
can be a problem.16 If panel data would be available, the interindividual 

16Consider a distribute lag model of the form: 

yt = Σhk=0βkxt−k + ϵt, t = 1, ..., T, 

17 



diffences in the (exogenous) explanatory variable could be use to reduce 
the problem of collinearity. Panel data also allows one to control for one of 
the crucial problem arise in cross-sectional of time series data, namely 
the omit variable bias. If individual- or some group-specific factor affect 
on the dependent variables, explanatory variable can capture the effect 
of these factors, and parameter estimate will not represent the true effect 
of the explanatory variable per se. With panel data, one can utilize the 
intertemporal dynamic and the individuality of the subject be studied. 
Consider, for example, a simple time series regression: 

yt = α + β′xt + γzt + ϵt (1.4) 

where xt and zt be exogenous variables, α be a constant and the error term ϵt 
be independently and identically distribute over t with mean zero and vari- 
ance σ2. If zt be observable, there be no problem and the coefficient of β and 
γ can be consistently estimate use OLS. However, if zt be unobservable 
and the covariance between xt and zt be nonzero, the OLS estimator of coeffi- 
cients on xt be inconsistent. If we would be able to use repeat observation 
from the same individual, model (1.5) would be give as: 

yt = α + β′xit + γzit + ϵit, (1.5) 

where ϵit be now identically, independently distribute over i and t with mean 
zero and variance σ2ϵ . Now, if zit = zt for all i meaning that the value of z 
stay constant across individuals, one be able to take deviation from the mean 
across individual at a give time yielding: 

yit − ȳt = β′(xit − x̄t) + (ϵit − ϵ̄t). (1.6) 

Thus, the (unobserved) effect zt be eliminate and OLS can be use to obtain 
consistent and unbiased estimate of β from (1.6). 

The limitation of the panel data analysis include the possible hetero- 
geneity bias and cross-sectional dependence. Even though the panel data can 
cope with heterogeneity of the data good than the cross-sectional or time 

where xt be an exogenous variable and ϵt be random disturbance term. Now, obviously, xt 
be near xt−1, and still nearer 2xt−1 − xt−2 = xt−1 + (xt−1 − xt−2) (Hsiao 2003). Thus, a fairly 
strict multicollinearieties appear among h + 1 explanatory variables. 

18 



series data, ignore the individual or time-specific effect that exists among 
cross-sectional or time series unit can still lead to parameter heterogeneity in 
the panel model specification (Hsiao 2003). If, for example, the slope of the 
estimate parameter in the model (1.5) would differ, i.e. βi ≠ βj, straight- 
forward pool of all observation from different individual could lead to 
nonsensical pooling, a it would just give a average of coefficient that dif- 
fer across individuals. Furthermore, time-varying intercept and coefficient 
would also be likely to cause bias. 

Large macro panel include long time series from several countries, 
which all possible belong to some group, like the OECD countries, may be 
affected by cross-sectional dependence. The cross-sectional dependence arises 
when, for example, the GDP series of several country be correlate with 
each other. This may lead to bias inference if not account for. Especially, 
in cointegrated panel cross-sectional dependence can bias the result of the 
test and estimator considerably (Baltagi 2008; Mark and Sul 2003). 

1.5.1 Basic estimator of panel data 

In panel data models, the conditional expectation of y give x can be exam- 
ined by use the linear regression: 

yit = αi + βX ′it + ϵit, ϵit ∼ N(0, σ2), ϵit ⊥⊥Xit. (1.7) 

where β be a K×1 vector of parameter coefficient (excluding intercept). Now, 
if ui ⊥⊥Xit, but αi ≠ α ∀i, a random effect estimator can be use to estimate 
model (1.7). It be base on a model: 

yit = α + βX ′it + ui + ϵit, ui ∼ N(0, σ2u), ϵit ∼ N(0, σ2ϵ ), (1.8) 

where follow assumption must hold: 

Eui = Eϵit ≡ 0, (1.9) 

Euiuj = 
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩ 

σ2u if i = j 
0 if i ≠ j, 

(1.10) 

Eϵitϵjt = 
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩ 

σ2ϵ if i = j, t = s 
0 otherwise, 

(1.11) 

19 



and 

ui ⊥⊥Xit, (1.12) 
ϵit ⊥⊥Xit, (1.13) 
ϵit ⊥⊥ ui. (1.14) 

In the case of random effects, the OLS estimator be no longer the BLUE, i.e. 
the best linear unbiased estimator. Thus, in the case of random effects, the 
estimation must be conduct with generalize least square estimator, or 
GLS. 

However, if ui á Xit, the GLS random effect estimator will be incon- 
sistent. In this case, the fix effect estimator can be used. Fixed effect 
estimator be base on the model: 

yit = αi + β′Xit + ϵit, ϵit ∼ N(0, σ2), ϵit ⊥⊥Xit 
i = 1, ..., n, t = 1, ..., T, 

where αi be a scalar of constant represent the effect of those variable 
specific to the ith individual. The OLS estimator of fix effect be also call 
the least-squares dummy variables, or the LSDV estimator. The LSDV esti- 
mator remove the individual effect effects, usually by assume Σni=1αi = 0 
(Hsiao 2003). This way the individual effect αi represent the deviation of 
the ith individual from the common mean, and they be eliminate from 
estimation. 

One can also use instrumental estimation method to control for the pos- 
sible endogeneity problem. Endogeneity arises when some or all of the ex- 
planatory variable be correlate with some part of the error term. With 
panel data this often refers to the situation present above where ui áXit. 
Although LSDV estimator can be use to control for this problem, it be bias 
and inconsistent estimator, if explanatory variable include lag value of 
the dependent variable.17 Dynamic panel data model be of the form: 

yit = α + γyi,t−1 + ui + ϵit, ui ∼ iid(0, σ2u), ϵit ∼ iid(0, σ2ϵ ) (1.15) 

In this case, clearly, ui á yi,t−1. Now, the general method of moment (GMM) 
estimator can be use to consistently estimate model (1.15). For the instru- 
mental variables, denote a Zit, it be require that ui ⊥⊥ Zit. In the case of 

17However, with T Ð→∞ the LSDV estimator becomes consistent. 

20 



(1.15), lag of difference of explanatory variable can be use a instrumental 
variable for yit a first differencing eliminates the individual time-invariant 
variable ui. So, for example, (yi,t−1 − yi,t−2) and (yi,t−2 − yi,t−3) can be use 
a instrument for yi,t−1, (yi,t−2 − yi,t−3) and (yi,t−3 − yi,t−4 ) can be use a 
instrument for yi,t−2, etc. 

1.5.2 Estimation in cointegrated panel data 

Estimators present above be consistent and/or asymptotically unbiased 
only when the underlie data be not cointegrated (Baltagi 2008; Kao and 
Chiang 2000). Cointegration refers to a stationary linear combination of in- 
tegrated variables. Cointegration thus implies that there be a long-run equilib- 
rium relation between the integrate variables. Integration, or I(1) nonsta- 
tionarity of a variable mean that a stochastic trend affect the evolution of 
the series through time. Such series be described in A.1. Integrated variable 
have a infinite memory and they be highly persistent meaning that they be 
described by strong autocorrelation between successive observation of the 
time series. 

Assume, for example, that we have a two-dimensional time series of the 
form: 

⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩ 

y1t = βx∗t + ϵ1t 
y2t = x∗t + ϵ2t, 

(1.16) 

with x∗t ∼ I(1) and ϵ1t, ϵ2t ∼ I(0), then 

(1 − β) 
⎛ 
⎝ 
y1t 

y2t 

⎞ 
⎠ 
= β(x∗t − x∗t ) + (ϵ1t − βϵ2t) ∼ I(0), (1.17) 

Thus, the series Yt = (y1t y2t)′ be say to be cointegrated and the cointegra- 
tion vector be [1 − β]. The result present in (1.17) can also be use to 
test for cointegration between I(1) nonstationary variables, i.e. we can test 
be some of the linear combination of the variable stationary. 

Mark and Sul (2003) consider a dynamic OLS (DOLS) estimator with 
fix effects, heterogenous trends, and common time effect for cointegrated 
panel data. The last model account for cross-sectional dependence by intro- 

21 



ducing a common time effect. Mark and Sul’s model assumes that observa- 
tions on each individual i obey the follow triangular representation: 

yit = αi + λit + θt + γ′xit + uit, (1.18) 

where (1,−γ′) be a cointegrating vector between yit and xit, which be identical 
across individuals, αi be a individual-specific effect, λit be a individual-specific 
linear trend, θt be a common time-specific factor, and uit be a idionsyncratic 
error term that be independent across i, but possibly dependent across t. 
Model (1.18) allows for a limited form of cross-sectional correlation, where 
the equilibrium error for each individual be driven in part by θt. 

Panel DOLS eliminates the possible endogeneity between explanatory 
variable and the dependent variable by assume that uit be correlate at 
most with pi lead and lag of △xit (Mark and Sul 2003). The possible en- 
dogeneity can be control by project uit onto these lead and lags: 

uit = Σpis=−piδ′i,s△ xi,t−s + uit∗ = δ′izit + u∗it. (1.19) 

The projection error u∗it be orthogonal to all the lead and lag of △xit and 
the estimate equation becomes: 

yit = αi + λit + θt + γ′xit + δizit + u∗it, (1.20) 

where δ′izit be a vector of projection dimensions. The consistent estimation of 
(1.20) be base on sequential limits, meaning that the convergence occurs in 
sequential fashion, where first T → ∞ after which n → ∞. Equation (1.20) 
can be feasibly estimate in panel with small to moderate n. 

An alternative to the panel DOLS estimator be the panel VAR estima- 
tor by Breitung (2005). He proposes a panel VAR(p) model which can be 
present a a panel vector error-correction model (VECM) a 

△yit = ψidt + αiβ′y,t−1 +Σ 
p−1 
j=1Γij △ yi,t−j + ϵit, (1.21) 

where dt be a vector of deterministic variable and ψi a k × k matrix of un- 
know coefficients, Γij be unrestricted matrix, and ϵit be a white noise error 
vector with E(ϵit) = 0 and positive definite covariance matrix Σi = E(ϵitϵ′it). 
The model be estimate in two stages. First, the model be estimate sepa- 
rately across n cross-section units. Then cointegration vector be normalize 

22 



so that they do not depend on individual specific parameters. Second, the 
system be transform to a pool regression of the form: 

ẑit = β′yi,t−1 + v̂it, (1.22) 

where ẑit = (α̂′iΣ̂−1i α̂i)−1α̂′iΣ̂−1i △ yit and v̂it be define in similar fashion. The 
cointegration matrix, β, can now be estimate from (1.22) use the OLS es- 
timator. It be assume that the statistical unit include in the panel have the 
same cointegration rank. Consistent estimation be base on sequential limits. 
Cross-sectional correlation be account by use an estimate asymptotic 
covariance matrix. 

1.6 Contributions of the thesis 

This thesis concentrate on the panel econometric analysis of the relationship 
between inequality and growth. The relationship be study from three dif- 
ferent angles. First, the short-term effect of inequality on growth be studied. 
Next, the long-run (equilibrium) relationship between inequality and eco- 
nomic development be analyzed. The third chapter concentrate on the effect 
that inequality may have on the factor of economic development, namely on 
it possible effect on savings. 

1.6.1 The effect of income inequality on economic growth 
in the short run 

In Chapter 2, the effect of inequality on growth be study by use macroe- 
conomic data on a panel of 70 countries. Chapter contributes on two set 
of problem that panel econometric study have recently encountered. These 
be the comparability problem associate with the commonly use Gini index 
by Deininger and Squire (1996), and the problem relate to the estimation 
of group-related elasticity in panel data. 

Many recent study assess the effect of inequality on growth have 
use the Gini index by Deininger and Squire (1996) a a measure of income 
inequality. However, the "high quality" dataset of Deininger and Squire have 

23 



receive serious criticism concern the accuracy, consistency, and compara- 
bility of the data (Atkinson and Brandolini 2001; Galbraith and Kum 2006). 
Galbraith and Kum (2006) have create a new improve measure of in- 
come inequality call the EHII2008. They have obtain their inequality 
measure by regress Deininger and Squire’s Gini coefficient on the val- 
ues of explanatory variables, which include the different income measure 
of Deininger and Squire’s data set, the set of measure of the dispersion of 
pay in the manufacturing sector, and the manufacturing share of the popula- 
tion. This should make the value of EHII2008 consistent and comparable a 
the data on wage on the manufacturing sector should be comparable across 
countries. The EHII2008 inequality measure also have a large data coverage on 
different countries, which diminishes the small sample bias and the possibility 
of systematic error in estimation. 

Many of the theory present in Section 1.4 assume that the effect of 
income inequality on economic growth would differ between country accord- 
ing to their level of economic development. Estimation of such income group 
elasticity in panel data with parametric method would require that some 
group-specific constant be add to the estimate model. This creates a 
statistically dubious estimation configuration, and the inference of such esti- 
mations be likely to be conditional on the sample (Hsiao 2003; Baltagi 2008). 
The general way to avoid the vagueness relate to the use of group- or 
individual-related constant have be to use non-parametric method (Lin et 
al. 2006; Banerjee and Duflo 2003). The problem with non-parametric meth- 
od be that they be know to lack statistical power compare with parametric 
method in small sample generally use in growth literature. 

It be show in this chapter that there be a simple way to ’bypass’ the 
vagueness related to the use of parametric method to estimate group-related 
parameters. The idea be to estimate the group-related elasticity implicitly 
use a set of group-related instrumental variables. This can be do by 
group the individual in the sample, create group-related explanatory 
variable by link each explanatory variable to each group, and attach- 
ing some group-related instrumental variable to each of the group-related 
explanatory variables. Although the method be rather simple, the inference 
drawn from these estimation should be unconditional or marginal with re- 

24 



spect to the population. 
The result obtain use the estimation method described above indi- 

cate that the relationship between income inequality and growth be likely to 
be non-linear. This result be rather well in line with the result obtain with 
non- or semi-parametric method (Banerjee and Duflo 2003; Lin et al. 2006). 

1.6.2 The long-run relationship between income inequal- 
ity and economic development 

Findings in Chapter 2 give only the short- or medium-term effect of inequal- 
ity on growth. Potentially more interest question is, how do inequality 
affect economic growth or development in the long-run? Chapter 3 extends 
the analysis by study the possible long-run dependence between inequality 
and development. 

Chapter 3 incorporates the EHII2.1 inequality measure and a panel data 
on macroeconomic variable with annual time series observation from 38 
country to test the existence of long-run equilibrium relation between in- 
equality and the level of GDP. According to the panel unit root tests, both 
the logarithmic EHII2.1 inequality measure and the logarithmic GDP per 
caput series seem to follow an I(1) nonstationary process.18 They be also 
found to be cointegrated of order one use panel cointegration test by Pe- 
droni (2004) and Banerjee and Carrion-i-Silvestre (2006), which implies that 
there be a long-run equilibrium relation between them. 

The effect of inequality on the level of GDP be estimate with panel dy- 
namic OLS and panel dynamic SUR estimator use a simplify production 
function include just two factors, namely physical capital and income in- 
equality. In accordance with the theory present by Fishman and Simhon 
(2002), the estimate model assumes that the coefficient of inequality re- 
flects the effect of human capital on production growth (see Section 1.4.2). 
Estimation be base on the follow model: 

log(GDPit) = αi + γ′1log(investmentsit) + γ′2log(inequalityit) 
+λit + θt + uit, 

18In unit root testing, the data on the total of 53 country be used. 

25 



where αi be individual constants, λit be individual trends, θt be the common 
time effect, (1,−γ′1,−γ′2) be a cointegrating vector between GDP, investment 
and inequality, and uit be an idiosyncratic error. 

As mention above, many of the theoretical model present in Section 
1.4 imply that the growth elasticity of inequality might differ between de- 
veloping and developed economies. To take this into account in estimation, 
country in the dataset be divide into three income groups. To make the 
estimation of income group asymptotically feasible, i.e. to make the group 
large enough, country be divide into three equally size groups. According 
to the result of income group estimations, the long-run growth elasticity of 
inequality be negative in the middle-income and rich economies. Results for 
develop economy be inconclusive. 

These finding imply that the distribution of income and economic devel- 
opment have a steady-state equilibrium relation, or relations, a commonly 
predict by theoretical models. Findings also imply that this relationship 
between income inequality and economic growth be negative in developed 
economies. 

1.6.3 The relationship between inequality and saving 

As present in Section 1.4, the effect of saving on capital accumulation 
and growth have always be one of the fundamental research topic in eco- 
nomics. In addition to the theory present in Section 1.4, there be several 
theoretical model explain the effect of inequality on savings. 

The permanent income hypothesis by Friedman (1957) state that in- 
dividuals with low income have a high propensity to consume, and small 
change in income, or it distribution, do not affect the consumption decision 
of households. The life-cycle hypothesis argues that, if bequest be luxury, 
the save rate should be high among wealthier individual (Kotlikoff and 
Summers 1981). Deaton (1991) find that when income follow a random 
walk process and borrowing constraint be binding, it be undesirable for 
household to undertake any smooth of consumption imply that con- 
sumption equal income. In political-economy models, more unequal income 
distribution may create demand for more redistribution through taxation 
and income transfers. If the save function of individual in the economy be 

26 



convex, i.e. the rich save more, this will diminish aggregate saving through 
the diminish income of the rich (Alesina and Perotti 1994). 

Although theoretical research span several decades, the effect of income 
inequality on saving remains an open empirical question. This be due to the 
fact that empirical cross-country study have produce controversial result 
on the effect of income inequality on saving (Cook 1995; Leigh and Posso 
2009; Li and Zou 2004; Smith 2001). Generally all the empirical study have 
assume that income inequality, measure either by the Gini index or by the 
share of income earn by different income classes, be a stationary variable. 
However, accord to the result present in Chapter 2, income inequality 
may be driven by a stochastic trend indicate that inequality would be 
an I(1) nonstationary variable. If this result held in general, it would offer 
an explanation to the ambiguous result of the previous empirical studies, 
because regress a stationary variable on an I(1) variable(s) can lead to 
a spurious regression (Stewart 2011). In empirical studies, saving be usually 
measure a a percentage of the GDP. If both the logarithmic saving and the 
logarithmic GDP be I(1) variable and cointegrated, their difference results, 
by construction, in a stationary variable, namely saving a a percentage of 
the GDP. Thus, if inequality be an I(1) variable and saving a a ratio of 
the GDP a stationary I(0) variable, regress saving on inequality would 
give spurious results. 

In Chapter 4, macroeconomic data on nine developed economy span- 
ning across four decade start from the year 1960 be use to study the 
effect of the change in the top income share to national and private savings. 
The income share of the top 1 % of population be use a a proxy for the 
distribution of income. According to panel unit root tests, the logarithmic 
income share of the top 1%, logarithmic gross national saving and logarith- 
mic private consumption be all I(1) variables. The income share of the top 
1% be also found to be cointegrated with private consumption, which implies 
that there be a long-run dependency relation between them. The effect of 
inequality on private consumption be found to be negative in the Nordic and 
Central-European countries, but for the Anglo-Saxon country the direction 
of the effect (positive vs. negative) remains ambiguous. The result of the 
panel cointegration test be inconclusive on the possible cointegration rela- 

27 



tionship between gross saving and the top 1% income share. The real GDP 
per caput and gross saving a well a the real GDP per caput and private 
consumption be also found to be cointegrated. This implies that the ratio 
of saving and private consumption to GDP would be stationary variable 
and hence previous research be likely to have produce bias result on the 
effect of inequality on savings. 

28 



Bibliography 

Aaberge R, Wennemo T, Bjorklund A, Jantti M, Pedersen PJ, Smith N. 
(2002). Unemployment shock and income distribution: how do the Nordic 
country fare during their crises? Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 
102(1): 77–99. 

Acemoglu D. (2009) Introduction to Modern Economic Growth. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. 

Acemoglu D, Robinson JA. (2001). A theory of political transition. American 
Economic Review, 91(4): 938–963. 

Aitken B, Harrison A. (1999). Do domestic firm benefit from foreign direct 
investments? American Economic Review, 89, 605–618. 

Alesina, A, Perotti R. (1996). Income distribution, political instability and 
investment. European Economic Review, 40(6): 1203-1228. 

Alvaredo F, Atkinson AB, Piketty T, Saez E. (2011). The World Top 
Incomes Database. http://g-mond.parisschoolofeconomics.eu/topincomes. 
Accessed May 14th 2011. 

Atkinson A, Brandolini A. (2001) Promise and pitfall in the use of secondary 
data-sets: income inequality in OECD country a a case study. Journal 
of Economic Literature 39(3):771-799 

Bacon F. (1625). Of Seditions and Troubles. In Essays. 

Barro R. (2000). Inequality and growth in a panel of countries. Journal of 
Economic Growth 5(1):5-32 

29 



Becker GS. (1965). A theory of allocation of time. Economic Journal, 75(299): 
493–517. 

Bengoa M, Sanchez-Robles B. (2003). Foreign direct investment, economic 
freedom and growth: new evidence from Latin America. European Journal 
of Political Economy, 19(3): 529–545. 

Blundell R. Pistaferri L. Preston, I. (2008) Consumption inequality and par- 
tial insurance. American Economic Review, 98(5): 1887-1921. 

Castelló-Climent A. (2010). Inequality and growth in advanced economies: 
an empirical investigation. Journal of Economic Inequality, 8(3): 293–321. 

Chambernowne DG. (1953) A model of income distribution. The Economic 
Journal, 250(63): 318-351. 

Chu CY. (1990). An existence theorem on the stationary state of income 
distribution and population growth. International Economic Review, 31(1): 
171–185. 

Cook C. (1995). Savings rate and income distribution: further evidence from 
LDCs. Applied Economics, 27(1): 71-82. 

Culyer AJ. (1980). The Political Economy of Social Policy. Oxford: Robert- 
son. 

Deininger K, Squire L. (1996). A new data set measure income inequality. 
World Bank Economic Review, 10(3):565-591 

Doepke M. (2004). Accounting for fertility decline during the transition to 
growth. Journal of Economic Growth, 9(3): 347–383. 

Durham JB. (2004). Absorptive capacity and the effect of foreign direct 
investment and equity foreign portfolio investment on economic growth. 
European Economic Review, 48(2): 285–306. 

Easterly W, Fischer S. (1995). The Soviet economic decline. The World Bank 
Economic Review, 9(3): 341–371. 

30 



Eisenhart C. (1947). The assumption underlie the analysis of variance. 
Biometrics, 3(1): 1–21. 

Ekelund RB, Hébert RF. (1990). A history of Economic Theory and Method, 
3rd edition. McGraw-Hill: New York. 

Fishman A, Simhon A. (2002). The division of labor, inequality and growth. 
Journal of Economic Growth, 7(2): 117–136. 

Frazer G. (2006) Inequality and development across and within countries. 
World Development, 34(9): 1459–1481 

Forbes K. (2000). A reassessment of the relationship between inequality and 
growth. American Economic Review, 90(4):869-887 

Friedman M. (1957). A Theory of Consumption Function. Princeton Univer- 
sity Press. 

Galbraith J. K., Kum H. (2006). Estimating the inequality of household 
incomes: A statistical approach to the creation of a dense and consistent 
global data set. UTIP work paper no. 22. http://utip.gov.utexas.edu. 
Accessed 22. January 2011. 

Gagliani G. (1987). Income inequality and economic development. Annual 
Review of Sociology, 13: 313–334. 

Galor O, Moav O (2004) From Physical to human capital accumulation: 
inequality and the process of development. Rev Econ Studies 71(4):1001- 
1026 

Goethe, JW. (1892). The Maxims and Reflections. MacMillan: New York. 

Galor O, Weil DN. (2000). Population, technology, and growth: from Malthu- 
sian stagnation to the demographic transition and beyond. American Eco- 
nomic Review, 90(4): 806–828. 

Hall RE, Mishkin FS. (1982) The sensitivity of consumption to transitory 
income: estimate from panel data. Econometrica, 50(2): 461-481. 

31 



Harrison M. (2002). Coercion, compliance, and the collapse of the Soviet 
command economy. Economic History Review, 3: 397–433. 

Hayek FA. (1945). The use of knowledge in society. The American Economic 
Review, 4: 519–530. 

Hsiao C. (2003). Analysis of Panel Data. New York: Cambridge University 
Press. 

Hsieh CT, Klenow P. (2007). Relative price and prosperity. American Eco- 
nomic Review, 97(3): 562–585. 

Jäntti, M. Stephen, P. J. (2010). The impact of macroeconomics condition 
on income inequality. Journal of Economic Inequality, 8(2): 221–240. 

Kao C, Chiang MH (2000) On the estimation and inference of a cointegrated 
regression panel data. In Baltagi B (ed) Advances in Econometrics 15, 
Emerald, Bingley, pp. 179-222. 

Keynes M. (1936). The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money. 
Harcourt, New York 

Kotlikoff L, Summers L. (1981). The role of intergenerational transfer in 
aggregate capital accumulation. The Journal of Political Economy, 89(4): 
706–732. 

Kottaridi C, Stengos T. (2010) Foreign direct investment, human capital, 
and non-linearities in economic growth. Journal of Macroeconomics, 32(3): 
858–871. 

Kumhof M, Ranciére R. (2010). Inequality, leverage and crises. IMF work 
paper, 10/268. 

Kuznets S. (1955). Economic growth and income inequality. American Eco- 
nomic Review, 45(1): 1–29. 

Leigh A. (2007). How closely do top income share track other measure of 
inequality? Economic Journal, 117(524): 619-633. 

32 



Leigh A, Posso A. (2009). Top income and national savings. The Review of 
Income and Wealth, 1: 57-74 

Li H, Zou H-F. (2004). Savings and income distribution. Annals of Economics 
and Finance, 5: 245-270. 

Li H, Heng-fu Z. (1998). Income inequality be not harmful for growth: Theory 
and evidence. Review of Development Economics, 2(3): 318–34. 

Loury GC. (1981). Intergenerational transfer and the distribution of earn- 
ings. Econometrica, 49(4): 843–867. 

Maddison A. (2010). Statistics on world population, GDP and per caput 
GDP, 1-2008 AD. http://www.ggdc.net/MADDISON/oriindex.htm. Ac- 
cessed 13. April 2011. 

Malthus TR. (1836). Principles of Political Economy. 
http://oll.libertyfund.org. Accessed April 15. 2011. 

Malthus TR. (1815). An Inquiry Into the Nature and Progress of Rent. 
http://openlibrary.org. Accessed 14. April 2011. 

Mandelbrot B. (1961). Stable Paretian random function and the multiplica- 
tive variation of income. Econometrica, 29(4): 517-543. 

Mark N, Sul D. (2003) Cointegration vector estimation by panel DOLS and 
long-run money demand. Oxford Bull Econ Stat 65(5):655-80 

Marx K. (1887) Capital: a Critique of Political Econ- 
omy; Volume I: The Process of Production of Capital. 
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/. Accessed 2. 
March 2011. 

Marx K, Engels F. (1848). Manifesto of the Communist Party. 
http://www.anu.edu.au/polsci/marx/classics/manifesto.html. Accessed 
13. April 2011. 

Mayes DG. (2009). Did recent experience of a financial crisis help in cop- 
ing with the current financial turmoil? The case of the Nordic countries. 
Journal of Common Market Studies, 47(5):997–1015. 

33 



Meghir C, Pistaferri L. (2004) Income variance dynamic and heterogeneity. 
Econometrica, 72(1): 1-32. 

Menger C. (1871). Principles of Economics. 
http://mises.org/etexts/menger/principles.asp. Accessed 13. April 
2011. 

Mincer J. (1974). Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. New York: National 
Bureau of Economic Research. 

Mill JS. (1845). The claim of labour. http://oll.libertyfund.org. Accessed 
April 14. 2011. 

Mises L. (1969). The Historial Setting of the Austrian School of Economics. 
The Ludvig von Mises Institute. http://mises.org/hsofase.asp. Acccessed 
9 March 2011. 

Mocan HN. (1999). Structural unemployment, cyclical unemployment, and 
income inequality. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(1):122–134. 

Muth, JF. (1960) Optimal property of exponentially weight forecasts. 
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 55: 299-306. 

Nielsen F. (1994). Income inequality and industrial development: dualism 
revisited. American Sociological Review, 59(5): 654–677. 

Persson T, Tabellini G. (1994). Is inequality harmful for growth. American 
Economic Review, 84(3): 600–621. 

Piketty T. (2007). Top income over the twentieth century: a summary 
of main findings. In Atkinson A B, Piketty T (eds) Top Income Over 
the Twentieth Century: a contrast between European and English-Speaking 
Countries. Oxford: University Press. 

Pritchett L (2006) Does learn add up add up? The return to school in 
aggregate data. In Hanushek E, Welch F (eds) Handbook of the Economics 
of Education, Volume 1. Amsterdam: North-Holland. 

34 



Ricardo D. (1817). The Works and Correspondence of David Ricardo, Vol. 1 
Principles of Political Economy and Taxation. http://oll.libertyfund.org. 
Accessed April 14. 2011. 

Roine J, Waldenström D. (2011). Common trend and shock to top incomes: 
a structural break approach. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 
forthcoming. 

Rossana RJ, Seater JJ. (1995) Temporal aggregation and economic time se- 
ries. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 13(4): 441-451. 

Schumpeter JA. (1942) From Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. New 
York: Harper. 

Schmidt-Hebbel K, Servén L. (2000). Does income inequality raise aggregate 
saving? Journal of Development Economics, 61, 417-446. 

Shaw C, McKay H. (1969). Juvenile Delinquency and Urban Areas. Chicago: 
The University of Chicago Press. 

Smith A. (1776). An Inquiry Into the Nature and Causes of Wealth of Na- 
tions. http://www.econlib.org/library/Smith/smWNCover.html. Accessed 
12 March 2011. 

Stringham EP, Hummel JR. (2010). If a pure market economy be so good, why 
doesn’t it exist? The importance of change preference versus incentive 
in social change. Quarterly Journal of Austrian Economics, 13(2): 31–52. 

Walder A G (1992). Property right and stratification in socialistic redis- 
tributive economies. American Sociological Review, 57(4): 524–539. 

Weitzman ML (1991). Price distortion and shortage deformation, or what 
happen to the soap? American Economic Review, 81(3): 401–414. 

White, H. Granger, C. W. J. (2010). Consideration of trend in time series. 
Journal of Time Series Econometrics, 3(1): 1–38. 

Zubok V. (2008). The Soviet Union and the détente of the 1970s. Cold War 
History, 8(4): 427–447. 

35 



Åslund A (2007). How Capitalism Was Built: the Transformation of Cen- 
tral and Eastern Europe, Russia, and Central Asia. New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 

36 



Appendix A 

Random walk and I(1) 
nonstationary process 

When random variable ϵ1, ..., ϵn be identically and independently distribute 
with E[ϵt] = 0, the sum 

yt = ϵ1 + ... + ϵt, t = 1,2, ... (A.1) 

be call random walk -processes. The name come from the fact that the 
time series of random walk process (A.1) tends to wonder through time 
with increase variance. The process of (A.1) can also be define use a 
AR(1) model of the form 

yt = yt−1 + ϵt, ϵt ∼ i.i.d, (A.2) 

which be now also call an I(1) nonstationary process. When a constant 
term (δ ≠ 0) be add to equation (A.2) 

yt = yt−1 + δ + ϵt, ϵt ∼ i.i.d. (A.3) 

the process be call a random walk with drift. 

37 



38 



Chapter 2 

Inequality and growth: another 
look at the subject with a new 
measure and method 

Abstract1 

Recent empirical research on the relationship between income inequality 
and economic growth have provide controversial results. Some study pre- 
dict a negative, and some a positive effect of inequality on growth. Answers 
to the controversy have usually be sought from problem in the estimation 
technique, the measure of inequality, or from some form of non-linearity in 
the relationship between inequality and growth. This study account these 
problem by use an improve measure of income distribution and paramet- 
ric group-related panel estimation. In conclusion, we find that the effect of 
inequality be likely to be non-linear. 

1A paper base on this chapter be forthcoming in the Journal of International Devel- 
opment. 

39 



2.1 Introduction 

The effect of income inequality on economic growth have be under intensive 
study for several decades, but no clear empirical regularity have emerged. 
Empirical research on the subject commenced in 1955 when Simon Kuznets 
release his study. Kuznets argue that income inequality will first increase at 
the begin of industrialization, but will even out a the economy becomes 
more developed. Although Kuznets’ data do provide some evidence of the 
existence of such a relation, the subject be only infrequently investigate 
during the next four decades. The main reason for this be the lack of data on 
income distribution. In 1996, Deininger and Squire release their Gini index, 
which quickly become the most use estimate for the income distribution in 
growth studies. 

After the release of the Gini index, panel data analysis have become some- 
what of a standard in study try to ass the effect of inequality on 
growth, mostly because a simple cross-country estimation can suffer from 
an omitted-variables bias. If region-, country-, or some group-specific factor 
affect economic growth rates, explanatory variable can capture the effect 
of these factors, and parameter estimate will not represent the true effect 
of the explanatory variable per se.2 This problem can be diminish us- 
ing panel data. Unfortunately, the result of panel data study have be 
controversial. 

In one of the first panel data study on the topic, Persson and Tabellini 
(1994) found that income inequality have a negative effect on economic growth 
rates. Li and Zou (1998) found that income inequality be positively associate 
with economic growth, a view support by Forbes (2000). Deininger Squire 
(1998) found that initial inequality in the asset distribution have a strong 
negative effect on growth, a find which have be support by Lundberg 
and Squire (2003). Recently, Banerjee and Duflo (2003), Barro (2000), Chen 
(2003), and Lin et al. (2006) have found evidence that the relationship be- 
tween income inequality and growth might be non-linear. 

2There are, for example, clear indication of this in the study by Deininger Squire 
(1998, p. 270), where country dummy affected the inequality elasticity of growth. More 
detailed analysis of problem relate to the omitted-variable bias in growth regression 
with inequality a an explanatory variable can be found in Forbes (2000). 

40 



Recent panel econometric study have generally encounter two set of 
problems. First, the Gini index of Deininger and Squire (1996) have attract 
serious criticism concern it consistency and accuracy (Atkinson and Bran- 
dolini 2001; Galbraith and Kum 2006). If the value of Deininger and Squire’s 
Gini index be flawed, then the majority of the econometric study on the 
topic be subject to errors.3 Second, estimation of income group elasticity 
in panel data with parametric method require that some group-specific 
constant be add to estimation, which may cause the inference to be con- 
ditional on the country in the sample. Non-parametric method have be 
use to avoid this problem (Lin et al. 2006, Banerjee and Duflo 2003). The 
problem with non-parametric method be that they be know to lack sta- 
tistical power compare with parametric methods. Therefore, cross-country 
estimation and group-specific fix effect estimation have usually be use 
to estimate the income group elasticity with parametric method (see, e.g., 
Chen (2003) and Forbes (2000)). This has, unfortunately, lead to question- 
able result because many of the estimate model have include a lag 
dependent variable which render the fix effect estimator inconsistent with 
small time dimension of data. 

This study us a new inequality measure compile by Galbraith and 
Kum (2006) to correct for the possible bias create by the Deininger and 
Squire (1996) Gini index. This study also present a simple parametric way 
to robustly estimate group-specific elasticity use full data coverage in a 
panel setting. The result base on non-linear GMM estimation imply that 
income inequality have have a negative effect on growth, but that the relation 
may also include non-linearities. 

This paper be organize a follows. Section 2 present the basic theo- 
ries that have be suggest to provide the causal relationship of income 
inequality on economic growth. Section 3 give more detailed description of 
the problem encounter in previous studies, and present some solution for 
these problems. Section 4 introduces the data, and section 5 give estimation 
detail and results. Section 6 concludes the finding of this study. 

3For example, Barro (2000), Banerjee and Duflo (2003), Forbes (2000), and Chen 
(2003) have use the dataset by Deininger and Squire (1996). 

41 



2.2 The theoretical effect of inequality on growth 

Several theory have be propose on how income inequality might affect 
economic growth rates. Some theory describe the long-run and others a 
short- or medium-term causal relationship of inequality on growth. Because 
this study ass the short- and/or medium-term effect of inequality on 
growth, the long-run effect be not discuss here. The theory regard 
the short- and medium-term effect of inequality on growth can be classify 
into four broad categories: credit market imperfections, political economy, 
social unrest, and save rates, which we discus next. 

2.2.1 Credit market imperfection 

Given credit market imperfections, the inequality of income be usually as- 
sum to restrict households’ opportunity for education.4 If an economy’s 
aggregate capital be small, unevenly distribute income urge capital owner 
to invest in specialization (Fishman and Simhon 2002). In this case, inequal- 
ity result in a high level of human capital, a great division of labor and 
faster economic growth. When an economy’s aggregate capital be large, more 
equal distribution of income encourages household to invest in specializa- 
tion and entrepreneurship. In this case, equality of income creates a more 
risk-free environment and a broadly-based demand for goods, which will lead 
to high employment, great division of labor, and faster economic growth. 

2.2.2 Political economy 

In a society where the mean income exceeds the median income, the idea 
of even out the distribution of income through the political process may 
arise (Bénabou 1996). In such cases, taxation and transfer payment be 
commonly use to redistribute incomes. Higher tax can lead to diminish 
investment and/or consumption. 

4To be more precise, when access to credit be limited, households’ investment opportu- 
nities depend on their asset and incomes. Thus, give credit-market imperfections, poor 
household usually forgo investment in human capital (Barro 2000). 

42 



When income be distribute unevenly, the wealthier portion of the pop- 
ulation may try to influence politician not to increase tax and income 
transfers, which can lead to a corrupt government. Corrupted administration 
cause inefficiency in the distribution of licenses, social benefits, etc. Be- 
cause the demand for license be usually high and inflexible, a rise in license 
price lower the profit of producer and investors, which be likely to reduce 
investment (Murphy et al. 1993). 

2.2.3 Unrest related to social policy 

Income inequality may motivate individual to commit crime, illegal rent- 
seek activity or other act that disturb the stability of society (Bénabou 
1996; Merton 1938). Inequality can also increase social disorganization when 
social network be disrupt in residential area (Shaw and McKay 1969). 
Social disorganization may low social capital and increase crime and delin- 
quency rates. Crime and illegal rent-seeking activity may inflict additional 
cost on producer and investors, which lower the incentive to invest (Hall 
and Jones 1999; Murphy et al. 1993). Low social capital can also increase the 
bargaining and enforcement cost of contract a the party have less trust 
in each other (Ostrom 1990). Low social capital also usually mean a more 
risk-averse society. 

2.2.4 Saving rate 

High save rate be thought to be especially important for develop 
economies, because raise an economy to a high growth path require sub- 
stantial investment (Sachs et al. 2004; Stiglitz 1969). Funds for investment 
come from aggregate saving and/or loan from abroad. Domestic investment 
can also be replace by direct foreign investment. These option be not equal 
in risk. Large-scale lending can lead to a balance of payment deficit and to 
a debt circle if the high growth path remains unattained. Direct foreign 
investment creates job and raise income in the region, but also supersedes 
domestic supply. A major portion of the profit of foreign firm be also usually 
repatriate to a foreign country, which affect the balance of payment and 
hinders the exercise of an independent monetary policy. Foreign investment be 

43 



also usually highly sensitive to economic fluctuation and speculation, which 
may cause uncontrollable shift in the balance of capital. 

Thus, increase aggregate saving may be the safest way for a develop 
country to finance it structural investment. Many theory argue that sav- 
ings rate would increase with income. These include the permanent income 
hypothesis of Friedman (1957), life-cycle hypothesis of Ando and Modigliani 
(1963), which be augment with intergenerational transfer by Kotlikoff 
and Summers (1981), and saving under liquidity constraint of Deaton (1991) 
and Seater (1997). Inequality may therefore enhance growth indirectly through 
increase aggregate saving and investment. 

2.3 Summary of the main problem encoun- 
tered in the field of study 

In this section, we present the problem associate with the Deininger and 
Squire (1996) Gini index that have be intensively use in income inequality 
study within the last 15 years. We also offer a simple parametric way to 
estimate group-related elasticity in panel data. 

2.3.1 Problems with the Deininger and Squire (1996) 
Gini index 

Many modern study on the relationship between inequality and growth 
have use the Deininger and Squire (1996) Gini index a a measure of in- 
come distribution. Most of these study rely on the “high quality” part of 
the data. However, the “high quality” dataset of Deininger and Squire have 
attract serious criticism concern it accuracy, consistency, and compara- 
bility.5 According to Atkinson and Brandolini (2001), Deininger and Squire’s 
Gini index include so many different datasets that in many case the “high 
quality” time series cannot be view a a continuous series. The different 
datasets may not be comparable between country either. These be serious 

5All this criticism also naturally applies to the “low” quality part of Deininger and 
Squire’s data. 

44 



problem for estimation, because statistical inference require that obser- 
vations be from the same parent population. If the observation be not 
comparable even within a country, there be no one parent population, and 
the parameter estimate may be spurious. Galbraith and Kum (2006) have 
also show that the income distribution estimate give by Deininger and 
Squire’s Gini index be bias in many cases. 

The problem concern the accuracy and consistency of Deininger and 
Squire’s (1996) “high quality” estimate can best be demonstrate with the 
help of an example.6 The time series of Deininger and Squire’s “high quality” 
Gini index for France, Norway, and India be present in Figure 1. The 
first thing that attracts attention be the abrupt change in the value of 
the Gini in Norway. The value of the Gini drop by 6 point between 1976 
and 1979 and rise almost 3 point between 1984 and 1986. Why would a 
Nordic welfare state have experienced such violent change in it income 
distribution when there be no major economic or societal development or 
crisis during these periods? There is, however, a far stranger result present 

Figure 1. Values of Deininger and Squire’s "high quality" Gini index for France, Norway, 

and India. Source: Deininger and Squire (1996) 

in Figure 1. According to the Deininger and Squire (1996) Gini index, India 
have a more equal income distribution than Norway in 1973 and a more equal 
income distribution than France in the 1960s and 1970s. This result be highly 

6All the value here be from the update version of Deininger and Squire’s dataset. As 
recommend by Deininger and Squire (1996), 6.6 Gini point be add to all the Gini 
value that be from the “expenditure” series. 

45 



questionable, because the poverty rate in India be one of the high in 
the develop economy in the 1990s, and the level of poverty have clearly 
decline from the 1970s (Justino 2007). Both Norway and France also have 
progressive taxation and extensive publicly finance social service by the 
1970s. 

For comparison, the time series of the EHII2008 Gini index for France, 
Norway, and India be present in Figure 2. The change in series be grad- 

Figure 2. Values of EHII2008 Gini index for France, Norway, and India. Source: 

Galbraith and Kum (2006) 

ual, a should be the case with a slowly-changing societal variable like in- 
come distribution in the absence of economic or other crises. The value of 
the Gini index for India be also clearly above those of France and Norway, 
which be reasonable consider the difference in the level of economic de- 
velopment and poverty (Justino 2007). The effect of the economic downturn 
on income distribution in the Nordic country at the begin of the 1990s 
be also present in the series for Norway. 7 As point out by Atkinson and 
Brandolini (2001), the most severe problem in the "high quality" dataset of 
Deininger and Squire (1996) be it inconsistency. Like Norway, there be sev- 
eral other country which, accord to Deininger and Squire’s Gini index, 

7Aaberge et al. (2002) argue that very generous unemployment benefits, a different type 
of unemployment compare to many previous economic downturns, and the method use 
to calculate the Gini index have probably contribute to the small change in the income 
distribution in Norway during the economic downturn at the begin of the 1990s. In 
other Nordic countries, e.g. Finland and Sweden, the economic downturn and the growth 
of unemployment be more severe. 

46 



exhibit some rather aggressive change in their income distribution within 
relatively short time period without a clear economic rationale. 

These problem in the widely-used Deininger and Squire (1996) Gini index 
have some profound implications. In the bad case, all previous study on 
the topic use this Gini index have produce nonsense estimate for the 
effect of income inequality on growth. Even if the parameter estimate of 
income inequality have not be spurious, they still could not be trust 
because the value of Deininger and Squire’s index may have be erroneous. 
It be thus likely that we have only a few study on the subject whose result 
we can trust, i.e., those study that have not use their index a a measure 
of income distribution.8 These include Castelló-Climent (2010), who find 
that inequality have a negative effect on growth in low and middle-income 
economies, Frazer (2006), who do not find general support for the Kuznets 
hypothesis of an invert relation between inequality and growth use non- 
parametric methods, and Lin et al. (2006), who find support for the Kuznets 
hypothesis use semi-parametric methods. 

The EHII2008 inequality measure use in this study have be built "on 
top" of the Deininger and Squire (1996) Gini index, a method suggest by 
Atkinson and Brandolini (2001) (Galbraith and Kum 2006). Galbraith and 
Kum have estimate their inequality measure use the various income mea- 
sures of Deininger and Squire’s data set, the set of measure of the dispersion 
of pay in the manufacturing sector, and the manufacturing proportion of the 
population a explanatory variables.9 According to Galbraith and Kum, the 
EHII2008 inequality measure have three clear advantage over Deininger and 
Squire’s Gini index. It have more than 3000 estimates, while Deininger and 
Squire have only about 700 “high quality” estimates. The EHII2008 get it 

8It be of course possible that measure of income distribution use in these study have 
also be flawed, but, for example, Frazer (2006) us the UNU-WIDER (World Institute 
for Development Economics Research of the United Nations University) dataset, which be 
consider to be clearly more reliable than the dataset of Deininger and Squire (1996). 

9First, Galbraith and Kum (2006) regress the Deininger and Squire (1996) Gini index 
on the explanatory variable to see which be the most important explanatory variable 
and then use them to estimate the EHII2008 inequality measure. The large unexplained 
(residual) variation, which be the problem in the index of Deininger and Squire, be thus 
eliminate from the EHII2008 measure. 

47 



accuracy from the industrial data publish annually by the United Nations 
Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO). Changes over time and dif- 
ferences across country in pay dispersion be thus reflect in income in- 
equality. All estimate be also adjust to household gross income, which 
make them more congruent. Values of the EHII2008 also correspond to the 
estimate for income distribution of other research institutes, such a the 
OECD and the UNU-Wider,10 good than those of the Deininger and Squire 
Gini index (Föster & Pearson 2002, Galbraith & Kum 2004). 

2.3.2 Estimation of group-related elasticity 

Various modern study have use non-parametric method to ass the pos- 
sible non-linearity in the relation between inequality and growth (e.g., Baner- 
jee and Duflo (2003); Lin et al. (2006)). The problem with non-parametric 
method be that they be know to lack statistical power compare with 
parametric methods, especially in the mid-sized sample typically use in 
growth studies. That be why many study have try to avoid the use of non- 
parametric method by impose some restriction on the data. For example, 
Forbes (2000) have conduct a sensitivity analysis use fix effect to esti- 
mate the elasticity of growth with respect to inequality separately in different 
income groups. Her result show that the inequality elasticity of growth be 
positive and do not vary between different income group of countries. But 
Forbes us fix effect in a model that include a lag dependent variable, 
which lead to bias parameter estimate when the time dimension of the 
data be fixed.11 This creates a problem face the study of non-linear relation 
in the dynamic panel set use the parametric approach. Specifically, the 
group-specific constant be likely to lead to inference that be conditional 
on the particular country include in the data, and there be usually not 
enough observation among different group for feasible group- or country- 
specific instrumental estimation.12 

10World Institute for Development Economics Research of the United Nations Univer- 
sity. 

11For consistency, it be require that the time dimension of the data tends to infinity. 
12For example, the small group of Forbes (2000, p. 883) have only 48 and 54 obser- 

vations, which be clearly too few to obtain asymptotic efficiency in instrumental variable 

48 



Some econometrician argue that the statistical inference, when use in- 
dividual constant in panel data, be conditional on the individual include in 
the sample (Baltagi 2008, p. 14). This be because the model use individual 
constant be thought to include only the information confine to the indi- 
vidual effect present in that particular sample (Hsiao 2003, p. 43). In other 
words, if we use dummy variable to “earmark” each individual country or 
group in our dataset, our inference would be restrict to just those indi- 
viduals, not the population. This problem be closely link to fix effects, 
or the least square dummy variable estimator, a the individual effect be 
treat a parameter to be estimated. 

If we want to study the possible non-linearities in the relationship be- 
tween inequality and growth with respect to the level of economic develop- 
ment, for example, we would need to classify the country in our dataset in 
some way (e.g., a poor, middle-income, and rich) by use a set of dummy 
variables. As mention above, this may restrict our inference to just the 
sample employed. However, this problem can be ‘bypassed’ quite easily by 
use a non-linear (instrumental variables) estimator like the GMM. The 
idea be to estimate group-related elasticity implicitly use a set of group- 
related instrumental variables. This can be do by group the individual 
in the sample, create a group-related explanatory variable by link each 
explanatory variable to each group, and attach some group-related instru- 
mental variable to each of the group-related explanatory variables. The new 
group-related variable be use to estimate some set of unknown parameter 
drawn from the parameter space. Estimation be carry out implicitly with 
the non-linear instrumental variable estimator use a set of group-related 
instrumental variables, make the inference unconditional or marginal with 
respect to the population. 

In practice, however, there be a problem with this method. The number 
of estimate parameters, p, be of the order of the product of the number of 
groups, ng, and the number of explanatory variables, K, namely p =Kng +1. 
So if the number of individual in the data be large than the time dimension 
of the data, we end up with a very small number of degree of freedom rather 

estimations. Thus, Forbes be force to use a fix effect estimator, which be not likely to 
be consistent (see previous footnote). 

49 



quickly. Thus, in order for the method to work we need to have a sufficiently 
small number of group with respect to the time dimension. 

2.4 Data 

The data use in this study consists of the follow variables: real GDP 
per caput with the base year of 1996, change in real GDP per capita, gross 
investment a a portion of real GDP per capita, average year of schooling, 
the Gini index of Deininger and Squire (1996), and the EHII2008 inequality 
measure of Galbraith and Kum (2006). The data cover the year 1965 - 2000, 
and be mostly compile from the Penn-World table (Heston et al. 2006). 
Exceptions be the EHII2008 inequality measure, which be acquire from 
the University of Texas Inequality Project, the estimate for average year of 
school which be acquire from the dataset of Barro and Lee (2000), and 
the Gini index, which be acquire from the World Bank’s Measuring Income 
Inequality Database. The list of country be present in the appendix. 

Table 2.1: Descriptive statistic 
variable mean std. deviation min. max. 
GDP 6001.12 6787.93 115.19 34364.50 
GDP growth (%) 2.076 5.408 -53.119 27.254 
D&S Gini index 37.414 8.574 20.917 57.900 
EHII2008 ineq. measure 40.828 6.651 24.156 57.213 
investment (%) 17.321 8.869 2.237 69.523 
average school 5.293 2.795 0.380 12.250 

2.5 Estimation 

Several model specification have be suggest in econometric growth stud- 
y use the Gini index a an explanatory variable.13 Here, a basic Barro-type 
extend version of the neo-classical growth model be use to make the result 

13See, for example, Forbes (2000), Barro (2000) and Persson and Tabellini (1994). 

50 



comparable. Estimation be base on the follow model: 

log(growthit) = α + β1log(GDPi,t−1) + β2log(investmenti,t−1) 
+β3log(educationi,t−1) + β4log(inequalityi,t−1) + κit 

(2.1) 

where κit be the residual, which include both the possible country-specific ef- 
fect, µi, and the error term, ϵit (µi ∼ i.i.d.(0, σ2u), ϵit ∼ i.i.d.(0, σ2ϵ )). Growth be 
measure a five-year average to control for short-run economic fluctuation 
a in Islam (1995). The average growth rate during each five-year period be 
regress on the value of the explanatory variable in the year immediately 
precede each period.14 The use of five-year interval mean that there are, 
at most, eight observation available for each country. Since the instrumenta- 
tion of endogenous variable will drop the maximum number of observation 
in the estimation to five for each country, the estimation cover the year 
from 1975 to 2000 in practice. 

As show by Forbes (2000), the estimation of equation (2.1) be compli- 
cat by the endogeneity of the GDP, which can be demonstrate by write 
the GDP growth a the difference in level of income and add incomei,t−1 
to both sides: 

log(incomeit) = α + γlog(incomei,t−1) + β2log(investmenti,t−1) 
+β3log(educationi,t−1) + β4log(inequalityi,t−1) + κit, 

(2.2) 

where γ = β1+1. Clearly E(κitincomei,t−1) /= 0. In panel data, all explanatory 
variable can correlate with the (possible) country-specific effect, and this have 
to be take into account in the estimation. Because of this, and because model 
(2.1) be dynamic by nature, estimation be do with the generalize method 
of moment estimator (GMM) (Arellano and Bond 1991). The benefit of the 
GMM include heteroskedasticity not affect it and it be easily equip 
to withstand autocorrelation. 

In this paper, the first and second lag of the first difference of all ex- 
planatory variable be use a instrument for the explanatory variable in 
level (Arellano and Bower 1995).15 Thus, (Xi,t−2−Xi,t−3) and (Xi,t−3−Xi,t−4) 
be use a instrument for Xi,t−1, and (Xi,t−3 −Xi,t−4) and (Xi,t−4 −Xi,t−5 ) 

14The average growth rate in 1986 to 1990, for example, be regress against the value 
of the explanatory variable in 1985. 

15The correlation between difference and level commonly diminishes rapidly after the 

51 



be use a instrument for Xi,t−2, etc. It be therefore assume that all the 
explanatory variable be predetermine such that E(ϵitX′is) = 0 ∀ t > s, 
where X be the matrix of explanatory variables. 

The reason for estimate equation (2.1) in level be the fact that trans- 
form the data with first differencing or orthogonal deviation to elimi- 
nate the unobserved individual effect also eliminates the individual country- 
related information in those effects.16 By eliminate individual effects, we 
may actually create a spuriously good fit for our data, because we also 
remove some of the individual variation present in the data. 

Table 2 present the mean and standard deviation of the five-year av- 
erage growth rate and simple correlation coefficient between the five-year 
growth rate and the EHII2008 inequality measure in level and in first differ- 
ences. According to the mean and standard deviation show in table 2.2, 

Table 2.2: Summary statistic for 5 year average growth rate and the 
EHII2008 inequality measure 
variable mean s.d. 
5 year average growth rate in level 5.951 3.478 
5 year average growth rate in first-diff. -0.514 3.998 
variable corr. p-value 
5 year aver. gr. and EHII2008 in level -0.1694*** 0.0005 
5 year aver. gr. and EHII2008 in in first diff. 0.1006 0.0656 
5 year aver. gr. in level and EHII2008 in first diff. -0.217*** <.0001 
5 year aver. gr. in first-diff. and EHII2008 in level 0.079 0.1322 

S.d. stand for the standard deviation of the variable. Corr. give the value of the simple 

correlation coefficient between the growth rate and the EHII2008 inequality measure in 

level and in first differences. P-value give the p-value of the simple correlation coefficient. 

not much variation would be lose in differencing the five-year average growth 
rate. However, the simple correlation coefficient tell a different story. When 
the average growth rate be give in levels, the correlation coefficient with the 

second lag. Thus, only the first two lag of difference be usually relevant for the identifi- 
cation. Using too many moment condition could also result in bias in the GMM estimator 
(Ziliak 1997). 

16These unobserved country effect reflect, among other things, the difference in the 
initial level of efficiency (Bond et al. 2001). 

52 



EHII2008 inequality measure be negative regardless of the form in which the 
EHII2008 be give (i.e., in first difference or levels). The correlation coeffi- 
cient be positive if the average growth rate be present in first differences. 
This indicates that, although the external variation do not seem to change 
much in first-differencing, some information be clearly lost, which be very likely 
to affect the inference drawn from the data. That is, the result of our estima- 
tion could be totally different if we use first-differenced data. The result in 
table 2.2 thus indicate that remove individual effect by first-differencing 
run the risk of cause erroneous inference. 

The estimation result of equation (2.1) be present in table 3. The 
Newey-West estimator with lag one be use a the GMM estimator’s weight 
matrix to account for autocorrelation in the variable appear in the or- 
thogonality conditions. Hansen’s J test be use to evaluate the validity of 
extra instruments. According to the test, the orthogonality condition seem 
quite realistic for the chosen set of instruments. According to the result 
of GMM estimation present in table 2.3, only lag GDP per caput be 
statistically significant at the 5% level. However, the result may have be 
affected by the small sample bias, because the GMM estimator may exhibit 
substantial bias in dynamic panel data model estimation with small sample 
(Hayakawa 2007). 

To diminish the possible bias, we estimate the equation (2.1) use only 
the EHII2008 a a measure of income distribution. This increase the number 
of country include in estimation to 70 and the number of observation to 
263.17 According to result present in table 2.4, the elasticity of growth with 
respect to inequality be about -0.014. The elasticity of growth with respect to 
lag GDP be approximately -0.007. The elasticity of growth with respect to 
investment be about 0.028. The elasticity of growth with respect to average 
year of school be approximately 0.008. 

The GMM estimation result in table 2.4 be in line with general economic 
theory, contrary to those in table 2.3, where, for example, the coefficient 
of investment be not statistically significant. Although there be several 

17Countries that have observation in 4 consecutive estimation period be include 
in the estimation. This be the minimum number of observation because 3 time series 
observation be lose due to instrumentation. 

53 



Table 2.3: Estimation result for growth rate I 
Estimator: FE-OLS FE-OLS GMM GMM 
Constant 0.0173 0.0303** 0.0588* 0.0719*** 

(0.0077) (0.0106) (0.0281) (0.0188) 
GDPi,t−1 -0.0031**** -0.0032**** -0.0044*** -0.0054 

(0.0004) (0.0003) (0.0012) (0.0031) 
investmentsi,t−1 0.0025 -0.0086 0.0091 0.0041 

(0.0076) (0.0073) (0.0140) (0.0124) 
year of schoolingi,t−1 0.0030* 0.0016 0.0035 0.0048 

(0.0014) (0.0012) (0.0024) (0.0059) 
D&S gini indexi,t−1 -0.0027 - -0.0628 - 

(0.0021) (0.0572) 
EHII2008i,t−1 - 0.0034 - -0.0079 

(0.0027) (0.0055) 
country 34 34 34 34 
observation 183 203 103 136 
Hansen test - - 0.27 (8) 0.92 (8) 

* = p<.05, ** = p<.01, *** = p<.001, **** = p<.0001. Standard error be present 

in parentheses. Hansen stand for Hansen’s test for overidentifying restriction and the 

number of instrument be present in parentheses. All OLS estimation be do use 

White heteroskedasticity-consistent standard error and covariances. First and second lag 

of first difference be use a instrument for explanatory variable in GMM estimation. 

A Newey-West estimator with lag one be use a the GMM estimator’s weight matrix to 

account for autocorrelation in the variable appear in the orthogonality conditions. 

54 



Table 2.4: Estimation result for growth rate II 
Estimator: FE-OLS GMM 
Constant 0.0336**** 0.0979*** 

(0.0087) (0.0274) 
GDPi,t−1 -0.0026**** -0.0070** 

(0.0003) (0.0023) 
investmentsi,t−1 -0.0055 0.0277* 

(0.0042) (0.0137) 
average schoolingi,t−1 -0.0014 0.0082* 

(0.0009) (0.0037) 
EHII2008i,t−1 -0.0010 -0.0142* 

(0.0023) (0.0065) 
country 70 70 
observation 413 263 
Hansen test - 4.61 (8) 

* = p<.05, ** = p<.01, *** = p<.001, **** = p<.0001. Standard error be present 

in parentheses. Hansen stand for Hansen’s test for overidentifying restriction and the 

number of instrument be present in parentheses. All OLS estimation be do use 

White heteroskedasticity-consistent standard error and covariances. First and second 

lag of first difference be use a instrument for explanatory variable in GMM 

estimation. A Newey-West estimator with lag one be use a the GMM estimator’s 

weight matrix to account for autocorrelation in the variable appear in the 

orthogonality conditions. 

55 



possible reason for this strange result, include sample selection, one likely 
explanation be that the result in table 2.3 may have suffer from small 
sample bias. 

The result in table 2.4 thus imply that the inequality elasticity of growth 
be negative. There is, however, reason to doubt the congruency of this rela- 
tionship. Hineline (2007) have found that estimate coefficient of explana- 
tory variable generally use in growth regression differ substantially between 
OECD and non-OECD countries. Barro (2000) have also found that the coeffi- 
cient of inequality in growth regression may differ between the income group 
of countries. Sensitivity analysis be thus need to test the robustness of the 
results. The sensitivity analysis be conduct use the method suggest in 
section 3.2. 

As explain in section 3.2, in order to study the elasticity of economic 
growth with respect to explanatory variable separately in different group 
of countries, the estimate equation must include group-related dummy 
and group-related variables, and every group-related variable must have it 
own group-related instrument.18 To estimate the elasticity of growth with 
respect to inequality in OECD and non-OECD countries, the equation (2.1) 
be transform into: 

log(growthit) = β1OECDi + β2NOECDi 
+ (β3OECDi + β4NOECDi)log(GDPi,t−1) 
+ (β5OECDi + β6NOECDi)log(investmenti,t−1) (2.3) 
+ (β7OECDi + β8NOECDi)log(educationi,t−1) 
+ (β9OECDi + β10NOECDi)log(inequalityi,t−1) + κit 

where OECD be a dummy variable for OECD economies, NOECD be a dummy 
variable for non-OECD economies, and κit be the residual, which include 
both the possible country-specific effect, µi, and the error term, ϵit (µi ∼ 
i.i.d.(0, σ2u), ϵit ∼ i.i.d.(0, σ2)). 

To estimate the elasticity of growth with respect to the Gini index in 

18This mean that, for example, if we have a group of OECD country marked by dum- 
mies, this group need to have it own set of explanatory variable and their instrument 
in the dataset. 

56 



different income group of countries, equation (2.1) be transform into: 

log(growthit) = β1dri + β2dmi + β3dpi 
+ (β4dri + β5dmi + β6dpi)log(GDPi,t−1) 
+ (β7dri + β8dmi + β9dpi)log(investmenti,t−1) (2.4) 
+ (β10dri + β11dmi + β12dpi)log(educationi,t−1) 
+ (β13dri + β14dmi + β15dpi)log(inequalityi,t−1) + κit 

where dri be a dummy variable for rich economies, dmi be a dummy variable for 
middle-income economies, dpi be a dummy variable for poor economies, and 
κit be the residual, which include both the possible country-specific effect, 
µi, and the error term, ϵit (µi ∼ i.i.d.(0, σ2u), ϵit ∼ i.i.d.(0, σ2ϵ )). 

Table 2.5 show the result of the non-linear Newey-West GMM estima- 
tion of equation (2.3) and (2.4) for inequality. As before, the Newey-West 
estimator be base on one lag. Group-related first and second lag of first 
difference be use a instrument for group-related explanatory variables. 
According to the Hansen’s J test, orthogonality condition cannot be reject 
for the chosen set of instrument in all estimation (results not shown). 

The magnitude of the effect of inequality be quite different between the 
two measure in both OECD and non-OECD countries, although none of 
the parameter estimate of the OECD and the non-OECD country be 
statistically significant at the 5% level in either group of countries. The 
inequality elasticity of growth varies even more between the two measure 
in income group estimation. The parameter estimate of the Deininger and 
Squire (1996) Gini index be positive in the group of country whose GDP 
per caput be under $1000 and over $2500 in 1965 and negative in the re- 
maining income groups. However, the parameter estimate of the Gini index 
be not statistically significant at the 5% level in any of the income groups. 

The effect of inequality seem more robust across income group when the 
EHII2008 be use a a measure of inequality.19 The effect be negative in all 
income group except in the group of country whose GDP per caput be 

19The difference between the measure may be due to sample selection a there be great 
difference in the number of country include in estimation between the two measures. 
This difference could also result from small-sample bias in the GMM estimator or from 
inconsistency in the Deininger and Squire (1996) dataset. 

57 



Table 2.5: Sensitivity analysis: GMM estimation on growth elasticity of in- 
equality measure in select group of country 

Coefficient of Standard 
ineq. measure error Countries Observations 

Whole sample D&S -0.0368 0.0416 34 103 
Whole sample EHII2008 -0.0142* 0.0065 70 263 

OECD D&S -0.0004 0.0033 15 103 
non-OECD D&S -0.0065 0.0102 34 103 

OECD EHII2008 -0.0043 0.0073 19 263 
non-OECD EHII2008 -0.0156 0.0097 49 263 

Income groups: 
D&S: 
<$500 -0.0137 0.0118 8 103 
>$500 - <$2000 -0.0014 0.0042 13 103 
>$2000 -0.0078 0.0101 13 103 

D&S: 
<$1000 0.0015 0.0052 11 103 
>$1000 -<$2500 -0.0049 0.0044 14 103 
>$2500 0.00001 0.0065 9 103 

EHII2008: 
<$500 -0.0230* 0.0098 18 263 
>$500 - <$2000 -0.0109 0.0099 37 263 
>$2000 -0.0031 0.0065 15 263 

EHII2008: 
<$1000 -0.0016 0.0120 33 263 
>$1000 -<$2500 -0.0142* 0.0065 14 263 
>$2500 0.0108 0.0073 9 263 

* = p<.05. Countries denote the number of country marked with dummy variable in the dataset. Ob- 

servations give the total number of observatios include in the estimation. D&S denotes the Gini index 

by Deininger and Squire (1996) and the EHII2008 inequality measure by Galbraith and Kum (2006). Es- 

timation of group-elasticities be do use group-related dummy and instrument in the whole dataset. 

First and second lag of first difference be use a instrument for explanatory variable in GMM estima- 

tion. A Newey-West estimator with lag one be use a the GMM estimator’s weight matrix to account for 

autocorrelation in the variable appear in the orthogonality conditions. 

58 



over $2500 in 1965. The parameter estimate be also statistically significant in 
the group with GDP per caput under $500 and between $1000 and $2500 
in 1965, but not in the group with GDP per caput under $1000 in 1965. 
Results obtain use the EHII2008 inequality measure do thus indicate 
that the relationship between income inequality and growth may be non- 
linear, a find which be quite well in line with those obtain with non- or 
semi-parametric method (Banerjee and Duflo 2003; Lin et al. 2006). 

2.6 Conclusions 

Our result show that the effect of income inequality on economic growth 
be statistically significant and negative when use a new measure of income 
distribution, the EHII2008 measure of inequality. However, group-related es- 
timation reveal that although the negative effect of inequality on growth 
dominates, there be some non-linearities in the relationship. 

Many previous study have bypass the problem in the commonly use 
measure of income distribution, i.e. the Deininger and Squire (1996) Gini 
index, mostly because there have be no other measure of income distri- 
bution available. However, it be likely that Deininger and Squire’s dataset 
contains inconsistency such that all the result obtain use it be in 
doubt. The EHII2008 inequality measure use in this study can be assume 
to be more consistent. The data coverage be also clearly extend compare 
to Deininger and Squire’s data. Previous study have usually only be able 
to use data on 40-50 country at most while we use information on 70 coun- 
tries. Because of this, dynamic panel data estimation may have suffer from 
small-sample bias in previous studies. We also include data on sub-Saharan 
African economies, on which there be basically no data in Deininger and 
Squire’s dataset. 

Results may have be influence by sample selection bias and measure- 
ment error. Since, at it best, the data include only about one-third of 
all the country in the world, systematic error may have influence the 
findings. The EHII2008 inequality measure be not an unflawed estimator of 
income distribution either, because it be only a representation of statistical 
summaries, like the Gini index. Thus, the level of inequality give by the 

59 



EHII2008 inequality measure may not represent the true level of inequality 
in the country in question. It should also be note that the result describe 
only the short- or medium-term relationship between inequality and growth, 
and the long-run relationship remains an open question. 

In spite of these inevitable reservations, the present finding can be con- 
sidered more reliable than those of many previous studies. This be mostly 
due to inaccuracy and inconsistency in the Gini index by Deininger and 
Squire (1996). Use of the EHII2008 inequality measure also greatly increase 
the data coverage thus diminish the small sample bias and the possibil- 
ity of systematic error in estimation. In previous studies, the examination 
of group-related growth elasticity of inequality by parametric method be 
also complicate by statistical obscurities. The use of group-related constant 
in estimation be statistically dubious, and the asymptotic property of esti- 
mators suffer greatly where several parameter be estimate use only a 
few dozen observations. However, a be show here, the problem relate 
to the use of country constant in panel data can be bypass in a statistically 
meaningful way by use a non-linear estimator. 

60 



Bibliography 

Aaberge R, Wennemo T, Bjorklund A, Jantti M, Pedersen P J, Smith N 
(2002). Unemployment shock and income distribution: how do the Nordic 
country fare during their crises? Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 
102(1): 77–99. 

Ando A, Modigliani F. (1963) The "life cycle" hypothesis of savings: aggre- 
gate implication and tests. The American Economic Review, 53(1): 55–84. 

Arellano M, Bond S. (1991). Some test of specification for panel data: Monte 
Carlo evidence and an application to employment equations. Review of 
Economic Studies, 58(2): 277 - 97. 

Arellano M, Bover O. (1995). Another look at the instrumental variable 
estimation of error-components models. Journal of Econometrics, 68(1): 
29–51. 

Atkinson A, Brandolini A. (2001). Promise and pitfall in the use of secondary 
data-sets: income inequality in OECD country a a case study. Journal 
of Economic Literature, 39(3):771–799 

Baltagi B. (2008). Econometric analysis of panel data. John Wiley & Sons, 
West Sussex 

Banerjee A, Duflo E. (2003). Inequality and growth: what can the data say? 
Journal of Economic Growth, 8(3):267-299. 

Barro R. (2000). Inequality and growth in a panel of countries. Journal of 
Economic Growth, 5(1):5-32 

61 



Barro RJ, Lee J-W. (2000). International data on educational attainment: 
update and implications. CID work paper No. 42. Harvard. 

Bénabou R. (1996). Inequality and growth. In NBER macroeconomics an- 
nual, Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, (eds.). Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. 

Bond S, Hoeffler A, Temple J. (2001). GMM estimation of empirical growth 
models. CEPR discussion paper 3048. London. 

Castelló-Climent A. (2010). Inequality and growth in advanced economies: 
an empirical investigation. Journal of Economic Inequality, 8(3): 293–321. 

Chen, B-L. (2003). An inverted-U relationship between inequality and long- 
run growth. Economic Letters, 78(2):205-212. 

Deaton, A. (1991). Saving and liquidity constraints. Econometrica, 59(5): 
1221–1248. 

Deininger K, Squire L. (1998). New way look at old issues: inequality and 
growth. Journal of Development Economics, 57(2): 259–287. 

Deininger K, Squire L. (1996). A new data set measure income inequality. 
World Bank Economic Review, 10(3):565-591 

Dynan K, Skinner J, Zeldes S. (2004). Do rich save more? Journal of Political 
Economy, 112(2): 397-444 

Fishman A, Simhon A. (2002). The division of labor, inequality and growth. 
Journal of Economic Growth, 7(2): 117–136. 

Forbes K. (2000). A reassessment of the relationship between inequality and 
growth. The American Economic Review, 90(4): 869-87. 

Frazer G. (2006). Inequality and development across and within countries. 
World Development, 34(9):1459-1481. 

Friedman, M. (1957). A Theory of Consumption Function. Princeton Univer- 
sity Press. 

62 



Föster M, Pearson M. (2003). Income distribution and poverty in the OECD 
area: Trends and drive forces. Economic Studies, 49(4):479–513. 

Galbraith J, Kum H. (2006). Estimating the inequality of household incomes: 
a statistical approach to the creation of a dense and consistent global data 
set. UTIP work paper no. 22. Levy. 

Hall RE, Jones CI. (1999). Why do some country produce so much more 
output per worker than others? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1): 
83–116. 

Hayakawa K. (2007). Small sample bias property of the system GMM esti- 
mator in dynamic panel data models. Economic Letters, 95(1): 32–38. 

Heston A, Summer R, Aten B. (2006). Penn World Table version 6.2. Center 
for International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices. Univer- 
sity of Pennsylvania. 

Hsiao C. (2003). Analysis of Panel Data. New York: Cambridge University 
Press. 

Islam N. (1995). Growth empirics: a panel data approach. Quarterly Journal 
of Economics, 110(4): 1127–1170. 

Jong-sun Y, Khagram S. (2005). A comparative study of inequality and cor- 
ruption. American Sociological Review, 70(1): 136–157. 

Justino P. (2007). Social security in develop countries: Myth or necessity? 
Evidence from India. Journal of International Development, 19(3): 367– 
382. 

Kotlikoff L, Summers L. (1981). The role of intergenerational transfer in 
aggregate capital accumulation. The Journal of Political Economy, 89(4): 
706-732. 

Kuznets S. (1955). Economic growth and income inequality. American Eco- 
nomic Review, 45(1): 1-29. 

Li H, Heng-Fu Z. (1998). Income inequality be not harmful for growth: Theory 
and evidence. Review of Development Economics, 2(3): 318–334. 

63 



Lin SC, Huang HC, Weng HW. (2006). A semi-parametric partially linear in- 
vestigation of the Kuznets’ hypothesis. Journal of Comparative Economics, 
34(3): 634–647. 

Lundberg M, Squire L. (2003). The simultaneous evolution of growth and 
inequality. The Economic Journal, 113(487): 325–344. 

Merton RK. (1938). Social structure and anomie. American sociological re- 
view, 3(5): 672–695. 

Murphy KM, Shleifer A, Robert BW. (1993). Why be rent-seeking so costly 
to growth. American Economic Review, 83(2): 409-14. 

Ostrom E. (1990). Governing the Commons. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer- 
sity Press. 

Persson T, Tabellini G. (1994). Is inequality harmful for growth. American 
Economic Review, 84(3): 600–621. 

Sachs J, McArthur J, Scmidt-Traub G, Kruk M, Bahadur C, Faye M, McCord 
G. (2004). Ending Africans poverty trap. Brooking Papers of Economic 
Activity, 1: 117–240. 

Seater, John J. (1997). An optimal control solution to the liquidity constraint 
problem. Economics Letters, 54, pp. 127-134. 

Shaw C, McKay H. (1969). Juvenile Delinquency and Urban Areas. Chicago: 
The University of Chicago Press. 

Stiglitz J. (2002). Globalization and Its Discontents. New York: W.W. Norton 
& Company inc. 

Sukiassyen G. (2007). Inequality and growth: What do the transition econ- 
omy data say? Journal of Comparative Economics, 35(1): 35-56. 

Ziliak JP. (1997). Efficient estimation with panel data when instrument be 
predetermined: An empirical comparison of moment-condition estimators. 
Journal of Business & Economic Statiscs, 15(4): 419-431. 

64 



Appendix B 

Country list 

65 



Table B.1: Country list 
Algeria Italy 
Australia Jamaica 
Austria Japan 
Bangladesh Jordan 
Barbados Kenya 
Belgium Malawi 
Bolivia Malaysia 
Cameroon Malta 
Canada Mauritius 
Central African Republic Mexico 
Chile Netherlands 
Colombia Nicaragua 
Costa Rica Norway 
Cyprus Pakistan 
Denmark Panama 
Dominican Republic Papua New Guinea 
Ecuador Philippines 
Egypt Poland 
El Salvador Portugal 
Fiji Senegal 
Finland Singapore 
France South Africa 
Germany Spain 
Ghana Sri Lanka 
Greece Sweden 
Haiti Syria 
Honduras Taiwan 
Hong Kong Togo 
Hungary Tunisia 
Iceland Turkey 
India United Kingdom 
Indonesia United States 
Iran Uruguay 
Ireland Venezuela 
Israel Zimbabwe 

66 



Chapter 3 

Estimating the long-run 
relationship between income 
inequality and economic 
development 

Abstract1 

There be several theory describe the effect of income inequality on eco- 
nomic growth. These theory usually predict that there exists some optimal, 
steady-state growth path between inequality and development. This study 
us a new measure of income distribution and panel data cointegration 
method to test for the existence of such a steady-state equilibrium rela- 
tion. It be show that there be a long-run equilibrium relationship between 
the variables, and that this relationship be negative in developed economies. 

1A paper base on this chapter be forthcoming in the Empirical Economics. 

67 



3.1 Introduction 

The decade long empirical research on the relationship between income in- 
equality and economic development have produce controversial results, with 
the direction and the statistical significance of the effect of income inequal- 
ity on economic growth change between study (e.g., Banerjee and Duflo 
2003, Barro 2000, Chen 2003, Forbes 2000, Li and Zou 1998, Lin et al. 2006). 
Theories have also generally be divide on the effect of income inequality 
on growth. The classical approach argues that save rate be an increase 
function of wealth. In this case, inequality will increase income of the rich 
whose marginal propensity to save be the highest. Thus, income inequality will 
lead to faster capital accumulation (Kaldor 1957; Kuznets 1955; Smith 1776). 
The political economy approach emphasizes the destabilize effect that in- 
equality may have on the society (Benhabib and Rustichini 1996). According 
to this view, equality will increase stability in the society and simulate in- 
vestment and economic growth. The credit market imperfection approach 
suggests that equality of income diminishes the effect of credit-constraints 
on human capital accumulation in developed economy (Galor and Moav 
2004). Because credit-constraints become less binding in a developed econ- 
omy where income be distribute evenly, equality of income will fasten the 
accumulation of human capital and thus accelerate economic growth. 

Despite of several theory describe the relationship between inequal- 
ity and growth, the dependence between the variable over time remains an 
open empirical question. Although we have observation on GDP from sev- 
eral consecutive years, value of commonly use Gini index (e.g., the Gini 
index by Deininger and Squire (1996)) have not be consistently measure 
over time, which have make it virtually impossible to ass the possible time 
dependence between the two variables. Some study have try to bypass 
this problem by regress the value of average growth rate of 20 years, 
or more, on the value of the Gini index and other explanatory variable 
in the first year include in the average (Chen 2003; Forbes 2000). The 
problem with this method be that these multi-decade average lose a lot of 
information and there be a risk of spurious parameter estimates. The observe 
controversy in the relation between inequality and growth have also lead some 
to estimate the relation use non-parametric or semi-parametric method 

68 



(Banerjee and Duflo 2003; Frazer 2006; Lin et al. 2006). The advantage of 
non-parametric method be the fact that they can be use to estimate the 
relation between variable in both short- and long-run and robustness. The 
drawback of these method be low statistical power compare to parametric 
methods, especially in finite samples. Recently, Galbraith and Kum (2006) 
have gather a inequality measure dataset that have continuous observation 
from several countries, which enables the use of panel data time series meth- 
ods. 

From time series analysis we know that, if variable be integrate pro- 
cesses, we can learn about their long-run dependence by test whether the 
variable be cointegrated. If variable be found to be cointegrated, there ex- 
ists a stationary distribution between them, and we can estimate this steady- 
state relationship use standard estimation methods. Unfortunately, these 
rule do not apply to panel data per se. The inference and estimation in panel 
cointegrated data differs from that in regular time series, because the asymp- 
totic property of the estimator in panel cointegrated regression model be 
different from those of time series cointegrated regression model (Baltagi 
2008; Phillips and Moon 1999). The time series regression may, for exam- 
ple, be spurious, while the panel regression utilise all cross-sections be not 
(Phillips and Moon 1999). OLS estimator be also not asymptotically unbiased 
in cointegrated panel data (Kao and Chiang 2000). 

This study us panel cointegration method and improve data on in- 
come inequality to ass the possible steady-state relationship between in- 
come inequality and economic development. According to panel unit root 
tests, both the logarithmic EHII2.1 inequality measure and the logarithmic 
GDP series seem to follow an I(1) process in country in question.2 They 
be also found to be cointegrated of order one use panel cointegration test 
developed by Pedroni (2004) and Banerjee and Carrion-i-Silvestre (2006), 
which implies that there be a long-run equilibrium relation between them. 
The cointegrating coefficient of the EHII2.1 inequality measure be estimate 
with panel dynamic OLS and panel dynamic SUR estimator and it be found 
to be negative. According to the income group estimations, this negative 

2EHII=Estimated Household Income Inequality data set by University of Texas In- 
equality Project. 

69 



relationship be robust in middle-income and rich economies. Results for de- 
veloping country be inconclusive. 

This paper be organize a follows. Section 2 present the general theory 
describe the causal relationship from income inequality to economic growth. 
Section 3 present the data and report the result of panel unit root and 
cointegration tests. Estimation detail and result be give in section 4 and 
section 5 concludes. 

3.2 The main theoretical relationship between 
inequality and growth 

3.2.1 The income approach 

In classical economic theory, inequality of income be assume to influence 
economic growth rate through saving and consumption. According to Smith 
(1776), an increase division of labor raise productivity, but saving govern 
capital accumulation, which enables production growth. When the save 
function be linear, e.g., si = myi + b, where yi be output per capita, m be the 
marginal propensity to save, and b be the per caput saving at zero income, 
aggregate save behavior in an economy be not affected by the distribution of 
income (Stiglitz 1969). However, if the save function be nonlinear, aggregate 
saving become dependent on the distribution of income. 

When the save function be linear or concave, distribution of income 
and wealth converge toward equality (Stiglitz 1969). If the save function 
be convex, i.e., the marginal propensity to save increase with income,3 un- 
eqalitarian stationary distributions, or steady-state equilibriums, be Pareto 
superior to egalitarian stationary distributions. This be because, in the case 
of a convex save function, more unequal distribution of income result 
in high capital intensity through great aggregate savings. In these une- 
galitarian steady-state equilibria, income and consumption for all individu- 
al be great than in egalitarian steady-state equilibria. In addition, in a 
steady-state equilibrium, where income be distribute unevenly, the wealth 

3The hypothesis of convex saving function be support by empirical findings, see e.g., 
Dynan et al. (2004). 

70 



of a nation be great than in the steady-state equilibrium, where income be 
distribute evenly. However, these steady-state equilibrium exist only when all 
individual have positive wealth. Thus, result may not apply, for example, to 
develop countries.4 

3.2.2 The credit-market imperfection and combine ap- 
proach 

The income approach emphasizes the effect of income inequality on saving 
and on physical capital accumulation. Credit market imperfection approach 
considers the effect of income inequality on the accumulation of human cap- 
ital (Galor and Zeira 1993). In a model by Galor and Moav (2004), the 
engine of economic growth change from physical capital to physical and hu- 
man capital in the process of economic development. The process of economic 
development be divide into two regimes, which have their own steady-state 
growth paths. 

Economies in the first regime be underdeveloped, aggregate physical cap- 
ital be small, and the rate of return to human capital be low than the rate 
of return to physical capital (Galor and Moav 2004). There be two type of 
individual in the economy: those who own the physical capital (the rich) and 
those who do not (the poor). The poor consume their entire income (wages) 
and be not engage in save and on capital accumulation. Thus, there be 
a temporary steady-state equilibrium where the poor be in poverty trap 
and the rich get richer. Inequality increase aggregate saving by increase 
the income of the rich and great aggregate saving fuel physical capital 
accumulation.5 

In the second regime, physical capital accumulation by the rich have in- 

4According to Keynes (1936), demand be the basis for investment and, because in- 
equality lower aggregate consumption, inequality of income will lead to slow economic 
growth. This argument that inequality decrease consumption be valid, if the save func- 
tion be convex. In this case, aggregate demand diminishes when income becomes more 
unequally distributed. 

5In modern less developed economies, it be possible that also human capital drive 
growth, if the capital and skill-biased technology be imported. In this case, the effect of 
inequality on growth would be mixed or negative (Galor and Moav 2004). 

71 



crease the rate of return to human capital so high that it induces human 
capital accumulation (Galor and Moav 2004). In this regime, both human and 
physical capital be engine for economic development. Since individuals’ in- 
vestment in human capital be subject to diminish marginal returns, the 
return to human capital investment be maximize when investment in hu- 
man capital be widely spread among the population. Because access to credit 
be constrained, human capital investment be maximize when income in the 
economy be distribute evenly. However, in a certain phase of economic de- 
velopment income of every individual becomes so high that credit constraint 
become less binding. In this locally stable steady-state equilibrium, the effect 
of inequality on growth becomes less significant. 

3.2.3 The political economy approach 

Political economy model assume that preference of individual be aggre- 
gate through political process. Therefore, redistribution of income and eco- 
nomic growth be driven by the political process. Political process can be 
driven by a median voter or by organize social groups. In the model by Per- 
otti (1993), the equilibrium reach by the economy depends on the initial 
distribution of income. If the aggregate capital in the economy be very small, 
redistribution of income through tax and subsidy will result in a poverty 
trap where no one be able to acquire education. In this case, more unequal dis- 
tribution of income will help the economy because in that case at least some 
individual can acquire education and increase the level of human capital 
in the economy. As economy becomes more developed, very unequal income 
distribution may diminish growth because the accumulation of more human 
capital would require that middle-income and poor individual acquire ed- 
ucation, a the rich have already educate themselves. In an rich economy, 
only the poor may increase the level of human capital in the economy and 
high steady-state growth path require that income be distribute evenly. 

72 



3.3 Time series analysis of panel data 

The theoretical model present above predict steady-state equilibrium re- 
lations, or stationary distributions, that may exist between income inequality 
and the evolution of output. The estimation of these theoretical stationary 
distribution require that we know the time series feature of the variable 
in the model. Many model also assume that income distribution and eco- 
nomic development be determine endogenously, which have to be take into 
account in the estimation.6 

3.3.1 Data 

Data for this study consist at 3 variables: real GDP per capita, Estimated 
Household Income Inequality (EHII) 2.1 measure, and portion of investment 
on GDP. Gross domestic product be state in real term with the base year 
of 1996. Investments be gross investment a a portion of GDP. The data 
on GDP and investment be from Penn World Tables (Heston et al. 2006). 
The EHII2.1 measure of inequality be from the University of Texas Inequality 
Project (Galbraith and Kum 2006). 

Many of the previous study make on the relationship between income 
inequality and economic growth have use the Gini index construct by 
Deininger and Squire (1996) a a measure on income distribution.7 The main 
reason why so many researcher have rely on the Deininger and Squire’s 
Gini index have be it allege "high quality". However, a point out by 
Atkinson and Brandolini (2001, p. 780), Deininger and Squire’s dataset in- 
cludes so many different datasets that in many case it would be "highly 
mislead to regard Deininger and Squire’s "high quality" estimate a a 
continuous series". The different country-related datasets in Deininger and 
Squire’s "high quality" dataset may also not be comparable with each other. 
These be serious problem for estimation, because the statistical inference 
require that observation be from the same parent population. If the obser- 

6Bénabou (2005) have actually suggest that endogeneity of income inequality in growth 
regression be the primary reason for the observe controversy in empirical growth studies. 

7These include Barro (2000), Banerjee and Duflo (2003), Forbes (2000), and Chen 
(2003). 

73 



vations be not comparable, there be no one coherent parent population and 
the parameter estimate may be spurious. 

Many scholar study income inequality have already switch to Gini 
index provide by UNU-Wider.8 Although UNU-Wider Gini be likely to be 
more consistent and accurate than Deininger and Squire’s Gini index, they 
share one deficiency. Both Gini index be unevenly distribute through 
time, which restricts their use in time series analysis. However, Galbraith 
and Kum (2006) have gather a EHII2.1 inequality measure, which have a 
consistent, long time series for several countries. 

Galbraith and Kum (2006) have build their measure of inequality "on 
top" of the Gini index by Deininger and Squire (1996), a method that have 
be suggest by Atkinson and Brandolini (2001). Galbraith and Kum have 
obtain their inequality measure by regress Deininger and Squire’s Gini 
coefficient on the value of explanatory variables, which include the different 
income measure of Deininger and Squire’s data set, the set of measure of 
the dispersion of pay in the manufacturing sector, and the manufacturing 
share of the population. According to Galbraith and Kum, the EHII2.1 in- 
equality measure have three clear advantage over the Deininger and Squire’s 
Gini index. It have more than 3000 estimates, while Deininger and Squire 
have only about 700 "high quality" estimates. The EHII2.1 get it accuracy 
from the Industrial data publish annually by the United Nations Indus- 
trial Development Organization (UNIDO). This way change over time and 
difference across country in pay dispersion be reflect in income inequal- 
ity. All estimate be also adjust to household gross income, which make 
them more congruent. Values of the EHII2.1 also correspond to the estimate 
of income distribution of other research institutes, such a the OECD and 
the UNU-Wider, good than those of the Deininger and Squire’s Gini index 
(Föster and Pearson 2003; Galbraith and Kum 2006). 

3.3.2 Unit root test 

There be 60 country in the EHII2.1 dataset where the time series of in- 
equality measure be consistent and at least 20 year long. After individual 

8World Institute for Development Economics Research of the United Nations Univer- 
sity. 

74 



Table 3.1: Descriptive statistic 
variable mean std. deviation min. max. 

GDP 6624.25 6750.15 145.24 32766.51 
GDP growth (%) 6.498 5.692 -27.032 72.860 
EHII2.1 inequality 39.713 6.520 23.074 58.975 
investment (%) 18.112 8.664 0.191 52.531 

unit root tests, 7 country be discard from the set because their series 
of the EHII2.1 inequality measure or GDP do not seem to follow a I(1) 
process accord to the ADF-test.9 Descriptive statistic of the remain 
53 country be present in table 1 and a list of the 53 country be present 
in the appendix. 

Most of the time series analysis method for panel data assume that there 
be no cross-unit correlation present in the panel. When deal with economic 
variables, this restriction be quite uncomfortable, because for example busi- 
ness cycle do transfer to neighbor country quite easily in modern open 
economies. To account for the obvious cross-sectional correlation present in 
the data, the result of panel unit root test allow for cross-sectional de- 
pendence be also report (Pesaran 2007). Pesaran’s test account for cross- 
sectional correlation by introduce common factors. This method capture a 
linear cross-sectional dependence, where there can be several common factor 
between the test series of the panel. 

The panel unit root test use in this study assume two different type 
of unit root processes. Test by Levin et al. (2002) (LLC) assumes a common 
unit root process, i.e., that all the country in the dataset have the same 
unit root. Test by Im et al. (2003) (IPS), Fisher type ADF and PP tests, 
present by Maddala and Wu (1999), and test by Pesaran (2007) allow for 
individual unit root processes. That is, they allow the coefficient of unit root 

9This be a precautionary method. Karlsson and Löfgren (2000) have study how few 
stationary series in the panel can alter the result of panel unit root tests. They found 
that when the time dimension of a dataset be long, small fraction of stationary series in 
the dataset result to high power and vice versa. Therefore, there be a risk that panel 
with large T would erroneously be model a stationary and panel with small T a 
non-stationary. 

75 



to differ across countries. A more detailed discussion about the use panel 
unit root test be provide in the appendix. 

Summary of the result of the five panel unit root test be present 
in table 3.2.10 Individual trend and constant be include in the test for 
GDP and inequality. For GDP it be natural to allow for both individual time 
trend and constants, because the time series of GDP usually follow a clear 
upward trend. The time series of inequality also seem to be trend in many 
countries,11 and so it be also allow to have individual time trends. GDP 
growth and investment seem not to exhibit a trend, and so only individual 
constant be include in their tests.12 All other test use the unbalanced 
panel data of 53 countries,13 except Pesaran’s test where a balance panel of 
38 country with 25 yearly observation be used.14 Summary table (years and 
country included) of the different datasets can be found in the appendix. 

According to all five tests, the logarithmic GDP and inequality seem to 
follow a I(1) process, and the series of GDP growth and investment seem 
to be stationary.15 However, a mention above, it be likely that at least 
some of the test series be cross-sectionally correlated. This would violate 
the assumption of uncorrelated residual among cross-sections. Banerjee et 
al. (2005) have study the effect of the violation of the assumption of no 
cross-unit cointegration on rejection frequency of the null hypothesis. Their 
result show that in the presence of cross-unit cointegration, the ADF, PP, 
and IPS test grossly overreject the null hypothesis of unit root with small 
time (T ) and relatively large cross-sectional (n) dimension of data. Accord- 
ing to all these tests, the null hypothesis of unit root cannot be reject in 
series of inequality and GDP. As Pesaran’s test also do not reject the null 

10All test be perform with Eviews 6, except Pesaran’s test which be do with 
Stata. Lag length have be determine use Schwarts information criterion, spectral 
estimation have be conduct with Bartlett kernel and bandwidth have be select use 
Newey-West method. 

11The time series be inspect visually. 
12If individual trend be included, the result change only marginally and both series 

be still stationary accord to all five tests. 
13Panel unit root test be also conduct use the whole dataset of 60 countries. 

Results be similar to those present in table 3.2. 
14Pesaran’s test require that the panel be balanced. 
15Results be the same when original data of 60 country be used. 

76 



Table 3.2: Panel unit root test 
variable LLC IPS ADF PP Pesaran* 

log(GDP) 9.068 15.092 15.855 16.072 0.709 
(1.0000) (1.0000) (1.0000) (1.0000) (0.761) 

GDP growth -45.913 -25.415 572.04 599.36 -12.089 
(<.0001) (<0.0001) (<.0001) (<.0001) (<.0001) 

log(inequality) 0.549 2.702 77.387 70.521 -0.790 
(0.7085) (0.9966) (0.9834) (0.9968) (0.215) 

log(investments) -6.071 -7.558 244.13 212.80 -4.529 
(<.0001) (<.0001) (<.0001) (<.0001) (<.0001) 

The p-values of the test statistic be present in parentheses. All test include individual 

effect and trend except the test for GDP growth and investment which include only 

individual effects. Lag length be determine use Schwarts information criterion. All 

other test use unbalanced panel of 53 country except Pesaran’s test, where the panel be 

balance include 38 country and 25 yearly observations. 

hypothesis for inequality and GDP, they seem very likely to be unit root 
processes.16 Because Pesaran’s test also find GDP per caput growth and 
investment to be stationary, it seem that cross-sectional correlation have 
not bias the result of traditional unit root tests. Thus, these series be 
assume to be stationary. 

3.3.3 Cointegration test 

The possible cointegration between inequality and GDP be test with panel 
cointegration test developed by Pedroni (2004), which consist of 11 different 
test statistics.17 To allow for possible cross-sectional dependence present in 
the panel, cointegration be also test with a test developed by Banerjee and 

16First differenced series be stationary accord to all panel unit root tests. GDP and 
inequality thus seem to be I(1). 

17There be 7 different test statistics, but Eviews 6 give also the result of weight 
test statistic on the first four tests. Tests statistic include the panel version of PP and 
ADF tests, a form of the average of the Phillips and Ouliaris (1990) test statistic (ρ), 
and panel variance ratio statistic (v). 

77 



Carrion-i-Silvestre (2006). A more detailed discussion about these test be 
provide in the appendix. 

Pedroni’s panel cointegration test 

The model for test for cointegration between inequality and GDP is: 

log(GDPit) = αi + δit+ γilog(inequalityit)+ βilog(investmentsit)+ ϵit, (3.1) 

where the change in GDP be explain by the change in inequality and on 
the level of investments, and (1,−γi) be the individual cointegration vector 
between inequality and GDP. Results of Pedroni’s panel cointegration test 
on equation (3.1) be present in table 3.3.18 

According to all of the 11 test statistic present in table 3.3, the series 
of inequality and GDP be cointegrated at the 5% level. The test be also 
conduct use only the inequality a an explanatory variable for GDP. 
In this case, 9 of the 11 test statistic find the GDP and inequality to be 
cointegrated.19 

If the test be conduct use only investment a an explanatory variable, 
all of the 11 test statistic find the investment and GDP to be cointegrated. 
This indicates that there might be cross-sectional cointegration relation in 
the panel of investments, which may have affected on the result of panel 
unit root tests. Cross-unit cointegration can bias the result of panel unit 
root test towards type I error, i.e., that hypothesis of unit root be reject 
far too often (Banerjee et al. 2005; Breitung and Pesaran 2008). If series be 
cross-sectionally cointegrated, the common trend present in the data may be 
identify a common factor in unit root test that model the cross-sectional 
correlation through common factors, like the Pesaran’s test, and remove 
from the analysis (Breitung and Pesaran 2008). In this case, if the remain 
idiosyncratic component be stationary, the panel unit root test have a ten- 
dency to present the time series a stationary when panel unit be actually 
nonstationary. So, although all panel unit root test found the investment 

18The test be conduct with Eviews 6. 
19If the original data of 60 country be used, 8 of the 11 test find the GDP and inequality 

to be cointegrated. 

78 



Table 3.3: Pedroni’s panel cointegration test statistic for log(GDP) and 
log(inequality) 

Within-dimension 
statistic prob. weight. statistic prob. 

panel v-statistic 49.309 <.0001 44.793 <.0001 
panel ρ-statistic 7.152 <.0001 7.329 <.0001 
panel PP-statistic 2.888 0.0062 3.494 0.0009 
panel ADF-statistic 2.489 0.0180 3.039 0.0039 

Between-dimension 
statistic prob. 

group ρ-statistic 9.417 <.0001 
group PP-statistic 4.555 <.0001 
group ADF-statistic 2.313 0.0275 

country 53 
observation 1961 

The null hypothesis be that there be no cointegration between variables. Within-dimension 

test presuppose common AR coefficient among cross sections. Between-dimension test 

presuppose individual AR coefficients. Lag length be determine with Schwarz infor- 

mation criterion. Spectral estimation be do with Bartlett method and bandwidth be 

select with Newey-West method. 

79 



to be I(0), the possibility that investment be actually I(1) process that be 
cointegrated with GDP have to be take into account in estimation.20 

Banerjee & Carrion-i-Silvestre’s cointegration test 

As with panel unit root tests, the presence of cross-sectional dependency may 
have affected the result of cointegration tests. There may also be structural 
break in the relation between inequality and GDP. To account for possi- 
ble cross-sectional dependence and structural break in the relation between 
inequality and GDP, cointegration be also test with the panel cointegra- 
tion test developed by Banerjee and Carrion-i-Silvestre (2006). Banerjee and 
Carrion-i-Silvestre’s test allows for cross-sectional dependence by introduce 
common factor in the estimate model. 

Table 3.4 report the result of Banerjee and Carrion-i-Silvestre’s panel 
cointegration test between inequality and GDP use the dataset of 38 coun- 
try with 25 yearly observations. The test allows for level and cointegration 
vector shifs.21 

According to the basic model allow just time trend in the test series, 
inequality and GDP would be cointegrated. If level and slope trend shift be 
allowed, only ρ test find the variable to be cointegrated at the 5% level. If 
both time trend and cointegration vector shift be allowed, ρ test find the 
variable to be cointegrated at 0.01% level and the t test find the variable 
to be cointegrated at the 10%level. 

Thus, inequality and GDP seem to be cointegrated even when possible 
structural break in the relation and the possible cross-sectional correlation 
present in the panel be take into account. When cointegration relation- 
ship include structural breaks, cointegration test tend to be bias towards 
accept the null hypothesis of no cointegration, whereas cross-sectional 
correlation tends to bias the result towards reject the null (Banerjee and 

20The cointegration between log(GDP) and log(inequality), and log(GDP) and 
log(investments) be also test with Johansen’s combine Fisher panel cointegration 
test developed by Maddala and Wu (1999). According to it, both GDP and inequality and 
GDP and investment be cointegrated of order one. Detailed result be available upon 
request. 

21Estimation do with Gauss. We be grateful to Carrion-i-Silvestre for provide the 
program code. 

80 



Table 3.4: Banerjee & Carrion-i-Silvestre’s cointegration test for log(GDP) 
and log(inequality) 

Pedroni model with a time trend 
statistic p-value 

Zt̂NT (λ̂) -6.434 <.0001 
Zρ̂NT (λ̂) -7.122 <.0001 

Model with level shift 
statistic p-value 

Zt̂NT (λ̂) -1.256 0.1046 
Zρ̂NT (λ̂) -3.913 <.0001 

Model with coint. vector shift 
statistic p-value 

Zt̂NT (λ̂) -1.619 0.0527 
Zρ̂NT (λ̂) -5.992 <.0001 

country 38 
observation 950 

Model with level shift include time trend and a level and slope trend shift. Model with a 

cointegrating vector shift include time trend and cointegration vector shifts. 

81 



Carrion-i-Silvestre 2006; Banerjee et al. 2004). Results present in table G.2 
imply that cross-sectional correlation and/or structural break in the relation 
between inequality and GDP have not bias the result of Pedroni’s panel 
cointegration test present in table 3.3. 

3.4 Estimation of the cointegrating coefficient 
of inequality 

3.4.1 Estimation and inference in cointegrated panel 

Conventional limit theorem assume one index (n or T ) to pas to infinity. 
The limit theory for panel with large cross-sectional (n) and time (T ) dimen- 
sion need to allow both index to pas to infinity. This have some profound 
effect for estimators. For example, the OLS estimator be not asymptotically 
unbiased, and the standard GMM estimator be inconsistent for panel cointe- 
grate data (Kao and Chiang 2000). 

Several estimator for cointegrated panel data have be proposed. Prob- 
ably the most commonly use estimator have be the fully-modified OLS 
(FM-OLS) propose by Phillips and Moon (1999) and Pedroni (2000), and 
the dynamic OLS (DOLS) propose by Kao and Chiang (2000). The major 
problem for estimator in cointegrated panel data have be the model of 
simultaneous cross-sectional and time series dependence (Phillips and Moon 
1999). This be a problem in this study, because it be likely that, at least, GDP 
series be correlate or even cointegrated across the panel. Mark and Sul 
(2003) have developed a version of DOLS estimator that allows for simul- 
taneous cross-sectional and time series dependence. It us a common time 
effect to control for cross-sectional dependency.22 

22Wagner and Hlouskova (2010) have compare the performance of different type of 
estimator for panel cointegrated data. They found that Mark and Sul’s DOLS system 
estimator (panel DOLS) performs best in the case of cross-unit correlation or cointegration 
compare to several other estimator developed for panel cointegrated data. The test 
estimator include FM-OLS present by Phillips and Moon (1999), DOLS present 
by Kao and Chiang (2000) and Mark and Sul (2003), one-step VAR, and two-step VAR 
present by Breitung (2005). 

82 



It is, of course, possible that the common time-effect cannot capture all 
the cross-sectional correlation present in the data. In this case, a panel dy- 
namic seemingly unrelated regression estimator developed by Mark et al. 
(2005) can be use to fully account for the cross-sectional dependence. Panel 
DSUR estimator can be use when the cross-section be small relative to time 
series. A more detailed discussion about panel DOLS and DSUR estimator 
can be found in the appendix. 

3.4.2 Estimation result 

The estimate model include a measure of physical capital accumulation 
(investments) and a measure of income inequality (EHII2.1). Panel DOLS 
estimation be use to estimate the follow equation: 

log(GDPit) = αi + γ′1log(investmentsit) + γ′2log(inequalityit)+ 
+λit + θt + uit, 

(3.2) 

where αi be individual constant, λit be individual trends, θt be the common 
time effect, (1,−γ′1,−γ′2) be a cointegrating vector between GDP, investment 
and inequality, and uit be a idiosyncratic error. Table 3.5 present the result 
of fix effect DOLS estimation of equation (3.2).23 

The cointegrating coefficient of investment be positive and statistically 
significant at the 5% level in all estimations. The cointegrating coefficient 
of inequality be negative and statistically significant at the 5% level in all 
estimation use the dataset with 37 yearly observations. In estimation 
use the dataset with 25 yearly observations, the cointegrating coefficient 
of inequality be not statistically significant at the 5% level when two and 
three lead and lag of the first difference be use a instrument for the 
explanatory variables. 

Thus, the result of panel DOLS estimation use the 15 country dataset 
with longer time dimension imply that the long-run growth elasticity with 
respect to income inequality would be negative. However, the result of panel 
DOLS estimation use the 38 country dataset with shorter time dimension 
be inconclusive. 

23Estimation be conduct with Gauss. Author be grateful to Donggyu Sul for provide 
the program code on his homepage. 

83 



Table 3.5: DOLS estimate of the cointegrating coefficient of inequality 
Dependent variable: log(GDP) 

Panel DOLS (leads & lags=1) 
log(investments) 0.2199*** 0.0954* 

(0.0402) (0.0455) 
log(inequality) -0.1836*** -0.0678** 

(0.0252) (0.0217) 
Panel DOLS (leads & lags=2) 
log(investments) 0.1851*** 0.1852*** 

(0.0447) (0.0433) 
log(inequality) -0.2427*** -0.0632 

(0.0287) (0.0290) 
Panel DOLS (leads & lags=3) 
log(investments) 0.1281*** 0.3847*** 

(0.0488) (0.0384) 
log(inequality) -0.3069*** -0.0375 

(0.0297) (0.0194) 

country 15 38 
year 1963-99 1972-96 
observation 816 950 

* = p<.05, ** = p<.01, *** = p<.001. Standard error of the parameter estimate be 

present in parentheses. Standard error be estimate use Andrews and Monahan’s 

Pre-whitening method. Inclusion of individual constant mean that all estimation be 

make with fix effects. Leads & lags=1 mean that first lag and lead of first difference 

of explanatory variable be use a instruments. Leads & lags=2 mean that first and 

second lead and lag of first difference be use a instruments, etc. 

84 



3.4.3 Estimation of income group-related elasticity of 
growth 

Recently, Hineline (2008) have found that the estimate coefficient of ex- 
planatory variable generally use in growth regression differ substantially 
between OECD and non-OECD countries. Panel cointegration test by Pe- 
droni (2004) and Banerjee and Carrion-i-Silvestre (2006) also allow for 
individual cointegrating coefficient between countries. It be therefore pos- 
sible that the cointegrating coefficient of inequality may differ in different 
group of countries. However, none of the theory present in section 2 
imply that there would be difference in the growth elasticity of income in- 
equality between OECD and non-OECD countries. What they do imply be 
that the growth elasticity of inequality might differ between develop and 
developed economies. 

To estimate the long-run growth elasticity of income inequality and 
physical capital accumulation in different income groups, country in the 
dataset be divide into three income groups. To make the estimation of in- 
come group asymptotically feasible, i.e., to make the group large enough, 
country be divide into three equally size groups. This be do use all 
the country in the 53 country dataset that have observation on GDP in 
1972. There be 48 such country in the dataset of 53 country and so we 
have 3 group of 16 countries. The threshold for these group become: GDP 
per caput under $1270 in 1972 for less developed countries, GDP per caput 
between $1271 and $3715 in 1972 for middle-income countries, and GDP per 
caput above $3715 in 1972 for rich countries. Table 10 present the result 
of panel DOLS estimation of equation (3.2) in different income group of 
countries.24 

The cointegrating coefficient of investment be positive and statistically 
significant in all income groups, when three lead and lag be use a instru- 
ments. The cointegrating coefficient of inequality be negative and statistically 
significant at the 5% level in middle-income and rich economy in all estima- 
tions. In less developed economies, the cointegrating coefficient of inequality 

24Estimation be conduct with Gauss. Author be grateful to Donggyu Sul for provide 
the program code on his homepage. 

85 



Table 3.6: DOLS estimate of the cointegrating coefficient of inequality in 
different income group 
Dependent variable: log(GDP) 

less developed middle-income rich 

Panel DOLS (leads & lags=1) 
log(investments) 0.1766*** 0.1000* -0.0018 

(0.0366) (0.0496) (0.0974) 
log(inequality) -0.0069 -0.1317* -0.1443* 

(0.0190) (0.0559) (0.0627) 
Panel DOLS (leads & lags=2) 
log(investments) 0.2678*** 0.0803 0.0919 

(0.0583) (0.0543) (0.0742) 
log(inequality) 0.0549* -0.1520*** -0.2417*** 

(0.0238) (0.0299) (0.0490) 
Panel DOLS (leads & lags=3) 
log(investments) 0.4492*** 0.2667*** 0.1962** 

(0.0366) (0.0397) (0.0596) 
log(inequality) 0.1014*** -0.2175*** -0.4558*** 

(0.0152) (0.0397) (0.0424) 

country 11 12 15 
year 1972-96 1972-96 1972-96 
observation 275 300 375 

* = p<.05, ** = p<.01, *** = p<.001. Standard error be present in parentheses. 

Standard error be estimate use Andrews and Monahan’s Pre-whitening method. All 

estimation include individual constants, individual trends, and common time effects. 

86 



be positive and statistically significant at the 5% level when two and three 
lead and lag be use a instruments. 

The result of table 3.6 have two implications. The elasticity of growth 
with respect to investments, i.e., physical capital accumulation, diminishes 
in accordance with the level of economic development and the elasticity of 
growth with respect to income inequality change in the process of economic 
development. In early stage of economic development, the effect of income 
inequality on growth be positive, but turn negative a the economy becomes 
more developed. The negative growth elasticity of inequality also increase 
in accordance with the level of economic development. 

However, panel DOLS may be bias if there remains correlation between 
equilibrium error and lead and lag of instrumental variable of different 
cross-sections (see appendix C). In this case the panel DOLS exhibit the 
same form of second order asymptotic bias a pool OLS (Mark and Sul 
2003). To account for this possible cross-equational correlation, the panel 
DSUR estimator be apply to income group estimation. Because panel DSUR 
require that the time series dimension be clearly large than cross-sectional 
dimension, a dataset that have 34 yearly observation on 24 country be used. 
This dataset span from 1963 to 1996. Grouping of country be do in the 
same way a present above. There be 44 country in the dataset of 53 
country that have observation on real GDP per caput in 1963. Thus, 
33% of all country would give 14.6 country per group. Because of this, 
14 country be include in the group of less developed and rich country 
and 16 country to the group of middle-income countries. The threshold 
for these group become: GDP per caput under $637 in 1963 for less de- 
veloped economies, GDP per caput between $638 and $1903 in 1963 for 
middle-income economies, and GDP per caput over $1903 in 1963 for rich 
economies. Table 3.7 give the result of panel dynamic SUR estimation of 
equation (3.2) in different income groups.25 

According to the result present in table 3.7, the cointegrating coeffi- 
cient of investment be positive and statistically significant at the 5% level 
in less developed and middle-income countries.26 The cointegrating coeffi- 

25Estimation be conduct with Gauss. Author be grateful to Donggyu Sul for provide 
the program code on his homepage. 

26Estimations be also do with three lead and lags, but a there be no major 

87 



Table 3.7: DSUR estimate of the cointegrating coefficient of inequality in 
different income group 
Dependent variable: log(GDP) 

less developed middle-income rich 

Panel DSUR (leads & lags=1) 
log(investments) 0.1532*** 0.1296*** 0.0068 

(0.0309) (0.0345) (0.0114) 
log(inequality) -0.1567*** -0.1700*** -0.1187*** 

(0.0208) (0.0282) (0.0069) 
Panel DSUR (leads & lags=2) 
log(investments) 0.1841*** 0.0843*** -0.0151 

(0.0132) (0.0168) (0.0092) 
log(inequality) -0.1337*** -0.1622*** -0.1216*** 

(0.0132) (0.0168) (0.0071) 

country 7 6 11 
year 1963-96 1963-96 1963-96 
observation 238 204 374 

* = p<.05, ** = p<.01, *** = p<.001. Standard error be present in parentheses. Stan- 

dard error be estimate use parametric correction. All estimation include individual 

constants, individual trends, and common time effects. 

88 



cient of investment be not statistically significant at the 5% level in any of 
the estimation of rich countries. The elasticity of growth with respect to 
investment also get small a country get richer. This implies that the 
influence of investment on per caput growth diminishes a the level of phys- 
ical capital increases. The cointegrating coefficient of inequality be negative 
and statistically significant at the 5%level in all income groups.27 

It be unexpected that the cointegrating coefficient of investment be not 
positive and statistically significant in rich economies. However, DSUR esti- 
mator assumes that the cointegration rank be 1. Because estimate equation 
include two explanatory I(1) variables, there may be two cointegrating vec- 
tors. If equation (3.2) be estimate with DSUR use only investment a a 
explanatory variable in rich economies, the cointegrating coefficient of invest- 
ments be positive (the value of the cointegrating coefficient be about 0.01) and 
statistically significant at the 5% level.28 If equation (3.2) be estimate use 
inequality a the only explanatory variable, the cointegrating coefficient of 
inequality change only marginally compare to the result present in table 
3.7. 

As such, result present in table 3.7 contradict the result of panel 
DOLS estimation, where the cointegrating coefficient of the inequality be 
positive and statistically significant in less developed economy when two 
and three lead and lag be use a instruments. This could result from 
cross-sectional correlation not capture by the common time effect, from 
correlation between equilibrium error and cross-equations, from efficiency of 
panel DSUR compare to panel DOLS, or from sample selection bias. To test 
this, both estimator be use to estimate model (3.2) use the dataset with 
34 yearly observations. Results of estimation be present in table 3.8. 

According to the results, the cointegrating coefficient of inequality be not 
statistically significant in less developed economies, when panel DOLS esti- 
mator be used, and negative and statistically significant, when panel DSUR 

change in the results, only result of estimation with one and two lead and lag be 
present here. 

27Equation 3.2) be also estimate use only the data on 6 of the most developed 
countries. Results be similar to those present in table 3.7. 

28The cointegrating coefficient of investment remains more or less the same when esti- 
mation in other income group be do use only investment a a explanatory variable. 

89 



Table 3.8: DOLS and DSUR estimate of the cointegrating coefficient of 
inequality in different income group 
Dependent variable: log(GDP) 

less developed middle-income rich 

Panel DOLS (leads & lags=1) 
log(investments) 0.263* 0.180*** 0.136*** 

(0.116) (0.047) (0.043) 
log(inequality) -0.101 -0.120*** -0.057 

(0.066) (0.038) (0.030) 
Panel DOLS (leads & lags=2) 
log(investments) 0.420* 0.162*** 0.068 

(0.144) (0.040) (0.061) 
log(inequality) -0.106 -0.112*** -0.108*** 

(0.070) (0.032) (0.035) 
Panel DSUR (leads & lags=1) 
log(investments) 0.1532*** 0.1296*** 0.0068 

(0.0309) (0.0345) (0.0114) 
log(inequality) -0.1567*** -0.1700*** -0.1187*** 

(0.0208) (0.0282) (0.0069) 
Panel DSUR (leads & lags=2) 
log(investments) 0.1841*** 0.0843*** -0.0151 

(0.0132) (0.0168) (0.0092) 
log(inequality) -0.1337*** -0.1622*** -0.1216*** 

(0.0132) (0.0168) (0.0071) 

country 7 6 11 
year 1963-96 1963-96 1963-96 
observation 238 204 374 

* = p<.05, ** = p<.01, *** = p<.001. Standard error be present in parentheses. Stan- 

dard error be estimate use parametric correction. All estimation include individual 

constants, individual trends, and common time effects. 

90 



be used. The difference between the estimation result present in table 
3.6 and 3.8 imply that the estimation result of less developed economy 
might be driven by the sample selection. However, it be also possible that 
the difference result from bias in the DOLS estimator cause by correlation 
in cross-equations. Unfortunately, due to the limited extent of the data this 
issue cannot be solve here and this question need to be address further 
in future research. 

There be no major difference in result of middle-income and rich economy 
compare to result present in table 3.6. Thus, the result obtain for 
middle-income and rich country seem to be robust across samples. 

3.5 Conclusions 

The result show that the distribution of income and economic develop- 
ment seem to have a steady-state equilibrium relation, or relations, a com- 
monly predict by theoretical models. According to estimations, this long- 
run growth elasticity of income inequality be negative in middle-income and 
rich economics. Estimation result also indicate that the long-run growth 
elasticity of inequality may differ between less developed economies. 

There be (at least) three reservation that have to be attach to the 
results: the highly simplify production function, the time dimension, and 
the extent of the data use in estimation. The production function use in 
estimation include only two inputs, namely physical capital and income in- 
equality. It be assume that the coefficient of inequality reflect the effect of 
human capital on production growth. However, it be likely that the observe 
effect of income inequality reflect the economic effect of several other vari- 
ables a well. It have be show that income inequality may, in addition to 
human capital, have an effect on several variables, e.g., social capital, ag- 
gregate savings, and social stability. Controlling for all these variable could 
result in bias coefficient of inequality, because the coefficient would not 
represent the aggregate effect of income inequality but only a partial effect. 
Thus, it may be feasible not to try to control the different channel through 
which income inequality may affect growth. 

Panel cointegration method have make it possible to test for cointegra- 

91 



tion use only a handful of time series observations. This have brought about 
a dilemma. If only a few dozen time series observation be need for cointe- 
gration testing, what be the time dimension after which the relationship can be 
described a a long-run relation? It be assume here that a "lower bound" 
for long-run relationship be one generation (25 to 30 yearly observations). 
Some may argue that, economically, this do not constitute long-run. How- 
ever, theory describe the effect of inequality on growth predict that there 
may be temporary steady-state equilibrium between them at different stage 
of economic development. As result present here indicate that country 
in question seem to be, at least, in their temporary steady-state equilibrium 
within this period, it seem that one generation could be consider long-run 
in this setting. 

The dataset use in estimation be fairly small include only 38 country 
at maximum. There be also only few less developed country include in 
group-related estimations. Due to this, the result on poor country remain 
inconclusive, but the data on developed economy be far more comprehen- 
sive. In rich economies, estimation result validate the general find of the 
theory describe the relationship between income inequality and growth. 
That is, income inequality be associate with low long-run economic growth 
in rich economies. 

92 



Bibliography 

Atkinson A, Brandolini A. (2001). Promise and pitfall in the use of secondary 
data-sets: income inequality in OECD country a a case study. Journal 
of Economic Literature, 39(3):771-799 

Baltagi B. (2008). Econometric analysis of panel data. John Wiley & Sons, 
West Sussex 

Banerjee A, Marcellino M, Osbat C. (2005). Testing for PPP: should we use 
panel methods? Empirical Economics, 30(1):77-91 

Banerjee A, Marcellino M, Osbat C. (2004). Some caution on the use of panel 
method for integrate series of panel data. Econometrics J 7(2):322-40 

Banerjee A, Carrion-i-Silvestre J. (2006). Cointegration in 
panel data with break and cross-section dependence. 
European Central Bank work paper series no. 591. 
http://www.ecb.int/pub/scientific/wps/date/html/wpsall.en.html. Ac- 
cessed 20 August 2010 

Banerjee A, Duflo E. (2003). Inequality and growth: what can the data say? 
Journal of Economic Growth, 8(3):267-299 

Barro R. (2000) Inequality and growth in a panel of countries. Journal of 
Economic Growth, 5(1):5-32 

Bènabou R. (2005) Inequality, technology, and the social contract. In Aghion 
P, Durlauf S (eds) Handbook of economic growth 1B. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 
pp. 1595-1638 

93 



Benhabib J, Rustichini A. (1996) Social conflict and growth. Journal of Eco- 
nomic Growth, 1(1):125-142 

Breitung J. (2005) A parametric approach to estimation of cointegrating 
vector in panel data. Econometric Reviews, 24(2):151-173 

Breitung J, Pesaran H. (2008). Unit root and cointegration in panels. In 
Matysas L, Sevestre P (eds) The econometrics of panel data: fundamental 
and recent development in theory and practice, Springer, Berlin, pp. 279- 
322 

Chen B-L. (2003). An inverted-U relationship between inequality and long- 
run growth. Economic Letters, 78(2):205-212. 

De La Croix D, Doepke M. (2003). Inequality and growth: why differential 
fertility matters. American Economic Review, 93(4):1091-1113. 

Deininger K, Squire L. (1996). A new data set measure income inequality. 
World Bank Economic Review, 10(3):565-591 

Dynan K, Skinner J, Zeldes S. (2004). Do rich save more? J Pol Econ 
112(2):397-444 

Forbes K. (2000). A reassessment of the relationship between inequality and 
growth. American Economic Review, 90(4):869-887 

Frazer G. (2006). Inequality and development across and within countries. 
World Development, 34 (9), 1459–1481 

Föster M, Pearson M. (2003). Income distribution and poverty in the OECD 
area: data and explanations. CESifo Economic Studies, 49(4):479-513 

Galbraith J, Kum H. (2006). Estimating the inequality of household incomes: 
a statistical approach to the creation of a dense and consistent global data 
set. UTIP work paper no. 22. http://utip.gov.utexas.edu. Accessed 10 
January 2007 

Galor O, Moav O. (2004). From physical to human capital accumulation: 
inequality and the process of development. Review of Economic Studies, 
71(4):1001-1026 

94 



Galor O, Zeira J. (1993). Income distribution and macroeconomics. Review 
of Economic Studies, 60(1):35-52 

Heston A, Summer R, Aten B. (2006). Penn World Table Version 6.2. Center 
for International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices. Univer- 
sity of Pennsylvania 

Hineline D. (2008). Parameter heterogeneity in growth regressions. Economic 
Letters, 101(2):126-129 

Im K, Pesaran H, Shin Y. (2003) Testing for unit root in heteregenous 
panels. Journal of Econometrics, 115(1):53-74 

Kao C, Chiang MH. (2000) On the estimation and inference of a cointegrated 
regression panel data. In Baltagi B (ed) Advances in Econometrics 15, 
Emerald, Bingley, pp. 179-222. 

Kaldor N (1957). A model of economic growth. Economic Journal, 
67(268):591-624 

Karlsson S Löthgren M. (2000). On the power and interpretation of panel 
unit root tests. Economic Letters, 66(3):249-255 

Keynes M. (1936) The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money. 
Harcourt, New York 

Kuznets S. (1955). Economic growth and income inequality. American Eco- 
nomic Review, 45(1):1-29 

Levin A, Lin CF, Chu CS. (2002). Unit root test in panel data: asymptotic 
and finite-sample properties. Journal of Econometrics, 108(1):1-24 

Li H, Heng-fu Z. (1998). Income inequality be not harmful for growth: theory 
and evidence. Review of Development Economics 2(3):318-334 

Lin SC, Huang HC, Weng HW. (2006). A semi-parametric partially linear in- 
vestigation of the Kuznets’ hypothesis. Journal of Comparative Economics 
34(3): 634-647. 

95 



Maddala G, Wu S. (1999). A comparative study of unit root test with panel 
data and a new simple test. Oxford Bulletin of Economic Statistics 61(spe- 
cial issue): 631-652. 

Mark N, Ogaki M, Sul D. (2005). Dynamic seemingly unrelated cointegrating 
regressions. Review of Economic Studies 72(3): 797-820. 

Mark N, Sul D. (2003). Cointegration vector estimation by panel DOLS 
and long-run money demand. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statis- 
tic 65(5):655-80 

Pedroni P. (2004) Panel cointegration: asymptotic and finite sample prop- 
erties of pool time series test with an application to PPP hypothesis. 
Econometric Theory 20(3):597-625 

Pedroni P. (2000). Fully modify OLS for heterogenous cointegrated panels. 
In Baltagi B (ed) Advances in Econometrics 15, Emerald, Bingley, pp. 
93-130 

Pedroni P. (1999). Critical value for cointegration test in heterogenous pan- 
el with multiple regressors. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 
61(special issue): 653-670 

Perotti R. (1993). Political equilibrium, income distribution and growth. Re- 
view of Economic Studies 60(4): 755-776 

Persson T, Tabellini G. (1994). Is inequality harmful for growth. American 
Economic Review 84(3): 600-621 

Pesaran H. (2007). A simple panel unit root test in the presence of cross 
section dependence. Journal of Applied Econometrics 22(2): 265-315 

Phillips P, Moon H. (1999). Linear regression limit theory for nonstationary 
panel data. Econometrica 67(5): 1057-1111 

Phillips Peter, Ouliaris S. (1990). Asymptotic property of residual base 
test for cointegration. Econometrica 58(1): 165-193 

Smith A. (1776). An Inquiry Into the Nature and Causes of Wealth of Na- 
tions. http://www.gutenberg.org/etext/3300. Accessed 6 September 2010 

96 



Stiglitz J. (1969). Distribution of income and wealth among individuals. 
Econometrica, 37(3):382-397 

Wagner M and Hlouskova J. (2007). The performance of panel cointegration 
methods: result from a large scale simulation study. Econometric Reviews 
29(2):182-223 

97 



98 



Appendix C 

Panel unit root test 

The traditional panel unit root test use in this study be base on the 
follow regression: 

△yit = ρiyi,t−1 + δi + ηit + θt + ϵit, (C.1) 

where δi be the individual constants, ηit be the individual time trends, and θt 
be the common time effect. All test rely on the assumption that E[ϵitϵjs] = 0 
∀ t, s and i ≠ j, which be require for the calculation of common time effects. 
The inclusion of individual constant and time trend be also optional. 

The null hypothesis in all test isH0 ∶ ρi = 0 ∀ i, but the test have different 
assumption about the heterogeneity of ρ and on the alternative hypothesis. 
Im et al. (2003), Fisher type ADF and PP tests, and Pesaran (2007) test 
introduce below allow for individual processes. Their alternative hypothesis 
be that some but not all of the individual series may have unit roots. Levin 
et al. (2002) test, on the other hand, assumes a common unit root process, 
i.e., ρi = ρ ∀ i. 

The test by Pesaran (2007) be base on a regression 

△yit = ρyi,t−1 + ηit + αi + δiθt + ϵit, (C.2) 

where αi be the individual constants, ηit be the individual time trends, θt 
be the common time effect, whose coefficients, δi, be assume to be non- 
stochastic and they measure the impact of the common time effect on series 
i, ϵit ∼ i.i.d.N(0, σ2) over t, and ϵit be independent of ϵjs and θs for all i ≠ j and 
s, t. Cross-sectional dependence be allow through the common time effect 

99 



which be proxied by the cross-section mean of yit (ȳt = n−1Σnj=1yjt) and it 
lag values, ȳt−1, ȳt−2, etc. The null hypothesis be that H0 ∶ ρi = 0 ∀ i and 
alternative hypothesis allows for some of the test series to be nonstationary. 

100 



Appendix D 

Pedroni’s and Banerjee & 
Carrion-i-Silvestre’s panel 
cointegration test 

Panel cointegration test developed by Pedroni (2004) be base on the model: 

yit = αi + δit + βiXit + ϵit, (D.1) 

where αi:s and δi:s allow for member specific fix effect and deterministic 
trends, Xit be a m-dimensional column vector of explanatory variable for 
each member i, and βi be an m-dimensional row vector for each member i. 

The data generate process be described a a partition vector z′it ≡ 
(yit,Xit) where the true process be generate a zit = zi,t−1 + ζit, ζ ′it = (ζ 

y 
itζ 

X 
it ) 

(Pedroni 2004). 1√ 
T 
∑[Tr]t=1 ζit be assume to converge to a vector Brownian 

motion with asymptotic covariance of Ωi a T Ð→∞. The individual process 
be assume to be i.i.d. so that E[ζitζ ′js] = 0 ∀s, t, i ≠ j. 

Let êit denote the estimate residual of (D.1) and Ω̂i the consistent 

101 



estimator of Ωi. The 7 test statistic can now be define a : 

Zv̂NT ≡ (ΣNi=1ΣTt=1L̂−211iê2i,t−1) 
−1 
, 

Zρ̂NT−1 ≡ (ΣNi=1ΣTt=1L̂−211iê2i,t−1) 
1 
ΣNi=1Σ 

T 
t=1L̂ 

−2 
11i(êi,t−1∆êit − λ̂i, 

Zt̂NT ≡ (σ̃ 
2 
NTΣ 

N 
i=1Σ 

T 
t=1L̂ 

−2 
11iê 

2 
i,t−1) 

−1 
ΣNi=1Σ 

T 
t=1L̂ 

−2 
11i(êi,t−1∆êit − λ̂i), 

Zt̂NT ≡ (s̃ 
∗2 
NTΣ 

N 
i=1Σ 

T 
t=1L̂ 

−2 
11iê 

∗2 
i,t−1) 

−1 
ΣNi=1Σ 

T 
t=1L̂ 

−2 
11i(ê∗i,t−1∆ê∗it − λ̂i), 

Z̃ρ̂NT−1 ≡ ΣNi=1 (ΣTt=1ê2i,t−1) 
−1 
ΣTt=1(êi,t−1∆êit − λ̂i), 

Z̃t̂NT ≡ Σ 
N 
i=1 (σ̂2iΣTt=1ê2i,t−1) 

−1/2 
ΣTt=1(êi,t−1∆êit − λ̂i), 

Z̃∗ 
t̂NT 
≡ ΣNi=1 (ΣTt=1ŝ∗2i ê∗2i,t−1) 

−1/2 
ΣTt=1(ê∗i,t−1∆ê∗it), 

where L−211i = Ω̂11i − Ω̂′21iΩ̂−122iΩ̂21i, λ̂i = 1/TΣ 
ki 
s=1 (1 − s/(ki + 1))ΣTt=s+1µ̂itµ̂i,t−s, 

ŝ2i ≡ 1/TΣTt=1µ̂2it, σ̂i = ŝ2i + 2λ̂i, σ̃2NT ≡ 1/NΣNi=1L̂−211iσ̂2i , ŝ∗2i ≡ 1/tΣTt=1µ̂∗2it , s̃∗2NT ≡ 
1/NΣNi=1ŝ∗2i , L̂211i = 1/TΣTt=1ϑ̂2it+2/TΣ 

ki 
s=1 (1 − s/(k − i + 1))ΣTt=s+1ϑ̂i, ϑ̂i,t−s. The 

residual µ̂it, µ̂∗it and ϑ̂it be attain from regressions: êit = γ̂êi,t−1 + µ̂it, êit = 
γ̂iêi,t−1+ΣK−ik=1 γ̂ik∆êi,t−k+ µ̂∗it, ∆yit = ΣMm=1b̂mi∆xmi,t = ϑ̂it. (Pedroni 1999, 2004) 

The first 4 statistic be construct by pool the data by it within 
dimension (Pedroni 2004). Here the numerator and denominator term be 
sum separately for the analogous conventional time series statistics. The 
last 3 statistic pool the between dimension of the panel. These statistic 
be construct by compute the ratio of the correspond conventional 
time series statistic and then by compute the standardize sum of the 
N time series of the panel. In the weight statistic present in table 3, 
the numerator and denominator of the panel statistic be weight by the 
member specific long-run conditional variances. Pedroni (1999, 2004) show 
that under the null of no cointegration the asymptotic distribution of the 
7 statistic present above and the weight statistic converge to normal 
distribution with zero mean and variance of one a N and T sequentially 
converge to infinity. 

Panel cointegration test developed by Banerjee and Carrion-i-Silvestre (2006) 

102 



be base on a model: 

yi,t = fi(t) + x′i,t + ui,t, 
△xi,t = vi,t, 

fi(t) = µi + βit + θDUi,t + γiDT ∗i,t, 
uit = F ′tπi + eit 

(D.2) 

where ei,t = ρiei,t + ϵi,t, 

DUi,t = 
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩ 

0 t ≤ Tbi 
1 t > tbi 

, (D.3) 

DT ∗i,t = 
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩ 

0 t ≤ Tbi 
(t − tbi) t > tbi 

, (D.4) 

where Tbi = λiT, λi ∈ Λ, denotes the time of the break for the i-th unit in 
a close subset of (0,1), and F ′t :s be the common factor which be use to 
account for the possible cross-sectional dependence. The cointegrating vector 
be specify a a function of time: 

δi,t = 
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩ 

δi,1 t ≤ Tbi 
δi,2 t > tbi 

. (D.5) 

Banerjee & Carrion-i-Silvestre’s test computes a Ze 
t̄NT 
(λ) = N−1∑Ni=1 tp̂i(λ) 

statistic for each break point use the idiosyncratic disturbance term (eit). 
The break point be estimate a the argument that minimizes the sequence 
of standardize statistics. Thus, the estimate break date be give by 

T̂b = argmin 
λ∈Λ 

⎛ 
⎝ 
N−1/2Ze 

t̄NT 
(λ) −Θe2(λ) 

√ 
N 

√ 
ψe2(λ) 

⎞ 
⎠ 
. 

103 



104 



Appendix E 

Panel DOLS and panel DSUR 
estimator 

E.1 Panel DOLS 

Mark and Sul (2003) consider a DOLS estimator with fix effects, fix ef- 
fects and heterogenous trends, and with fix effects, heterogenous trends, 
and common time effects. The last model account for cross-sectional depen- 
dence by introduce a common time effect. Mark and Sul’s model assumes 
that observation on each individual i obey the follow triangular repre- 
sentation: 

yit = αi + λit + θt + γ′xit + uit, (E.1) 

where (1,−γ′) be a cointegrating vector between yit and xit, which be identical 
across individuals, αi be a individual-specific effect, λit be a individual-specific 
linear trend, θt be a common time-specific factor, and uit be a idionsyncratic 
error that be independent across i, but possibly dependent across t. Model 
(E.1) allows for a limited form of cross-sectional correlation, where the equi- 
librium error for each individual be driven in part by θt. 

Panel DOLS eliminates the possible endogeneity between explanatory 
variable and the dependent variable by assume that uit be correlate at 
most with pi lead and lag of △xit (Mark and Sul 2003). The possible en- 
dogeneity can be control by project uit onto these pi lead and lags: 

uit = Σpis=−piδ′i,s△ xi,t−s + uit∗ = δ′izit + u∗it. (E.2) 

105 



The projection error u∗it be orthogonal to all lead and lag of △xit and the 
estimate equation becomes: 

yit = αi + λit + θt + γ′xit + δizit + u∗it, (E.3) 

where δ′izit be a vector of projection dimensions. The consistent estimation of 
(I.4) be base on sequential limits, i.e., a T →∞ then n→∞. Equation (I.4) 
can be feasible estimate in panel with small to moderate n. 

E.2 Panel DSUR 

However, if there remains correlation between equilibrium error, uit, and lead 
and lag of other cross-sections △xjt, j /= i, the panel DOLS exhibit the same 
form of second order asymptotic bias a pool OLS (Mark and Sul 2003). 
Panel DSUR estimator can be use to account for this correlation. 

The data generation process in Mark et al. (2005) DSUR estimator be of 
the form 

yit = βix′it + uit, (E.4) 

△xit = eit (E.5) 

where there be n cointegrating regression each with T observations, and xit 
and eit be k×1 dimensional vectors. Endogeneity be control for by includ- 
ing lead and lag of (I.2) into the regression, a in panel DOLS estimator 
present above. Panel DSUR estimate a long-run covariance matrix that be 
use in estimation of equation (I.1). This make panel DSUR more efficient 
than panel DOLS when cross-sections be dependent. The efficiency of panel 
DSUR actually improves a the correlation between cross-sections increases. 

106 



Appendix F 

Country list 

107 



Table F.1: Country list I 
Country observation country observation 

Australia 35 Malaysia 32 
Austria 37 Malta 27 
Bangladesh 21 Mauritius 32 
Barbados 28 Mexico 30 
Belgium 30 Netherlands 37 
Bolivia 30 New Zealand 34 
Canada 37 Nicaragua 21 
Chile 37 Norway 36 
Colombia 37 Panama 32 
Cyprus 37 Papua New Guinea 20 
Denmark 36 Philippines 35 
Ecuador 37 Portugal 27 
Egypt 36 Senegal 24 
El Salvador 28 Singapore 37 
Fiji 23 Spain 37 
Finland 36 Sweden 37 
Germany 25 Syrian Arab Republic 36 
Greece 37 Taiwan 25 
Hong Kong 27 Turkey 36 
Hungary 30 UK 32 
India 37 USA 37 
Indonesia 29 Uruguay 23 
Ireland 36 Venezuela 29 
Israel 34 
Italy 32 
Japan 37 
Korea, Republic of 37 
Kuwait 38 
Macao 20 
Madagascar 22 

N=53 

Observations give the maximum number of simultaneous observation in the series of 

EHII2.1 inequality measure and real GDP per capita. 

108 



Table F.2: Country list II 
Countries (25 years) Countries (34 years) Countries (37 years) 
1973-1996 1963-1996 1963-1999 

Australia Australia Austria 
Austria Austria Canada 
Barbados Canada Chile 
Bolivia Chile Colombia 
Canada Colombia Ecuador 
Chile Denmark Finland 
Colombia Ecuador Greece 
Cyprus Finland India 
Denmark Greece Japan 
Ecuador India Korea, Republic of 
Egypt Ireland Netherlands 
Finland Israel Singapore 
Greece Japan Spain 
Hungary Korea, Republic of Sweden 
India Netherlands United States 
Indonesia New Zealand 
Ireland Norway 
Israel Philippines 
Italy Singapore 
Japan Spain 
Korea, Republic of Sweden 
Kuwait Syria 
Malaysia Turkey 
Malta United States 
Mauritius 
Mexico 
Netherlands 
New Zealand 
Norway 
Philippines 
Singapore 
Spain 
Sweden 
Syria 
Turkey 
United Kingdom 
United States 
Venezuela 

N=38 N=24 N=15 

Years give the number of simultaneous yearly observation in the series of EHII2.1 inequality measure and 

real GDP per capita. 

109 



110 



Chapter 4 

Income inequality and savings: a 
reassessment of the relationship 
in cointegrated panel 

Abstract1 

The effect of income inequality on saving and consumption have remain an 
open empirical issue despite several decade of research. Results obtain in 
this study indicate that income inequality and private consumption be both 
I(1) nonstationary variable that be cointegrated, and inequality have have 
a negative effect on private consumption in Central-European and Nordic 
countries. Results for Anglo-Saxon country be inconclusive. These finding 
suggest that previous empirical research may have produce bias result 
on the effect of inequality on saving by assume that inequality would be 
a stationary variable. 

1An early version of this chapter have be publish in Helsinki Center of Economic 
Research Discussion Papers, No. 337 

111 



4.1 Introduction 

The effect of saving on capital accumulation and growth have always be 
one of the fundamental research topic in economics. According to Smith 
(1776), increase division of labor raise productivity, but saving govern 
capital accumulation, which enables production growth. In the 18th century, 
only rich people saved. Therefore, economic growth be possible only when 
there be enough rich people in the society. However, accord to Keynes 
(1936), inequality of income would slow down economic growth. Keynes ar- 
gued that marginal consumption decrease a the income of an individual 
increases, and thus, aggregate consumption depends on change in aggregate 
income. Because demand be the basis of investments, and because inequality 
lower aggregate consumption, inequality of income would diminish economic 
growth. In neo-classical growth models, income distribution determines the 
level saving and thus the level of capital accumulation (Solow 1956; Kaldor 
1957). 

In addition to the approach of classical economics, there exist several the- 
ories describe the effect of income inequality on saving and consumption. 
These include the permanent income hypothesis by Friedman (1957), life- 
cycle hypothesis by Ando and Modigliani (1963), which be augment with 
intergenerational transfer by Kotlikoff and Summers (1981), saving under 
liquidity constraint by Deaton (1991), and political-economy model (e.g. 
Alesina and Perotti (1994)). 

Although theoretical research span several decades, the effect of income 
inequality on saving remains an open empirical question. This be due to the 
fact that empirical cross-country study have produce controversial result 
on the effect of income inequality on savings. In one of the most recent panel 
econometric studies, Leigh and Posso (2009) estimate the effect of the income 
share of the top 1% on the percentage value of gross saving of the GDP 
and find no statistically significant effect of inequality on national savings. 
Similarly, Schmidt-Hebbel and Servén (2000) find no statistically significant 
effect of the percentage value of saving of the GDP use several different 
measure of income inequality. However, Smith (2001) find that inequality, 
measure with Deininger and Squire’s (1996) Gini index, have a statistically 
robust positive effect on the percentage value of saving of the GDP. Cook 

112 



(1995) find the same effect in less developed economies. Li and Zou (2004) 
find that inequality have a negative effect on private saving use Deininger 
and Squire’s (1996) Gini index and the ratio of private saving of GDP. 

All the empirical study summarize above have assume that income 
inequality, measure either by the Gini index or by the share of income earn 
by different income classes, be a stationary variable. However, in the early 
theoretical literature on income inequality, the income variation be assume 
to be driven by a stochastic process (Chambernowne 1953; Mandelbrot 1961). 
Moreover, Mandelbrot (1961) argue that time-independent, i.e. stationary, 
income variation be unlikely, and it be possible that the distribution of 
income will never reach a steady state imply a nonstationary process of 
income variation. In recent study with cross-country panel data, Malinen 
(2012) and Herzer and Vollmer (2012) have obtain result accord to 
which the data generate process of income inequality would be driven by a 
stochastic trend, indicate that inequality would be an I(1) nonstationary 
variable. Previously, for example, Mocan (1999) have obtain similar results.2 

If this assumption of the early theoretical model held in general, it would 
offer an explanation to the controversy in the previous empirical studies. This 
be because regress a stationary variable on an I(1) variable(s) can lead to 
a spurious regression (Stewart 2011). In empirical studies, saving be usually 
measure a a percentage of the GDP. If both logarithmic saving and the 
logarithmic GDP be I(1) variable and cointegrated, their difference results, 
by construction, in a stationary variable, namely saving a a percentage of 
the GDP. Thus, if inequality be an I(1) variable and saving a a ratio of 
the GDP a stationary I(0) variable, regress saving on inequality would 
give spurious results. 

This study us panel cointegration method to test the time series prop- 
erties of the include variable and to estimate the (possible) long-run rela- 
tion between income inequality and savings. We use data on nine developed 
economies, and span four decade start from the year 1960. The in- 
come share of the top 1%, use to proxy the distribution of income, have be 
found to track broader measure of income inequality, like the Gini index, 
very well (Leigh 2007). According to panel unit root tests, the logarithmic in- 

2See also Jäntti and Jenkins (2010). 

113 



come share of the top 1%, logarithmic gross national saving and logarithmic 
private consumption be all I(1) nonstationary variables. Income share of 
the top 1% be also found to be cointegrated with private consumption, which 
implies that there be a long-run dependency relation between them. The effect 
of inequality on private consumption be found to be negative in the Nordic 
and Central-European countries, but for the Anglo-Saxon country the di- 
rection of the effect (positive vs. negative) remains somewhat ambiguous. 
The result of the panel cointegration test be inconclusive on possible coin- 
tegration between gross saving and the top 1% income share. The real GDP 
per caput and gross saving a well a the real GDP per caput and private 
consumption be also found to be cointegrated. This implies that the ratio 
of saving and private consumption to GDP would be stationary variable 
and hence previous research be likely to have produce bias result on the 
effect of inequality on saving and consumption. 

The rest of the paper be organize a follows. Section 2 give the theoret- 
ical and empirical background of the study. Section 3 describes the data and 
present the result of unit root tests. Section 4 report the result of cointe- 
gration test and section 5 give the estimation results. Section 6 concludes. 

4.2 Theoretical and empirical consideration 

Several theory have be construct to explain the effect of inequality on 
savings. In classical economic theory, the form of the individual save func- 
tion determines the effect of income inequality on savings. When the save 
function be linear or concave, the distribution of income and wealth converge 
toward equality a the economy grows (Stiglitz 1969). If the save function 
be convex, the marginal propensity to save increase with income. Accord- 
ing to the permanent income hypothesis, individual with low income have 
high propensity to consume, and small change in income, or it distribu- 
tion, do not affect the consumption decision of household (Friedman 1957). 
The life-cycle hypothesis argues that, if bequest be luxury, the save rate 
should be high among wealthier individual (Kotlikoff and Summers 1981). 
In political-economy models, more unequal income distribution may create 
demand for more redistribution through taxation and income transfers, and 

114 



if the save function of individual in the economy be convex, i.e. the rich 
save more, this will diminish aggregate saving through diminish income 
of the rich (Alesina and Perotti 1994). 

What be common to all of the theory introduce above be that they gen- 
erally assume that the individual income process be non-stochastic. However, 
a point out by Stiglitz (1969), the very first (formal) model of income 
inequality by Chambernowne (1953) and Mandelbrot (1961) be base on 
stochastic processes. Chambernowne (1953) developed a model assume that 
the evolution of income of an individual be determine by his/her income in 
the previous year and by a stochastic (chance) process. In modern terms, this 
process would be say to be I(1) non-stationary. 

I(1) non-stationary process have a infinite memory, i.e., they be highly 
persistent. Assuming some degree of persistence in the evolution of the in- 
come series of an individual be quite intuitive a shock (e.g., wage raise) to 
the income process of an individual be likely to have permanent effect on 
the future income of the individual. Microeconomic literature on household 
income and consumption behavior adopt the idea of permanent effect af- 
fecting the income series of an individual. For instance, Hall and Mishkin 
(1982) consider a stochastic model of consumption propose by Muth 
(1960), where the effect of individual income on consumption be divide 
into permanent and transitory components. In a recent study on the evo- 
lution of consumption and income inequality, Blundell et al. (2008) use the 
same kind of formulation where the income of household varies accord to 
the follow function: 

logYit = Zitϑt + Pit + vit, (4.1) 

where Zit be a set of income characteristic of household i that be observable 
and know by consumer at time t,3 vit follow an MA(q) process, and Pi,t = 
Pi,t−1 + ϵit with ϵit serially uncorrelated, indicate that the process {P} be 
I(1) non-stationary. Several study in the micro literature tend to find that 
also empirically the permanent component Pit be a random walk, and hence 
it can be model a an I(1) nonstationary process (Meghir and Pistaferri 
2004; Hall and Mishkin 1982; Blundell et al. 2008). 

3These include demographic, education, employment status, ethnic, etc. factor (Blun- 
dell et al. 2008) 

115 



Deaton (1991) study how liquidity constraint affect national savings, 
when income be driven by a random walk with drift.4 He argue that the as- 
sumption of optimal intertemporal consumption behavior of consumer be 
restrict by borrowing constraint would help to create a model that could 
explain the observe pattern of household wealth and the dependency of 
consumption on income during the life cycle of an individual. According to 
Deaton, the problem with stochastic life cycle - permanent income models, 
like the model by Hall and Mishkin (1982), be that they assume substantial 
wealth accumulation at some point of the life cycle of an individual, which 
be not support by the data. Deaton assume that the labor income of an 
individual follow an AR(1) process of the form: 

log(yt+1) = log(yt) + log(zt+1) + δ, (4.2) 

where yt be labor income, zt+1 be stochastic random variable, and δ > 0 be a con- 
stant. When zt+1 be assume to be identically and independently distributed, 
the labor income process, log(yt), be I(1) non-stationary and, specifically, 
it follow a random walk with drift. Deaton found that, when income be a 
random walk and borrowing constraint be binding, it be undesirable for 
household to undertake any smooth of consumption, i.e., they have no 
incentive to save. This implies that consumption equal income on all in- 
come levels. However, he assume that the interest rate be high than the 
consumer’s discount rate. If the interest rate equal the consumer’s discount 
rate, the stochastic income process and borrowing constraint lead to the re- 
sult that the propensity to consume be low at high income level (Seater 
1997; Travaglini 2008). In this day and age, the debate on the validity of 
the life cycle - permanent income hypothesis be still very much ongoing. In a 
recent paper, Attanasio and Weber (2010) review the literature on intertem- 
poral allocation model and present some modification to the standard life 
cycle hypothesis framework to make the model fit the micro data better. 

When individual income series be affected by a random walk component, 
the aggregate time series be likely to be characterize by a random walk 
(Rossanan and Seater 1995). This applies to the aggregate income, but the 

4Assuming a drift in income relation be intuitive and necessary, because income tends 
to grow over time. Thus, just variation around that trend be assume to be stochastic. 

116 



distribution of income be often measure use some bound measure, like 
the Gini index or share of total income. This change thing a bit a any 
measure that varies within some boundary like the income share, cannot, 
by definition, be an I(1) nonstationary process. This be because the variance 
of such an series cannot grow to infinity with time, which be what happens 
with random walk series. However, it be possible that the distribution can 
have a stochastic trend in it other moments, like the mean, skewness, and 
kurtosis, than variance (White and Granger 2010). Thus, when individual 
income series that be affected by a random walk component be aggregate 
to a bound distribution, it be likely that this distribution have a stochastic 
trend in it kurtosis and/or in it skewness. This way the measure of income 
inequality, be a functional of some income distribution, may exhibit such 
high level of persistence that it be good approximate by an I(1) process 
than a stationary process. 

Figure 1 present the detrended and demean time series of the top 1% 
income share series for 5 developed countries. Time series of the share seem 
to "wander" randomly through time in all countries, which be a distinctive 
feature of a series that be driven by a stochastic trend. The series be also 
clearly not mean- or trend-reverting in the observe period, which be one 
condition of stationarity. 

Thus, the possibility that income inequality be driven by a stochastic trend 
need to be take into account in the analysis of the relationship between 
inequality and savings. Especially in empirical analysis, this be quite crucial, 
a the possible I(1) non-stationarity of the include variable determines the 
way this relationship can be consistently estimate (see the Introduction). 
That be why we next turn to test the time series property of relevant 
variables. 

4.3 Data and unit root test 

4.3.1 Data 

In this study we use the the top 1% income share of population to proxy the 
income distribution in different countries. Since the work of Piketty (2003), 

117 



-.06 

-.04 

-.02 

.00 

.02 

.04 

.06 

.08 

1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 

Australia Canada France 
Japan US 

Figure 1. The detrended and demean share of income of the top 1% of population in 5 

developed country 1925-1998 Source: Leigh (2007) 

there have be a grow interest towards building long time series of the 
evolution of top income share of the population. Measuring the development 
in top income share make it possible to construct substantially longer time 
series from the evolution of the distribution of income than would be possible 
use the Gini index or similar aggregate measures. Top income series be 
built use national tax data and apply the same method across country 
to make the series comparable (Atkinson and Piketty 2007). Leigh (2007) have 
also demonstrate that the top 1% income share series have a high correlation 
with other measure of income inequality, like the Gini index. The dataset 
on the top 1% income share gather by Leigh be a primary source of data 
in this study. 

However, after Leigh (2007) there have be addition to the pool of coun- 
try for which a historical dataset of the evolution of top income be available. 

118 



Roine and Waldenström (2011) have use data collect from several differ- 
ent source in their analysis of common trend and shock in top income 
series. Their dataset be extensive, but it, like the dataset by Leigh (2007), have 
one caveat. Due to the length of some series (starting from the begin of 
the 20 century) the observation from all country be not continuous, and 
thus they be force to extrapolate over some observations. This be problem- 
atic, because extrapolation of over just one observation may alter the time 
series property of the observe variable. From the dataset of Leigh we know 
that the series of New Zealand have observation miss in 1961, 1974, and 
1976. Thus, New Zealand be not include in the datasets that consists of those 
periods. For the other country neither Leigh nor Roine and Waldenström 
explicitly list the observation over which they be extrapolating, and thus 
we have to check the original data source to find out about the location of 
the miss observations. After observe the individual source of data, we 
include nine country in our baseline dataset. These country are: Australia, 
Canada, Finland, France, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the 
United Kingdom and the United States.5 All these country have continuous 
observation from the year 1960 onwards, except Switzerland from which we 
have only bi-annual average observation (Dell et al. 2010). That is, for ex- 
ample, in 1995 and in 1996 the value corresponds to the average share of the 
top 1% income during 1995-1996. Thus, we do not include Switzerland on any 
of the unit root tests, but observation from Switzerland be include in the 
cointegration test and estimations. Because of the restriction impose by 
some of our test method explain later, the nine country be divide 
into three group of country accord to their (assumed) economic models. 
The group are: Nordic, Central-European, and Anglo-Saxon countries.6 In 

5The problematic country in this dataset be Finland and the Netherlands. In Fin- 
land’s case the original data, allegedly span from 1920 to 2005, could not be checked, 
but we could check that the data be continuous at least from 1966 onwards. For the Nether- 
land there be direct observation only from the year 1977 onward and significant part 
of the previous observation be a result of interpolation and pure estimation. However, 
panel unit root test be do also without Nordic country and the Netherlands, and 
because extrapolation would have the big impact on those tests, the bias create by 
possible extrapolation over some value of top 1% series in Finland and the Netherlands 
be diminished. 

6Canada, United Kingdom and Unites States be include in the Anglo-Saxon group. 

119 



addition, Japan and New Zealand be include in the test for the time 
series property of the top 1% income share data. 

The endogenous variable use in this study be the gross saving and 
the private consumption expenditures. The data on these be obtain from 
the AMECO database compile and publish by the Directorate-General 
for Economic and Financial Affairs of the European Comission. AMECO be 
used, because it have more extensive time series coverage on the variable 
in question than, for example, the dataset of World Bank. AMECO do 
not include data on private savings, but because private consumption be the 
mirror image of private savings, it should not make any difference which 
of these two variable be used. Both variable be measure in aggregate 
term to minimize the effect that a third variable might have on the relation 
between inequality and savings. Changes, for example, in fertility may have 
an effect on variable that be measure in per caput term without affect 
the income share of the top 1%. Thus, express gross saving and private 
consumption in per caput term could add stochastic element to the time 
series of those variable unrelated to their relation with income inequality. 

The other variable include in the estimation be the real gross domestic 
product per capita, the dependency rate, and the interest rate. The real GDP 
per caput be historically thought to proxy the expect lifetime wealth of the 
resident in a country (Cook 1995). The level of national income may also 
have a direct effect on gross saving and consumption. The dependency rate 
be use to control for possible change in the save pattern across the life 
cycle of individuals, and it measure the ratio of the population under 15 to 
that over 64 year of age. Interest rate may affect the individual propensity 
to save by affect the profitability of saving. The year 1960 be the first year 
include in the dataset but the last year varies from one country to another. 
The data on dependency be obtain from the World Development Indicators 
of the World Bank and the data on interest rate be from the database of the 
International Monetary Fund. 

The data on interest rate varies a little across country in the dataset. 
The baseline rate be the discount or the bank rate, i.e. the rate at which cen- 

France, Netherlands, and Switzerland be include in the Central-European group, and 
Finland, Norway, and Sweden be include in the group of Nordic countries. 

120 



tral bank lend to deposit banks. However, for some countries, observation 
of this variable be not available for the whole time period. That be why there 
be some difference in the indicator of interest rate between the group of 
countries. For Finland, Sweden, Norway, and Switzerland, the central bank 
rate be used. For Canada, the United Kingdom, and the USA, the treasury 
bill rate be used, which give the rate at which short-term security be issue 
or trade in the market. For France and the Netherlands, the money market 
rate be used, which give the rate on short term lending between financial 
institutions. Although use different indicator of interest rate be not opti- 
mal, all these indicator should reflect change in the interest rate at which 
consumer borrow from and deposit money to banks. 

4.3.2 Unit root test 

To test for possible unit roots, four different panel unit root test be used. 
The first two be the so call traditional and the last two the so call 
second generation panel unit root tests. Traditional panel unit root test do 
not allow for cross-sectional dependency while the second generation test 
allow for cross-sectional correlation. 

The traditional panel unit root tests, by Im et al. (2003) and the panel 
version of the ADF test by Maddala and Wu (1999), be base on the fol- 
low regression: 

△yit = ρiyi,t−1 + ηit + αt + θt + ϵit, (4.3) 

where αi be individual constants, ηit be individual time trends, and θt be 
the common time effects. The test rely on the assumption that E[ϵitϵjs] = 0 
∀ t, s and i ≠ j, which be require for calculate common time effects. Thus, 
if the different series be correlated, the last assumption be violated. 

The second generation test by Pesaran (2007) and Phillips and Sul 
(2003) be base on the regression 

△yit = ρyi,t−1 + ηit + αi + δiθt + ϵit, (4.4) 

where αis be the individual constants, ηit be the individual time trends, 
and θt be the common time effect, whose coefficients, δi, be assume to be 

121 



non-stochastic, measure the impact of the common time effect of series i, 
and ϵit be assume to be normally distribute with mean zero and covariance 
of σ2 and independent of ϵjs and θs for all i ≠ j and s, t. Cross-sectional 
dependence be allow through the common time effect, which generates the 
correlation between cross-sectional units. The matrix δi give the non-random 
factor load coefficient that determine the extent of the cross-sectional 
correlation. The null hypothesis in all test be that ρi = 0 ∀ i. The alternative 
hypothesis are: 

H1 ∶ ρi < 0, i = 1,2, ...,N1, ρi = 0, i = N1 + 1,N1 + 2, ...,N. (4.5) 

For consistency of panel unit root test it be also require that, under the 
alternative, the fraction of the individual process that be stationary be 
non-zero, formally limN→∞(N1/N) = γ, 0 < γ ≤ 1 (Im et al. 2003). 

Table 4.1 present the result of the four panel unit root test for the top 
1% income share. The test have be apply to three different datasets. 
The first include the data on five country with the long continuous time 
series in the dataset by Leigh (2007).7 The second dataset include the eight 
country on which we have data for all the include variable exclude 
Switzerland. The third dataset include observation from seven country 
exclude the Nordic countries. This dataset span from 1983 to 2002.8 The 
third dataset be used, because, accord to Roine and Waldenström (2011), 
there be a trend break in the series of the top 1% income share in 1991 in 
the Nordic countries. According to Roine and Waldenström (2011), there 
be similar trend break in the top 1% income share series in the Anglo- 
Saxon countries, include Australia, Canada, UK and USA (in 1982), in 
Central European countries, include France, Switzerland, and Netherlands 
(in 1976), and in Asian countries, include Japan (in 1983). So, to make 
sure that the result of the panel unit root test be not driven by structural 
breaks, the test be run use only those country that should not have 
break in their top 1% income share series in the test period. According 
to all test in all datasets, the logarithmic top 1% income share be a I(1) 

7Countries include in the test are: Australia, Canada, France, Japan, and the USA. 
All these country should have continuous observation throughout the period. 

8Countries include in the test are: Australia, France, Japan, New Zealand, the United 
Kingdom, and the USA. 

122 



Table 4.1: Panel unit root test of the top 1% income share 
variable period IPS ADF Pesaran PS 
top 1% 1925-1998 3.449 2.270 -0.103 4.200 

(0.998) (0.994) (0.459) (0.838) 
top 1% 1960-1996 5.256 1.282 -0.348 3.212 

(0.999) (0.998) (0.364) (0.976) 
top 1% 1983-2002 -0.302 16.670 -0.198 16.636 

(0.381) (0.273) (0.421) (0.187) 

The test equation is:△yit = ρiyi,t−1+δi+ηit+θt+ϵit. All variable be test in logarithms. 

P-values of the test statistic appear in parentheses. With the exception of the PS test, 

lag length be determine use Schwarts information criterion (SIC). In PS test the lag 

length be select with top-down method. The dataset of 1925-1998 include 6 country 

and 444 observations, the dataset of 1960-1996 include 9 country and 333 observations, 

and the dataset of 1983-2002 include 6 country and 121 observations. 

nonstationary process. This hold even in the last test, where the Nordic 
country be exclude from the test to control for the possible structural 
break present in their top 1% income share series. 

Table 4.2 present the result of panel unit root test of the other variables. 
Because gross saving be express in constant Euros and private consumption 
in purchasing power parity (ppp), two different series of real GDP per caput 
series be include in the dataset. According to all tests, gross savings, private 
consumption, the interest rates, and both version of the real GDP per caput 
be I(1) processes. With the exception of the test by Pesaran (2007), all test 
clearly reject the null hypothesis of the nonstationarity of the dependency 
rate, indicate that it be a trend-stationary variable. 

4.4 Cointegration test 

4.4.1 Testing with the whole data 

The method for test for cointegration in panel data have developed very 
rapidly during the first decade of the 21st century. One of the most com- 

123 



Table 4.2: Panel unit root test of the other include variables, 1960-1996 
variable IPS ADF Pesaran PS 
gross saving 2.207 2.144 -0.186 4.79 

(0.986) (0.999) (0.426) (1.000) 
private consumption 12.532 0.0645 0.221 7.53 

(1.000) (1.000) (0.587) (0.960) 
GDP, ppp 11.006 14.039 0.347 5.331 

(1.000) (1.000) (0.636) (0.994) 
GDP, eur 3.912 19.453 2.420 11.210 

(1.000) (0.364) (0.992) (0.796) 
dependency -5.077 82.382 1.005 50.92 

(<.001) (<.001) (0.843) (<.001) 
interest rate 0.717 13.937 -1.144 19.97 

(0.764) (0.731) (0.126) (0.220) 

The test equation is: △yit = ρiyi,t−1 + δi + ηit + θt + ϵit. All variable be in logarithms. 

Probabilities of the test statistic appear in parentheses. In all other tests, except in the 

PS test, lag length be determine use Schwarts information criterion (SIC). Testing 

include 9 country and 333 observations. 

monly use cointegration test method have be the residual base panel 
cointegration test by Pedroni (2004). The limitation of Pedroni’s test be that 
it assumes independence of cross-sections, an assumption, which be likely to 
be violate in econometric cross-country studies.9 Cross-sectional correlation 
may bias the result towards reject the null of no cointegration (Baner- 
jee et al. 2004). To account for this bias, we use a panel cointegration test 
developed by Banerjee and Carrion-i-Silvestre (2006) that control for cross- 
sectional dependency by introduce common factors. The test also control 
for possible endogeneity of regressors by include lead and lag of differ- 
enced explanatory variable in estimation (this method be explain more 
thoroughly in the appendix I describe the panel DSUR estimator). A more 
thorough explanation of the test by Banerjee and Carrion-i-Silvestre (2006) 

9There are, for example, only few country that avoid the downturn of 2008 that 
start from the U.S. 

124 



can also be found in the appendix G. The test be base on two different test 
statistics, namely Zρ̂NT (λ̂) and Zt̂NT (λ̂) to test for the possible cointegra- 
tion between two variables. Both statistic be base on the ADF regression, 
from where the former us the estimate coefficient of ρ̂ and the latter the 
associate t-ratio to compute the test statistic. 

Table 4.3 present the result of the panel cointegration test by Banerjee 
and Carrion-i-Silvestre (2006). It report the result of the cointegration test 
between gross saving and the top 1% income share and gross saving and the 
GDP per capita.10 In addition, we test for cointegration between private con- 
sumption and the top 1% income share and private consumption and GDP 
per capita. 11 According to the result of the Zt̂NT (λ̂) test present in table 
4.3, gross saving and the income share of top 1% a well a private consump- 
tion and top 1% income share be cointegrated at the 5% level. According 
to the Zρ̂NT (λ̂) test, only gross saving and the top 1% income share be 
cointegrated. However, Banerjee and Carrion-i-Silvestre (2006) note that the 
Zt̂NT (λ̂) statistic should be prefer over the Zρ̂NT (λ̂) statistic, because the 
former have considerably good size and power property especially in small 
samples. Thus, we rely more on the result of the Zt̂NT (λ̂), and conclude that 
both gross saving and private consumption seem to be cointegrated with the 
top 1% income share. The GDP per caput and gross saving a well a GDP 
per caput and private consumption seem to be cointegrated of order 1. 

Table 4.3 only present the result of the test without breaks. However, 
we also conduct test with breaks, but if trend break be allow for, 
the result do not change dramatically. This be expect a structural break 
tend to bias the result towards the acceptance of the null (Banerjee and 
Carrion-i-Silvestre 2006). The result of the test include structural break 
be available upon request. 

10GDP per caput in euro be use in the for gross saving a the gross saving series be 
also present in euros. GDP per caput in ppp be use in the test for private saving for 
the same reason. 

11Estimation be do with Gauss. We be grateful to Carrion-i-Silvestre for provide 
the program code. 

125 



Table 4.3: Banerjee & Carrion-i-Silvestre’s cointegration test for gross sav- 
ings, final consumption and the income share of top 1% 

gross saving private consumption 
Top 1% income share 
Zt̂NT (λ̂) -3.952 -2.255 

(<.0001) (0.0121) 
Zρ̂NT (λ̂) -3.084 -0.548 

(0.0010) (0.292) 
GDP per caput 
Zt̂NT (λ̂) -5.683 -5.494 

(<.0001) (<.0001) 
Zρ̂NT (λ̂) -3.090 -6.399 

(0.0010) (<.0001) 

country 9 9 
year 1960-1996 1960-1996 
observation 333 333 

The test model include individual deterministic constant and trends. 

126 



4.4.2 Testing for the cointegration rank 

One of the obvious drawback of the residual tests, like the one present 
above, be that they cannot identify the number of cointegrating vector be- 
tween the variables. If we have just two variables, this be not a problem, 
because then there cannot be more than one cointegrating vector. However, 
with three variables, there can be two cointegrating vectors, with four vari- 
ables three cointegrating vectors, etc. The cointegration rank affect estima- 
tors, because some estimators, like the panel DSUR estimator, be base on 
the single equation approach meaning that a single cointegration relation- 
ship be assumed. If there be two or more cointegration relationship between 
the variables, the asymptotic property of the estimator derive under the 
assumption of one cointegration relation be no longer valid. In addition, 
estimator allow for multiple cointegrating vectors, like the estimator by 
Breitung (2005) use in this study, usually assume that the cointegration 
rank be homogenous across the country include in the panel. 

To allow for multiple cointegrating vectors, we use the panel trace coin- 
tegration test developed by Larsson and Lyhagen (2007) to test for the coin- 
tegration rank in model involve several explanatory variables. Their test 
be base on the likelihood ratio test of Johansen (1995). The general model 
on which Larsson ja Lyhagen’s test be base can be write a 

△Yt = µ +ΠYt−1 +Σm−1k=1 Γk∆Yt−k + ϵt, (4.6) 

where Π = αikβ′kj, Π and Γk be of order Np×Np and µ = (µ′1, µ′2, ..., µ′n) and 
ϵt = (ϵ′1t, ϵ′2t, ..., ϵ′nt) be of order Np× 1, and ϵt = (ϵ′1t, ϵ′2t, ..., ϵ′nt) be assume to 
be multivariate normally distribute with mean zero and covariance matrix 
Ω. 

It be assume that matrix Π have a reduce rank ofNr, 0 ≤ r ≤ p, and can be 
decompose a Π = αikβ′kj. The matrix αik be assume to be unrestricted, but 
βkj = 0 ∀i ≠ j. The fact that unrestricted αik mean that different panel unit 
can be dependent, but because of the restriction on βkj, these dependency 
relation can only appear in the short run. In other words, cointegrating 
relation be only allow within the unit of the panel. The cointegration 
rank be estimate by sequentially test 

H(r) ∶ rank(Π) ≤ Nr (4.7) 

127 



against the alternative 
H(p) ∶ rank(Π) ≤ Np (4.8) 

a in Johansen (1995). A more detailed explanation of the test be provide in 
Appendix B. 

A limitation in the panel cointegration test by Larsson and Lyhagen 
(2007) be that the number of estimate parameter increase rapidly with 
the number of cross sections. This mean that there need to be enough time 
series observation compare to cross-sectional unit or the parameter of the 
model cannot be estimated. In our baseline dataset, there be nine country 
and 37 time series observation per country, a relation which be far too small 
for the test. That be why country be divide into three group a explain 
in the section 3.1. Because country in these group tend to have similar eco- 
nomic and social structures, it be more likely that they also have homogenous 
cointegration relations. 

Tables 4.4 and 4.5 present the result of the test for the cointegration 
rank by Larsson and Lyhagen (2007) for the three group of country for 
gross saving and private consumption a the dependent variable.12 All vari- 
ables be detrended and demean before testing. The VAR lag length be 
determine use the Schwartz information criterion (SIC). 

According to the result present in table 4.4, the top 1% income share 
and gross saving appear to be difference stationary variable in the Central 
European and Anglo-Saxon countries. That is, both be I(1) variable that 
be not cointegrated. This result contradicts the result present in Table 
4.3, where gross saving and the top 1% income share be found to be 
cointegrated. The result of Nordic country indicate that there would be, 
at least, two cointegration vector between top 1% income share and gross 
savings. When the GDP per caput and the interest rate be add test find 
a cointegration rank of two in the Nordic countries. 

According to result of table 4.5, private consumption and the top 1% 
income share be cointegrated in the Central European and Anglo-Saxon 
countries. When the GDP per caput and the interest rate be added, the 
test find a cointegration rank of two in the Anglo-Saxon country and coin- 

12All test be do by Gauss. We be grateful to Johan Lyhagen for provide the 
Gauss code on his homepage. 

128 



Table 4.4: Panel trace cointegration test for saving and the top 1% income 
share for the 3 country group 

Nordic Central-Europe* Anglo-Saxon** 

top 1% 
r=0 211.12 292.15 72.32 

(197.64) (307.22) (92.86) 
r≤ 1 57.52 - - 

(50.71) 
top 1%, GDP & interest 
r=0 469.50 - - 

(381.22) 
r≤1 301.53 - - 

(283.40) 
r≤2 186.47 - - 

(175.66) 
r≤3 113.70 - - 

(83.32) 

country 3 3 3 
year 1960-03 1960-96 1960-00 
observation 132 111 123 

All series be detrended and demean before testing. * In the group of Central European 

countries, only GDP per caput and top 1% income share be include in the test, because 

there be too few time series observation per country to include a 4 variable. ** for Anglo- 

Saxon countries, GDP per caput in constant Euros be use instead of GDP per caput 

in purchasing power parity in the test with private consumption. All variable be test 

in logarithms. Bartlett correct critical value be present in parentheses. Lag length 

be select use Schwarz information criterion. 

129 



Table 4.5: Panel trace cointegration test for consumption and the top 1% 
income share for the 3 country group 

Nordic Central-Europe* Anglo-Saxon** 

top 1% 
r=0 295.33 294.36 194.75 

(167.08) (270.17) (171.47) 
r≤1 68.33 72.97 38.86 

(51.49) (83.63) (59.64) 
top 1%, GDP & interest 
r=0 410.85 516.43 1137.26 

(381.27) (470.88) (992.44) 
r≤1 281.61 194.42 586.90 

(267.77) (214.56) (523.78) 
r≤2 172.84 - 300.25 

(166.60) (336.24) 
r≤3 58.99 - - 

(89.81) 

country 3 3 3 
year 1960-03 1960-96 1960-00 
observation 132 111 123 

All series be detrended and demean before testing. * In the group of Central European 

countries, only GDP per caput and top 1% income share be include in the test, because 

there be too few time series observation per country to include a 4 variable. ** for Anglo- 

Saxon countries, GDP per caput in constant Euros be use instead of GDP per caput 

in purchasing power parity in the test with private consumption. All variable be test 

in logarithms. Bartlett correct critical value be present in parentheses. Lag length 

be select use Schwarz information criterion. 

130 



tegration rank of three in the Nordic countries. In the Central European 
country only private consumption, the top 1% income share and the GDP 
per caput be include in the testing, because there be not enough time 
series observation for include four variables. In Central-European coun- 
try the cointegration rank among these three variable be found to be one. 

The result of Nordic country present above thus indicate that there 
be two stationary cointegration relation between gross saving and the top 
1% income share a well a between private consumption and the top 1% 
income share. In the time series case this would imply that, in both of these 
tests, the two variable be I(0) trend-stationary. However, it do not seem 
likely that some of these series would be trend-stationary in Nordic countries, 
a all of the panel unit root test found gross savings, private consumption 
and the top 1% income share to be I(1) non-stationary (see section 3.2). If 
the time series of a variable in three out of nine country would be trend- 
stationary, it would be highly unlikely for the test to present the series a 
I(1) non-stationary. 

With panel data, the implication of the cointegration rank test be not 
so straightforward a they be in the case of time series. In model (4.7), the 
block matrix element of Π be give by Πij = ΣNk=1αikβ′jk, which equal αijβ′j 
when βij = 0 for all i ≠ j. However, if βij ≠ 0 for i ≠ j, then the block matrix 
element of Π be give αijβ′jk and the rank of Π can be large than the 
number of variables. That is, because the dimension of Π be Np × Np, the 
number of cross-sectional cointegration relation may increase the rank of the 
matrix. One likely source of cross-sectional cointegration would be a station- 
ary linear combination of I(1) non-stationary common factor(s) drive the 
GDP per caput series in the Nordic countries. As Nordic country have very 
similar social structures, and because they be small country within close 
proximity to each other, it would be quite natural if a common stochastic 
trend would affect their GDP series. As GDP per caput and consumption 
be found to be cointegrated, common stochastic trend drive the GDP 
series would also affect on the series of saving and private consumption. 
So, the result of the Nordic country present in table 4.5 be likely to 
be explain by cross-sectional cointegration relation affect the GDP per 
caput and consumption series. 

131 



In conclusion, result of cointegration test indicate that income inequal- 
ity, measure with the top 1% income share, and private consumption be 
cointegrated, but the result of the cointegration test for gross saving be 
somewhat inconclusive. It be not quite clear why this be or why the result 
deviate from the result of the unit root tests. It should be noted, however, 
that in the case of the test of Banerjee and Carrion-i-Silvestre (2006) we have 
more than double the number of observation compare to the test of Lars- 
son and Lyhagen (2007). So, even with the Bartlett correction, it be possible 
that the power of Larsson and Lyhagen’s test be not sufficient to reject the 
null hypothesis of zero rank of the Π matrix. 

4.5 Estimation 

According to the result present in the previous section, the cointegration 
rank among the include variable varies between the group of countries. 
Because of this, two different estimation method be apply to estimate the 
long-run effect of the income share of the top 1% on the gross saving and 
private consumption. Panel dynamic seemingly unrelated regressors (DSUR) 
estimator of Mark et al. (2005) be use when there seem to be only one cointe- 
grate vector between the variables, while the two-step maximum-likelihood 
panel VAR estimator by Breitung (2005) be use when there seem to be two 
or more cointegrating relation between the variables. The reason for use 
panel DSUR estimator be that Wagner and Hlouskova (2010) have found 
that single-equation estimators, like panel DSUR, perform good than the 
VAR estimator of Breitung (2005), when cross-sections be cross-sectionally 
correlate and/or cointegrated.13 Both estimator control for possible endo- 
geneity of the regressors. The panel DSUR estimator control for endogeneity 
by include lag and lead of first difference of the explanatory variable 
in the estimate equation. Panel VAR control for endogeneity by impose 

13Results of Wagner and Hlouskova (2010) imply that panel DOLS would perform good 
than panel VAR by Breitung (2005) in cross-sectionally cointegrated panels. Panel DSUR 
be not include in testing. However, a panel DSUR be more efficient than panel DOLS 
when cross-sections be correlated, it be also likely to be more efficient than panel DOLS 
when cross-sections be cointegrated. 

132 



block-diagonality of the Fisher information matrix with respect to short- and 
long-run parameters. A more detailed explanation of the estimator use can 
be found in the Appendix. The possible long-run cross-unit dependency rela- 
tions in income and consumption series between the Nordic country found 
in previous section cannot be control with estimator allow for short- 
run dependency and/or cross-sectional correlation. Fortunately, Wagner and 
Hlouskova (2010) have found that, if there be only a cross-sectionally iden- 
tical unit-specific cointegrating relationship(s) between the cross-sections, it 
creates only a small bias in the result of cointegration estimator use here. 

The estimate model is: 

log(Yit) = αi + γ′1log(GDPit) + γ′2log(top1it)+ 
+γ′3(interestit) + λit + uit, 

(4.9) 

where where αi’s be individual constant, λit’s be individual trends, and 
uit be a white noise error vector with E(uit) = 0. Table 4.6 present the 
result of estimation of equation (4.9) use the panel DSUR and panel VAR 
estimators.14 According to the results, the relation between the top 1% 
income share and gross saving somewhat depends on the include variables. 
The initial estimate of the cointegrating coefficient of inequality measure 
with the top 1% income share be negative,15 but the panel VAR estimate 
from the model include also the GDP per caput and the interest rate be 
positive in all country groups. However, the parameter estimate of the top 
1% income share be statistically significant only in Nordic country and on 
the last estimation of the Anglo-Saxon countries. 

Theories describe the relation between income inequality and saving 
usually concentrate on household saving behavior, which make private sav- 
ings or consumption a more valid measure to ass the effect of inequality 
on consumption or saving than gross saving that include also the govern- 
ment. Table 4.7 present the result of panel DSUR and panel VAR esti- 
mations where the dependent variable be private consumption.16 According 

14Estimation be conduct with Gauss. Author be grateful to Donggyu Sul and Joerg 
Breitung for provide the program code on their homepages. 

15If first equation be estimate with panel VAR, result be similar to those present in 
table 4.6. 

16Estimation be conduct with Gauss. Author be grateful to Donggyu Sul and Joerg 
Breitung for provide the program code on their homepages. 

133 



Table 4.6: Estimates of the long-run elasticity of gross saving with respect 
to top 1% income share in 3 group of country 

Dependent variable: log(gross savings) 

Nordics Central-Europe Anglo-Saxon 
Panel DSUR (l&l =2) 
log(top 1%) -0.0846** -0.127*** -0.4462 

(0.0288) (0.0405) (0.3706) 
Panel VAR (lags=2;1;1) 
log(top 1%) 0.0799*** 0.3794 0.2499 

(0.0251) (0.2751) (0.1769) 
log(GDP) 0.0118*** 0.0946*** 0.0903*** 

(0.0015) (0.0100) (0.0108) 
Panel VAR (lags=2;1;2) 
log(top 1%) 0.5654* 0.1866 0.5385* 

(0.2512) (0.2583) (0.1990) 
log(GDP) 0.1374*** 0.0894*** 0.0983*** 

(0.0169) (0.0097) (0.0105) 
log(interest) -0.3655** -0.0213 0.0990 

(0.1237) (0.0477) (0.0803) 

country 3 3 3 
year 1960-03 1960-96 1960-00 
observation 132 111 123 

* = p<.05, ** = p<.01, *** = p<.001. Standard error of the parameter estimate be 

present in parentheses. Standard error be estimate use Andrews and Monahan’s 

Pre-whitening method. Inclusion of individual constant mean that all estimation be 

make with fix effects. Lags give the lag order of the VAR model. L&l =2 mean that 

first and second lead and lag of first difference of the explanatory variable be use a 

instruments. 

134 



Table 4.7: Estimates of the long-run elasticity of private consumption with 
respect to top 1% income share in 3 group of country 

Dependent variable: log(private consumption) 

Nordic Central-Europe Anglo-Saxon 
Panel DSUR (l&l=2) 
log(top 1%) -0.1107*** -0.1219*** -0.1260*** 

(0.0097) (0.0342) (0.0325) 
Panel VAR (lags=2;1;2) 
log(top 1%) -0.1409** -0.2101*** 0.1130*** 

(0.0490) (0.0530) (0.0290) 
log(GDP) 0.0905*** 0.1002*** 0.0982*** 

(0.0039) (0.0026) (0.0021) 
Panel VAR (lags=1;1;2) 
log(top 1%) -0.1349* -0.1748*** 0.0826*** 

(0.0512) (0.0451) (0.0262) 
log(GDP) 0.0919*** 0.0996*** 0.1007*** 

(0.0042) (0.0024) (0.0021) 
log(interest) -0.0132 0.0203 -0.0383*** 

(0.0262) (0.0120) (0.0108) 

country 3 3 3 
year 1960-03 1960-96 1960-00 
observation 132 111 123 

* = p<.05, ** = p<.01, *** = p<.001. Standard error of the parameter estimate be 

present in parentheses. Standard error be estimate use Andrews and Monahan’s 

Pre-whitening method. Lags give the lag order of the VAR model. Individual constant 

and trend be include in the regressions. L&l =2 mean that first and second lag and 

lead of first difference of explanatory variable be use a instruments. 

135 



to the results, the cointegrating coefficient of the GDP per caput have the 
expect positive sign in all group of countries, but the interest rate have a 
statistically significant negative effect only in the group of the Anglo-Saxon 
countries. The "blurry" estimate of interest rate in Central-European coun- 
try be not a surprise a these country have differ indicator of interest 
rates. Among the Anglo-Saxon and Nordic countries, individual country 
have the same indicator of interest rate within each group, but the indicator 
differ between the groups. In the Anglo-Saxon countries, the treasury bill 
rate be used, whereas in the Nordic countries, the central bank rate be 
used. Although it be surprising that the interest rate have no statistically sig- 
nificant effect on the level of private consumption in the Nordic countries, 
the result may also be explain by different consumption profiles. Bacchetta 
and Gerlach (1997) found that in the United States and Canada, the change 
in credit condition have a large impact on consumption than in France or 
the UK. Humphrey (2004) also show that credit card be use more of- 
ten a a mean of payment in Canada and the US than in Europe. Thus, 
it be likely that change in the interest rate have a great effect on private 
consumption in the Anglo-Saxon than in the European countries. 

According to the result of Table 4.7, the cointegrating coefficient of in- 
equality be negative in all three country group when the top 1% income share 
be the only explanatory variable. However, when the GDP per caput be add 
a an explanatory variable, the cointegrating coefficient of inequality change 
to positive in the Anglo-Saxon countries. In the Nordic and Central-European 
country the coefficient remains negative and statistically significant, thus 
indicate that these result be robust. 

As such, the result imply that the long-run elasticity of private consump- 
tion with respect to inequality would be negative in the Nordic and Central- 
European countries, but positive in the Anglo-Saxon countries. Although this 
result be somewhat counterintuitive, it is, of course, always possible that the 
individual save function be convex in the European country and concave 
in the Anglo-Saxon countries. However, this contradicts the result of most 
theory and also some quite recent micro-econometric evidence from the US 
state that propensity to save raise with income (Dynan et al. 2004). From 
these reason some reservation need to be attach to the estimation result 

136 



of the Anglo-Saxon countries.17 It is, for example, possible that the cointegra- 
tion rank differs among the Anglo-Saxon country in estimation include 
the GDP per capita. In this case, the asymptotic property of the panel VAR 
estimator derive under the assumption of homogenuous cointegration rank 
be no longer valid. Unfortunately, the time series dimension of individual 
country be too small for meaningful country-specific test of the cointe- 
gration rank. Thus, the ambiguity concern the estimation result of the 
Anglo-Saxon country have to be left to be address in future studies. 

4.6 Conclusions 

In this study we assess the relationship between income inequality and 
saving use a panel of developed economies. We also test the assumption 
present in early theoretical literature on income variation that the size dis- 
tribution of income could follow a random walk. According to the results, 
income inequality, measure with the logarithmic top 1% income share, log- 
arithmic aggregate saving and logarithmic private consumption be driven 
by stochastic trends. The non-stationarity of the logarithmic top 1% income 
share implies that the current macroeconomic literature may have take an 
erroneous stand by assume a stationary process of income variation. 

The result concern cointegration between the top 1% income share 
and gross saving be contradictory a the series be found to be coin- 
tegrated by both of the use test only in the Nordic countries. All test 
found the top 1% income share and private consumption to be cointegrated, 
which indicates that there be a long-run steady-state relation between them. 
The long-run elasticity of private consumption with respect to inequality 
be found to be negative in the Central-European and Nordic countries, 
but positive in the Anglo-Saxon countries. This result implies that, in the 

17To check that this result do not relate to the expansion of credit in the wake of 
grow inequality, we add the domestic credit claim on the private sector a an ex- 
planatory variable for Anglo-Saxon countries. The variable be found to be I(1) accord 
to all panel unit root test mention in section three. The variable be obtain from 
IMF database. Adding a measure of credit do not change the main result for Anglo- 
Saxon country and it have the expect statistically significant positive effect on private 
consumption. 

137 



Anglo-Saxon countries, the marginal propensity to save would decrease with 
income, while in the rest of the country it would increase. However, estima- 
tion result for the Anglo-Saxon country crucially depend on the inclusion 
of the GDP per caput series. When the GDP per caput be not include 
in the estimation, the parameter estimate of the top 1% income share be 
negative and statistically significant. Thus, it be possible that the inclusion 
of the GDP per caput series may introduce some form of bias in the estima- 
tion of Anglo-Saxon country which cannot be control with current panel 
estimation methods. 

One assumption that need to be test in the future be the assumption 
of homogenous cointegration rank among the Anglo-Saxon countries. If the 
cointegration rank have differ among the Anglo-Saxon country in estima- 
tions include the GDP per capita, the estimate will have be biased. 
In this study, the individual country cointegration relation could not be 
tested, because test would have require considerably more time series 
observation than be available in our dataset. For the Nordic and Central- 
European country the observe positive effect of inequality on private sav- 
ings seem robust. Estimation result be unchanged when either only the 
top 1% income share or the interest rate and the GDP per caput be also 
include a explanatory variables. This implies that even if the cointegra- 
tion rank have differ within the group of Nordic and Central-European 
country in estimation with additional explanatory variables, this have not 
change the basic results. 

So, although the result for the Anglo-Saxon country be somewhat in- 
conclusive, the result for the Nordic and Central-European country clearly 
indicate that income inequality lead to high level of private savings. This 
result be well in-line with the theoretical and micro-econometric evidence. It 
also implies that the controversy surround the result of the previous em- 
pirical macroeconomic study have be likely to result from miss-specification 
of the estimate model by assume stationary income inequality. 

138 



Bibliography 

Alesina A, Perotti R. (1994). Income distribution, political instability and 
investment. European Economic Review, 40, 1203-1228. 

Ando A, Modigliani F. (1963). The "life cycle" hypothesis of savings: aggre- 
gate implication and tests. The American Economic Review, 53, 55-84. 

Atkinson AB, Piketty T. (2007). Top Incomes Over the Twentieth Century: A 
Contrast Between European and English-Speaking Countries. Oxford Uni- 
versity Press, Oxford. 

Attanasio OP, Weber G. (2010). Consumption and savings: model of in- 
tertemporal allocation and their implication for public policy. Journal of 
Economic Literature, 48, 693-751. 

Bacchetta P, Gerlach S. (1997). Consumption and credit constraints: inter- 
national evidence. Journal of Monetary Economics, 40, 207-238. 

Bai J, Ng S. (2004). A panic attack on unit root and cointegration. Econo- 
metrica, 72(4): 1127-1177. 

Baltagi B. (2008). Econometric analysis of panel data. John Wiley & Sons, 
West Sussex 

Banerjee A, Marcellino M, Osbat C. (2004) Some caution on the use of panel 
method for integrate series of panel data. Econometrics Journal, 7(2), 
322-40 

Banerjee A, Marcellino M, Osbat C. (2005). Testing for PPP: should we use 
panel methods? Empirical Economics, 30, 77-91. 

139 



Banerjee A, Carrion-i-Silvestre J. (2006) Cointegration in 
panel data with break and cross-section dependence. 
European Central Bank work paper series no. 591. 
http://www.ecb.int/pub/scientific/wps/date/html/wpsall.en.html. Ac- 
cessed 20 August 2010. 

Blundell R, Pistaferri L, Preston I. (2008) Consumption inequality and par- 
tial insurance. American Economic Review, 98(5), 1887-1921. 

Breitung J. (2005). A parametric approach to estimation of cointegrating 
vector in panel data. Econometric Reviews, 24(2), 151-173 

Breitung J, Pesaran H. (2008). Unit root and cointegration in panels. In 
Matysas L, Sevestre P (eds) The econometrics of panel data: fundamental 
and recent development in theory and practice, Springer, Berlin, 279-322 

Brock WA, Mirman LJ. (1973). Optimal economic growth and uncertainty: 
the no discounting case. International Economic Review, 14, pp. 560-573. 

Campbell J, Deaton A. (1989). Why be consumption so smooth? Review of 
Economic Studies, 56, 357-374. 

Chambernowne DG. (1953). A model of income distribution. The Economic 
Journal, 250(63), 318-351. 

Chu CY. (1990). An existence theorem on the stationary state of income 
distribution and population growth. International Economic Review, 31(1), 
171–185. 

Cook C. (1995). Savings rate and income distribution: further evidence from 
LDCs. Applied Economics, 27, 71-82. 

Cook S. (2005). The stationarity of consumption-income ratios: evidence from 
minimum LM unit root testing. Economics Letters, 89, 55-60. 

Deaton A. (1991). Saving and liquidity constraints. Econometrica, 59, 1221- 
1248. 

Deininger K, Squire L. (1996). A new data set measure income inequality. 
World Bank Economic Review, 10(3), 565-591 

140 



Dell F, Piketty T, Saez E. (2010). Income and wealth concentration in 
Switzerland over the twentieth century. In Atkinson A, Piketty T (eds) Top 
Income Over the Twentieth Century: a global perspective. Oxford: Univer- 
sity Press. 

Dynan K, Skinner J, Zeldes S. (2004). Do rich save more? Journal of Political 
Economy, 112(2), 397-444 

Fisher I. (1930). The Theory of Interest a Determined by Impatience to 
Spend Income and Opportunity to Invest. Online library of Liberty. Ac- 
cessed 26. of November 2010. 

Friedman M. (1957). A Theory of Consumption Function. Princeton Univer- 
sity Press. 

Gonzalo J, Granger C. (1995). Estimation of common long-memory compo- 
nents in cointegrated systems. Journal of Business and Economic Statis- 
tics, 13, 27-35. 

Hall RE. (1978). Stochastic implication of the life cycle-permanent income 
hypothesis: theory and evidence. The Journal of Political Economy, 86, 
971-987. 

Hall RE, Mishkin FS. (1982) The sensitivity of consumption to transitory 
income: estimate from panel data. Econometrica, 50(2), 461-481. 

Herzer D, Vollmer S. (2012). Inequality and growth: evidence from panel 
cointegration. Journal of Economic Inequality, (forthcoming). 

Hierro M, Maza A. (2009) Non-stationary transition matrices: an overlook 
issue in intra-distribution dynamics. Economics Letters, 103, 107-109. 

Humphrey (2004). Replacement of cash by card in U.S. consumer payments. 
Journal of Economics and Business, 56, 211-225. 

Im K, Pesaran H, Shin Y. (2003). Testing for unit root in heteregenous 
panels. Journal of Econometrics, 115(1), 53-74 

Johansen S. (1995). Likelihood-Bases Inference in Cointegrated Vector Au- 
toregressive Models. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

141 



Jäntti M, Stephen PJ. (2010). The impact of macroeconomics condition on 
income inequality. Journal of Economic Inequality, 8, 221-240. 

Kao C, Chiang MH. (2000). On the estimation and inference of a cointegrated 
regression panel data. In Baltagi B (ed) Advances in Econometrics 15, 
Emerald, Bingley, pp. 179-222 

Kaldor N. (1957). A model of economic growth. Economic Journal, 67(268), 
591-624 

Keynes M. (1936). The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money. 
Harcourt, New York 

King RG, Plosser JH, Stock JH, Watson MW. (1991). Stochastic trend and 
economic fluctuation. The American Economic Review, 81(4), 819-840. 

Kotlikoff L, Summers L. (1981). The role of intergenerational transfer in 
aggregate capital accumulation. The Journal of Political Economy, 89, 706- 
732. 

Kuznets S. (1955). Economic growth and income inequality. American Eco- 
nomic Review, 45(1), 1-29 

Larsson R, Lyhagen J. (2007). Inference in panel cointegratin model with 
long panels. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 25, 473-483. 

Leigh A. (2007). How closely do top income share track other measure of 
inequality? Economic Journal, 117, 619-633. 

Leigh A, Posso A. (2009). Top income and national savings. The Review of 
Income and Wealth, 1, 57-74. 

Levin A, Lin CF, Chu CS. (2002). Unit root test in panel data: asymptotic 
and finite-sample properties. Journal of Econometrics, 108 (1), 1-24 

Li H, Zou H-F. (2004). Savings and income distribution. Annals of Economics 
and Finance, 5, 245-270. 

Loury GC. (1981). Intergenerational transfer and the distribution of earn- 
ings. Econometrica, 49(4), 843–867. 

142 



Lucas RE. (1978) Asset price in an exchange economy. Econometrica, 46(6), 
1429-1445. 

Maddala G, Wu S. (1999). A comparative study of unit root test with panel 
data and a new simple test. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 
61 (special issue), 631-652 

Malinen T. (2012). Estimating the long-run relationship between income in- 
equality and economic development. Empirical Economics, forthcoming. 

Mandelbrot B. (1961) Stable Paretian random function and the multiplica- 
tive variation of income. Econometrica, 29(4), 517-543. 

Mark N, Ogaki M, Sul D (2005). Dynamic seemingly unrelated cointegrating 
regressions. Review of Economic Studies, 72(3), 797-820 

Meghir C, Pistaferri L. (2004) Income variance dynamic and heterogeneity. 
Econometrica, 72(1), 1-32. 

Mocan HN. (1999) Structural unemployment, cyclical unemployment, and 
income inequality. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 81 (1), 122- 
134. 

Muth JF. (1960) Optimal property of exponentially weight forecasts. 
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 55, 299-306. 

Pedroni P. (2004). Panel cointegration: asymptotic and finite sample prop- 
erties of pool time series test with an application to PPP hypothesis. 
Econometric Theory, 20(3), 597-625 

Pedroni P. (1999). Critical value for cointegration test in heterogenous pan- 
el with multiple regressors. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 
61(special issue), 653-670 

Pesaran H. (2007). A simple panel unit root test in the presence of cross 
section dependence. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 22(2), 265-315 

Phillips P, Moon H. (1999). Linear regression limit theory for nonstationary 
panel data. Econometrica, 67(5), 1057-1111 

143 



Phillips PC, Sul D. (2003). Dynamic Panel Estimation and Homogeneity 
Testing under Cross Section Dependence. Econometrics Journal 6(1), 217– 
259 

Piketty T. (2003). Income inequality in France, 1901-1998. Journal of Polit- 
ical Economy, 5, 1004-1042. 

Roine J, Waldenström D. (2011). Common trend and shock to top incomes: 
a structural break approach. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 
forthcoming. 

Romero-Ávila D. (2009). Are OECD consumption-income ratio stationary 
after all? Economic Modelling, 26, 107-117. 

Rossana RJ, Seater JJ. (1995). Temporal aggregation and economic time 
series. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 13(4), 441-451. 

Sarantis N, Stewart C. (1999). Is the consumption-income ratio stationary? 
Evidence from panel unit root tests. Economics Letters, 64, 309-314. 

Smith A. (1776). An Inquiry Into the Nature and Causes of Wealth of Na- 
tions. http://www.gutenberg.org/etext/3300. Accessed 6 September 2010 

Smith D. (2001). International evidence on how income inequality and credit 
market imperfection affect private save rates. Journal of Development 
Economics, 64, 102-127. 

Schmidt-Hebbel K, Servén L. (2000). Does income inequality raise aggregate 
saving? Journal of Development Economics, 61, 417-446. 

Seater JJ. (1997). An optimal control solution to the liquidity constraint 
problem. Economics Letters, 54, 127-134. 

Solow RM. (1957). A contribution to the theory of economic growth. Quar- 
terly Journal of Economics, 70(1), 65-94. 

Stewart C. (2011). A note on spurious significance in regression involve 
I(0) and I(1) variables. Empirical Economics, 41, 565–571. 

144 



Stiglitz J. (1969). Distribution of income and wealth among individuals. 
Econometrica, 37(3), 382-397 

Taylor A. (2002). A century of current account dynamics. Journal of Inter- 
national Money and Finance 21, 725–48. 

Travaglini G. (2008). An exact consumption rule with liquidity constraint 
and stochastic income. Economics Bulletin, 5, 1-9. 

Wagner M, Hlouskova J. (2010). The performance of panel cointegration 
methods: result from a large scale simulation study. Econometric Reviews, 
29(2), 182-223 

White H, Granger CWJ. (2010) Consideration of trend in time series. Jour- 
nal of Time Series Econometrics, 3(1), 1–38. 

Zeldes SP. (1989). Consumption and liquidity constraints: an empirical in- 
vestigation. The Journal of Political Economy, 97(2), 305-346. 

145 



146 



Appendix G 

Panel cointegration test by 
Banerjee and Carrion-i-Silvestre 
(2006) 

Panel cointegration test developed by Banerjee and Carrion-i-Silvestre (2006) 
be base on the normalize bias and the pseudo t-ratio test statistic by 
Pedroni (2004). The data generate process behind Pedroni’s test statistic 
be give by: 

yit = fi(t) + x′it + eit, 
△xit = vit, 

eit = ρiei,t−1 + ϵitζit = (ϵit, vit)′, 

(G.1) 

where fi(t) include member specific fix effect and deterministic trends. 

The data generate process be described a a partition vector z′it ≡ 
(yit, xit) where the true process be generate a zit = zi,t−1 + ζit, ζ ′it = (ζ 

y 
itζ 

X 
it ) 

(Pedroni 2004). 1√ 
T 
∑[Tr]t=1 ζit be assume to converge to a vector Brownian 

motion with asymptotic covariance of Ωi a T Ð→∞. The individual process 
be assume to be i.i.d. so that E[ζitζ ′js] = 0 ∀s, t, i ≠ j. 

Let êit denote the estimate residual of obtain from (G.1) and Ω̂i the 

147 



consistent estimator of Ωi. The two test statistic can now be define a : 

Z̃ρ̂NT−1 ≡ 
N 

∑ 
i=1 
( 

T 

∑ 
t=1 
ê2i,t−1) 

−1 T 
∑ 
t=1 
(êi,t−1∆êit − λ̂i), 

Z̃∗ 
t̂NT 
≡ 

N 

∑ 
i=1 
( 

T 

∑ 
t=1 
ŝ∗2i ê 

∗2 
i,t−1) 

−1/2 T 
∑ 
t=1 
(ê∗i,t−1∆ê∗it), 

where λ̂i = 1/T ∑kis=1 (1 − s/(ki + 1))∑ 
T 
t=s+1 µ̂itµ̂i,t−s, σ̃2NT ≡ 1/N ∑ 

N 
i=1 L̂ 

−2 
11iσ̂ 

2 
i , 

ŝ∗2i ≡ 1/t∑ 
T 
t=1 µ̂ 

∗2 
it , s̃∗2NT ≡ 1/N ∑ 

N 
i=1 ŝ 

∗2 
i , L̂211i = 1/T ∑ 

T 
t=1 ϑ̂ 

2 
it 

+ 2/T ∑kis=1 (1 − s/(k − i + 1))∑ 
T 
t=s+1 ϑ̂i, ϑ̂i,t−s. The residual µ̂it, µ̂∗it and ϑ̂it be 

attain from regressions: êit = γ̂êi,t−1 + µ̂it, êit = γ̂iêi,t−1 +∑K−ik=1 γ̂ik∆êi,t−k + µ̂∗it, 
∆yit = ∑Mm=1 b̂mi∆xmi,t = ϑ̂it. (Pedroni 1999, 2004) 

The statistic pool the between dimension of the panel and they be con- 
structed by compute the ratio of the correspond conventional time series 
statistic and then by compute the standardize sum of the N time series 
of the panel. Pedroni (1999, 2004) show that under the null of no cointe- 
gration the asymptotic distribution of the two statistic present above 
converge to normal distribution with zero mean and variance of one a N 
and T sequentially converge to infinity. 

Banerjee and Carrion-I-Silvestre (2006) extend the model by Pedroni 
(2004) to include common factors: 

yi,t = fi(t) + x′i,t + ui,t, 
△xi,t = vi,t, 

fi(t) = µi + βit 
uit = F ′tπi + eit 

(G.2) 

where ei,t = ρiei,t + ϵi,t and F ′t :s be the common factor which be use to 
account for the possible cross-sectional dependence. 

148 



Appendix H 

Panel trace cointegration test 
statistic by Larsson and Lyhagen 
(2007) 

The trace cointegration test by Larsson and Lyhagen (2007) be base on the 
follow model: 

△Yt = µ +ΠYt−1 +Σm−1k=1 Γk∆Yt−k + ϵt, (H.1) 

where µ = (µ′1, µ′2, ..., µ′N)′, ϵt = (ϵ′1t, ϵ′2t, ..., ϵ′nt), Yt−1 and ∆Yt−k be of order 
Np×1, Π and Γk be Np×Np, and ϵt be assume to be multivariate normally 
distribute with mean zero and covariance matrix Ωij. 

It be assume that matrix Π have a reduce rank of Nr, 0 ≤ r ≤ p, which 
be specify a Π = αikβ′kj (Larsson and Lyhagen 2007). Matrices α and β be 
both order of Np×Nr and the former contains the short-run coefficient and 
the latter the long-run coefficient. In β, βii ≡ βi for each rank of r. Because 
of the restriction, βkj = 0 ∀i ≠ j, the block matrix element of Π be give by 
ΣNk=1αikβ 

′ 
kj = αijβ′j. 

The cointegration rank be estimate by sequentially test 

H(r) ∶ rank(Π) ≤ Nr (H.2) 

against the alternative 

H(p) ∶ rank(Π) ≤ Np, (H.3) 

149 



which be the same method a in Johansen (1995). 
Define QT a the maximum likelihood ratio test statistic for the test of 

H(r) against H(p), and assume that the matrix α′ ⊥ Γβ ⊥ have a full rank 
and that the root of the characteristic polynomial 

A(z) = (1 − z)INp − αβ′z −Σm−1i=1 Γk(1 − z)zi (H.4) 

lie outside the complex unit circle. Now, if r > 0, 

-2 log Qt 
wÐ→ U + V, (H.5) 

a T Ð→ ∞, where V be χ2 with N(N − 1)r(p − r) degree of freedom inde- 
pendent of U , and 

U = tr {∫ dBF ′ (∫ FF ′) 
−1 

∫ FdB′} . (H.6) 

Larsson and Lyhagen (2007) show that the limit distribution of the test 
statistic (H.5) equal the convolution of Dickey-Fuller distribution (B) and 
an independent χ2 variate (F ). The distribution can be simulated by approx- 
imating the Wiener process of B by a random walk. 

150 



Appendix I 

Panel DSUR and Panel VAR 
estimator 

I.1 Panel DSUR estimator by Mark et al. (2005) 

The data generation process in Mark et al. (2005) DSUR estimator be of the 
form 

yit = αi + λit + θt + β′xit + uit, (I.1) 

△xit = eit (I.2) 

where there be n cointegrating regression each with T observations, (1−β′) 
be the cointegration vector between yit and xit, and xit and eit be k × 1 di- 
mensional vectors. Panel DSUR eliminates the possible endogeneity between 
explanatory variable and the dependent variable by assume that uit be 
correlate at most with pi lead and lag of △xit (Mark et al. 2005). The 
possible endogeneity can be control by project uit onto these pi lead 
and lags: 

uit = 
pi 

∑ 
s=−pi 

δ′i,s△ xi,t−s + uit∗ = δ′izit + u∗it. (I.3) 

The projection error u∗it be orthogonal to all lead and lag of △xit and the 
estimate equation becomes: 

yit = αi + λit + θt + β′xit + δizit + u∗it, (I.4) 

where δ′izit be a vector of projection dimensions. Panel DSUR estimate a long- 
run covariance matrix that be use in estimation of equation (I.1). This make 

151 



panel DSUR more efficient when cross-sections be dependent. The efficiency 
of panel DSUR actually improves a the correlation between cross-sections 
increases. Asymptotics property of the estimator be base on T Ð→ ∞ 
with N fixed. 

I.2 Panel VAR estimator by Breitung (2005) 

Breitung (2005) proposes a panel VAR(p) model which can be present a 
a panel vector error-correction model (VECM) a 

△yit = ψidt + αiβ′y,t−1 +Σ 
p−1 
j=1Γij △ yi,t−j + ϵit, (I.5) 

where dt be a vector of deterministic variable and ψi a k × k matrix of un- 
know coefficients, Γij be unrestricted matrix, and ϵit be a white noise error 
vector with E(ϵit) = 0 and positive definite covariance matrix Σi = E(ϵitϵ′it). 
The model be estimate in two stages. First, the model be estimate sepa- 
rately acrossN cross-section units. Then cointegration vector be normalize 
so that they do not depend on individual specific parameters. Second, the 
system be transform to a pool regression of the form: 

ẑit = β′yi,t−1 + v̂it, (I.6) 

where ẑit = (α̂′iΣ̂−1i α̂i)−1α̂′iΣ̂−1i △ yit and v̂it be define in similar fashion. The 
cointegration matrix, β, can now be estimate from (I.6) use the OLS esti- 
mator. It be assume that the statistical unit include in the panel have the 
same cointegration rank. Consistent estimation be base on sequential limits. 
Cross-sectional correlation be account by use an estimate asymptotic 
covariance matrix. 

152 






INCOME INEQUALITY IN THE PROCESS OF 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: AN EMPIRICAL 
APPROACH 
Contents 
Acknowledgements 
Chapter 1 
Introduction 
1.1 Background 
1.2 Income inequality: the wisdom of economicthought and global trend 
1.2.1 What determines the division of product amongthe factor of land, labor, and capital? 
1.2.2 Measuring income inequality 


1.3 The process of income variation and thedistribution of income 
1.4 Theoretical effect of income inequality oneconomic growth 
1.4.1 The origin 
1.4.2 Modern theory 



1.5 Analyzing panel data 
1.5.1 Basic estimator of panel data 

1.6 Contributions of the thesis 
1.6.1 The effect of income inequality on economic growthin the short run 
1.6.2 The long-run relationship between income inequalityand economic development 
1.6.3 The relationship between inequality and saving 



Bibliography 
Appendix A 
Chapter 2 Inequality and growth: anotherlook at the subject with a newmeasure and method 
2.1 Introduction 
2.2 The theoretical effect of inequality on growth 
2.2.1 Credit market imperfection 
2.2.2 Political economy 
2.2.3 Unrest related to social policy 
2.2.4 Saving rate 


2.3 Summary of the main problem encounteredin the field of study 
2.3.1 Problems with the Deininger and Squire (1996)Gini index 
2.3.2 Estimation of group-related elasticity 


2.4 Data 
2.5 Estimation 
2.6 Conclusions 
Bibliography 
Appendix BCountry list 
Chapter 3 Estimating the long-runrelationship between incomeinequality and economicdevelopment 
3.1 Introduction 
3.2 The main theoretical relationship betweeninequality and growth 
3.2.1 The income approach 
3.2.2 The credit-market imperfection and combine approach 
3.2.3 The political economy approach 


3.3 Time series analysis of panel data 
3.3.2 Unit root test 
3.3.3 Cointegration test 
3.3.1 Data 


3.4 Estimation of the cointegrating coefficientof inequality 
3.4.1 Estimation and inference in cointegrated panel 
3.4.2 Estimation result 
3.4.3 Estimation of income group-related elasticity ofgrowth 



3.5 Conclusions 
Bibliography 
Appendix C Panel unit root test 
Appendix D Pedroni’s and Banerjee &Carrion-i-Silvestre’s panelcointegration test 
Appendix E Panel DOLS and panel DSURestimators 
E.2 Panel DSUR 

Appendix F Country list 
Chapter 4 Income inequality and savings: areassessment of the relationshipin cointegrated panel 
4.1 Introduction 
4.2 Theoretical and empirical consideration 
4.3 Data and unit root test 
4.3.1 Data 
4.3.2 Unit root test 

4.4 Cointegration test 
4.4.2 Testing for the cointegration rank 

4.5 Estimation 
4.6 Conclusions 
Bibliography 
Appendix G Panel cointegration test byBanerjee and Carrion-i-Silvestre(2006) 
Appendix H Panel trace cointegration teststatistic by Larsson and Lyhagen(2007) 
Appendix I Panel DSUR and Panel VARestimators 
I.1 Panel DSUR estimator by Mark et al. (2005) 
I.2 Panel VAR estimator by Breitung (2005) 



