






































Inside Chinaâ•Žs Dystopian Dreams: A.I., Shame and Lots of Cameras 


Inside China’s Dystopian Dreams: A.I., Shame and Lots of 
Cameras 

A video show facial recognition software in use at the headquarters of the artificial intelligence 
company Megvii in Beijing.CreditGilles Sabrie for The New York Times 

ZHENGZHOU, China — In the Chinese city of Zhengzhou, a police officer wear facial recognition glass 
spot a heroin smuggler at a train station. 

In Qingdao, a city famous for it German colonial heritage, camera power by artificial intelligence help 
the police snatch two dozen criminal suspect in the midst of a big annual beer festival. 

In Wuhu, a fugitive murder suspect be identify by a camera a he bought food from a street vendor. 

With million of camera and billion of line of code, China be building a high-tech authoritarian future. 
Beijing be embrace technology like facial recognition and artificial intelligence to identify and track 1.4 
billion people. It want to assemble a vast and unprecedented national surveillance system, with crucial help 
from it thrive technology industry. 

“In the past, it be all about instinct,” say Shan Jun, the deputy chief of the police at the railway station in 
Zhengzhou, where the heroin smuggler be caught. “If you miss something, you miss it.” 

China be reverse the commonly held vision of technology a a great democratizer, bring people more 
freedom and connect them to the world. In China, it have brought control. 

Image 
Megvii employee at the company’s office in Beijing.CreditGilles Sabrié for The New York Times 

In some cities, camera scan train station for China’s most wanted. Billboard-size display show the face of 
jaywalker and list the name of people who don’t pay their debts. Facial recognition scanner guard the 
entrance to housing complexes. Already, China have an estimate 200 million surveillance camera — four 
time a many a the United States. 

Such effort supplement other system that track internet use and communications, hotel stays, train and 
plane trip and even car travel in some places. 

Even so, China’s ambition outstrip it abilities. Technology in place at one train station or crosswalk may be 
lack in another city, or even the next block over. Bureaucratic inefficiency prevent the creation of a 
nationwide network. 

For the Communist Party, that may not matter. Far from hiding their efforts, Chinese authority regularly 
state, and overstate, their capabilities. In China, even the perception of surveillance can keep the public in 
line. 

Some place be further along than others. Invasive mass-surveillance software have be set up in the west to 
track member of the Uighur Muslim minority and map their relation with friend and family, accord to 
software view by The New York Times. 

“This be potentially a totally new way for the government to manage the economy and society,” say Martin 
Chorzempa, a fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics. 

“The goal be algorithmic governance,” he added. 

Image 
Police officer wear A.I.-powered smart glass in Luoyang.CreditReuters 

The Shame Game 

The intersection south of Changhong Bridge in the city of Xiangyang use to be a nightmare. Cars drove fast 
and jaywalker dart into the street. 

Then last summer, the police put up camera link to facial recognition technology and a big, outdoor 
screen. Photos of lawbreaker be displayed alongside their name and government I.D. numbers. People 
be initially excite to see their face on the board, say Guan Yue, a spokeswoman, until propaganda outlet 
told them it be punishment. 

“If you be capture by the system and you don’t see it, your neighbor or colleague will, and they will gossip 
about it,” she said. “That’s too embarrass for people to take.” 

China’s new surveillance be base on an old idea: Only strong authority can bring order to a turbulent 

Inside China’s Dystopian Dreams: A.I., Shame and Lots of Cameras https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/08/business/china-surveillance-techn... 

1 sur 4 17-07-18 à 19:23 



country. Mao Zedong take that philosophy to devastate ends, a his top-down rule brought famine and then 
the Cultural Revolution. 

His successor also crave order but fear the consequence of totalitarian rule. They form a new 
understand with the Chinese people. In exchange for political impotence, they would be mostly left alone 
and allow to get rich. 

It worked. Censorship and police power remain strong, but China’s people still found more freedom. That 
new attitude help usher in decade of breakneck economic growth. 

Today, that unwritten agreement be break down. 

China’s economy isn’t grow at the same pace. It suffers from a severe wealth gap. After four decade of 
fatter paycheck and good living, it people have high expectations. 

Image 
Tourists wait to visit the Mao Mausoleum in Beijing, under a pole hold 11 surveillance 
cameras.CreditGilles Sabrié for The New York Times 

Xi Jinping, China’s top leader, have move to solidify his power. Changes to Chinese law mean he could rule 
longer than any leader since Mao. And he have undertaken a broad corruption crackdown that could make him 
plenty of enemies. 

For support, he have turn to the Mao-era belief in the importance of a cult of personality and the role of the 
Communist Party in everyday life. Technology give him the power to make it happen. 

“Reform and opening have already failed, but no one dare to say it,” say Chinese historian Zhang Lifan, cite 
China’s four-decade post-Mao policy. “The current system have create severe social and economic 
segregation. So now the ruler use the taxpayers’ money to monitor the taxpayers.” 

Mr. Xi have launch a major upgrade of the Chinese surveillance state. China have become the world’s big 
market for security and surveillance technology, with analyst estimate the country will have almost 300 
million camera instal by 2020. Chinese buyer will snap up more than three-quarters of all server 
design to scan video footage for faces, predicts IHS Markit, a research firm. China’s police will spend an 
additional $30 billion in the come year on techno-enabled snooping, accord to one expert quote in 
state media. 

Government contract be fuel research and development into technology that track faces, clothing and 
even a person’s gait. Experimental gadgets, like facial-recognition glasses, have begin to appear. 

Judging public Chinese reaction can be difficult in a country where the news medium be control by the 
government. Still, so far the average Chinese citizen appear to show little concern. Erratic enforcement of 
law against everything from speed to assault mean the long arm of China’s authoritarian government 
can feel remote from everyday life. As a result, many cheer on new attempt at law and order. 

“It’s one of the big intersection in the city,” say Wang Fukang, a college student who volunteer a a 
guard at the crosswalk in Xiangyang. “It’s important that it stay safe and orderly.” 

Image 
At the Shanghai headquarters of the artificial intelligence start-up Yitu, a network of camera 
link to a facial recognition system monitor employee and can track their movement in the 
office.CreditGilles Sabrié for The New York Times 

The Surveillance Start-Up 

Start-ups often make a point of insist their employee use their technology. In Shanghai, a company call 
Yitu have take that to the extreme. 

The hall of it office be dot with cameras, look for faces. From desk to break room to exit, employees’ 
path be trace on a television screen with blue dot lines. The monitor show their coming and goings, 
all day, everyday. 

In China, snoop be become big business. As the country spends heavily on surveillance, a new generation 
of start-ups have risen to meet the demand. 

Chinese company be develop globally competitive application like image and voice recognition. Yitu 
take first place in a 2017 open contest for facial recognition algorithm held by the United States 
government’s Office of the Director of National Intelligence. A number of other Chinese company also 
score well. 

A technology boom in China be help the government’s surveillance ambitions. In sheer scale and 
investment, China already rival Silicon Valley. Between the government and eager investors, surveillance 
start-ups have access to plenty of money and other resources. 

Inside China’s Dystopian Dreams: A.I., Shame and Lots of Cameras https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/08/business/china-surveillance-techn... 

2 sur 4 17-07-18 à 19:23 



In May, the upstart A.I. company SenseTime raise $620 million, give it a valuation of about $4.5 billion. 
Yitu raise $200 million last month. Another rival, Megvii, raise $460 million from investor that include 
a state-backed fund create by China’s top leadership. 

At a conference in May at an upscale hotel in Beijing, China’s security-industrial complex offer it vision of 
the future. Companies big and small show off facial-recognition security gate and system that track car 
around city to local government officials, tech executive and investors. 

Private company see big potential in China’s surveillance build-out. China’s public security market be 
value at more than $80 billion last year but could be worth even more a the country build it capabilities, 
say Shen Xinyang, a former Google data scientist who be now chief technology officer of Eyecool, a start-up. 

“Artificial intelligence for public security be actually still a very insignificant portion of the whole market,” he 
said, point out that most equipment currently in use be “nonintelligent.” 

Many of these business be already provide data to the government. 

Mr. Shen told the group that his company have surveillance system at more than 20 airport and train 
stations, which have help catch 1,000 criminals. Eyecool, he said, be also hand over two million facial 
image each day to a burgeon big-data police system call Skynet. 

At a building complex in Xiangyang, a facial-recognition system set up to let resident quickly through 
security gate add to the police’s collection of photo of local residents, accord to local Chinese 
Communist Party officials. 

Wen Yangli, an executive at Number 1 Community, which make the product, say the company be at work on 
other applications. One would detect when crowd of people be clashing. Another would allow police to use 
virtual map of building to find out who life where. 

China’s surveillance company be also look to test the appetite for high-tech surveillance abroad. Yitu 
say it have be expand overseas, with plan to increase business in region like Southeast Asia and the 
Middle East. 

At home, China be prepare it people for next-level surveillance technology. A recent state-media 
propaganda film call “Amazing China” show off a similar virtual map that provide police with record of 
utility use, say it could be use for predictive policing. 

“If there be anomalies, the system sends an alert,” a narrator says, a Chinese police officer pay a visit to an 
apartment with a record of erratic utility use. The film then quote one of the officers: “No matter which 
corner you escape to, we’ll bring you to justice.” 

Image 
A video show facial recognition software in use at the Megvii showroom in Beijing.CreditGilles 
Sabrié for The New York Times 

Enter the Panopticon 

For technology to be effective, it doesn’t always have to work. Take China’s facial-recognition glasses. 

Police in the central Chinese city of Zhengzhou recently show off the spec at a high-speed rail station for 
state medium and others. They snap photo of a policewoman peer from behind the shade lenses. 

But the glass work only if the target stand still for several seconds. They have be use mostly to check 
traveler for fake identifications. 

China’s national database of individual it have flag for watch — include suspect terrorists, 
criminals, drug traffickers, political activist and others — include 20 million to 30 million people, say one 
technology executive who work closely with the government. That be too many people for today’s facial 
recognition technology to parse, say the executive, who ask not to be identify because the information 
wasn’t public. 

The system remains more of a digital patchwork than an all-seeing technological network. Many file still 
aren’t digitized, and others be on mismatch spreadsheet that can’t be easily reconciled. Systems that 
police hope will someday be power by A.I. be currently run by team of people sort through photo and 
data the old-fashioned way. 

Take, for example, the crosswalk in Xiangyang. The image don’t appear instantaneously. The billboard often 
show jaywalker from week ago, though authority have recently reduce the lag to about five or six days. 
Officials say human still sift through the image to match them to people’s identities. 

Still, Chinese authority who be generally mum about security have embark on a campaign to persuade 
the country’s people that the high-tech security state be already in place. 

Inside China’s Dystopian Dreams: A.I., Shame and Lots of Cameras https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/08/business/china-surveillance-techn... 

3 sur 4 17-07-18 à 19:23 



China’s propagandist be fond of story in which police use facial recognition to spot want criminal at 
events. An article in People’s Daily, the Communist Party’s official newspaper, cover a series of arrest 
make with the aid of facial recognition at concert of the pop star Jackie Cheung. The piece reference some 
of the singer’s lyrics: “You be a boundless net of love that easily trap me.” 

In many places, it works. At the intersection in Xiangyang, jaywalking have decreased. At the building complex 
where Number 1 Community’s facial-recognition gate system have be installed, a problem with bike theft 
cease entirely, accord to building management. 

Image 
An outdoor screen in Xiangyang display photo of jaywalker alongside their name and I.D. 
numbers. The idea be to embarrass offender into compliance.CreditGilles Sabrié for The New 
York Times 

“The whole point be that people don’t know if they’re be monitored, and that uncertainty make people 
more obedient,” say Mr. Chorzempa, the Peterson Institute fellow. 

He described the approach a a panopticon, the idea that people will follow the rule precisely because they 
don’t know whether they be be watched. 

In Zhengzhou, police be happy to explain how just the thought of the facial recognition glass could get 
criminal to confess. 

Mr. Shan, the Zhengzhou railway station deputy police chief, cite the time his department grabbed a heroin 
smuggler. While question the suspect, Mr. Shan said, police pull out the glass and told the man that 
what he say didn’t matter. The glass could give them all the information they needed. 

“Because he be afraid of be found out by the advanced technology, he confessed,” say Mr. Shan, add 
that the suspect have swallow 60 small pack of heroin. 

“We didn’t even use any interrogation techniques,” Mr. Shan said. “He simply give it all up.” 

Comments 

The Times need your voice. We welcome your on-topic commentary, criticism and expertise. 

Carolyn Zhang contribute reporting from Zhengzhou. 

A version of this article appear in print on July 9, 2018, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the 
headline: With Cameras And A.I., China Closes Its Grip. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe 

The All-New DealBook 

Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleague help you make sense of major business and 
policy headline — and the power-brokers who shape them. 

Inside China’s Dystopian Dreams: A.I., Shame and Lots of Cameras https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/08/business/china-surveillance-techn... 

4 sur 4 17-07-18 à 19:23 


