






































EE Times - Intel Probes Man-Machine 'Trust' 


Junko Yoshida, Chief International 
Correspondent 
8/24/2017 11:00 AM EDT 

8 comment post a comment 

Tweet 

Blog 

Intel Probes Man-Machine ‘Trust’ 

Acceptance of a self- 
drive car isn't just a 
question of trust 
versus control. Why 
should I want one? 
What value and 

benefit do it deliver? 

In hope of play a leadership role in the come era of driverless cars, Intel be make a 
gutsy move. The chip giant be initiate qualitative study toward solve the eternal human- 
machine quandary: Can you ever trust a machine? 

And if so, would the machine have to look like Darryl Hannah? 

Intel recently conduct a qualitative study with 10 volunteer with no previous exposure to 
driverless cars. The subject be invite to the company’s Chandler, Arizona, campus. Test 
proctor ask them to ride in a driverless test car and offer feedback on the experience. 
Although admit the sample be small, Intel cheerfully share with reporter some of the 
nugget — and a few surprise — that emerge from the study. Intel rep told u that they 
hope to verify the result in a series of large test to be conduct in different geographical 
regions. 

Intel have recently conduct Car & Rider Trust Study. (Source: Intel) 

First off, the skeptic on my shoulder found it slightly preposterous for a semiconductor 
company to conduct a socio-psychological study focus on an objective a touchy-feely a 
“trust.” 

My first instinct be that a study do by a company whose vested interest be convincing 
people to use it [driverless] technology have little credibility. Any conclusion could be 
dismiss a suspect and self-serving. 

On the other hand, I found myself applaud Intel for deal head-on with the thorniest 
issue of driverless cars: Will driverless car ever gain passengers’ trust? Do consumer 
really want this stuff? 

These be question that most technologist avoid. They see such issue a outside their 
engineering domain and responsibilities. 

Mike Demler, senior analyst at The Linley Group, agreed. “First of all, I’d give credit to Intel 
for do this. Ten people be by no mean a statistically significant sample, but the human 
aspect of autonomous transportation have be largely ignored. Too many company — 
Google, for example — be too prone to fall in love with their technology without take 
human factor into consideration.” 

ShareShare 84 

EE Times - Intel Probes Man-Machine 'Trust' http://www.eetimes.com/author.asp?section_id=36&doc_id=1332188&pr... 

1 sur 4 28/08/2017 19:29 



Seven key area of tension 
Intel be fully aware that people “are downright scar of robot cars,” a they put it. The 
company quote a recent American Automobile Association study, which found that 75% of 
Americans be afraid to ride in self-driving cars. 

Inevitably, it be incumbent upon technology company such a Intel to educate the medium 
and consumer and demonstrate that autonomous car are, indeed, safe. In that sense, 
consumer test like this be good public relations. 

Asked about the methodology of the study, Jack Weast, Chief Systems Architect of Intel 
Autonomous Driving Group, explain that first, Intel take it time pre-briefing the volunteers, 
explain how sensor and sensor fusion work and what make the car drive itself. During 
the ride, a safety driver inside a vehicle kept his hand off the steer wheel. He be not 
allow to speak. Participants, in the back seat, be ask to say whatever popped into 
their heads. Their comment and behavior be capture on audio and video. After the ride, 
Intel do another interview. 

As Weast told us, the study found “seven key area of tension” in the man-machine 
interaction. They unfolded in different scenarios, while participants’ comment be often 
somewhat contradictory. 

1. Can a driverless car handle roundabouts? 
The first and the most obvious area of tension be in the area of “human versus machine 
judgment.” Participants be uneasy about a driverless car’s judgment when the car need 
to handle difficult situation such a roundabout or other driver cut off the driverless 
car. Their repeat question was: “How do a machine make this sort of judgment?” On the 
other hand, volunteer express the belief that self-driving vehicle should be safer 
because they eliminate human error. 

2. How do I tell a driverless car where exactly in a mall to drop me off? 
Participants like have free time in their own personal space. But they be also concerned 
about “a lack of assistance, a lack of accountability,” say Weast. They asked, “Nobody be 
monitoring this?” Having no driver in the car be also unnerve to some participants. With 
no driver, they wonder how to tell the car a specific entrance and a specific dropoff point. 
Picture a big shopping mall, say Weast. The driverless car may have the address of the 
mall, but not the right entrance where the passenger want to go. “When it get closer to the 
destination, especially near the drop-off, we must have a way to fine-tune the car to respond 
to the passenger’s request.” 

3. Put a sock in it, Hal 
Participants appreciate know what the driverless car be do during their ride. However, 
they also thought that there be too much information. “Stop bother me, it’s not important” 
or “I’d like to take a nap.” 

Next page: Voice, context, gesture 

4. Why a steer wheel? 
For many people, it’s not easy to give up control of the vehicle. Seeing a steer wheel 
turn by itself — sometimes in a very abrupt way — make some volunteer anxious. They 
even discuss the benefit of remove these legacy instrument so that they won’t get 
nervous. Participants, however, appreciate other new tricks, such a use their own mobile 
device to summon a vehicle and unlock it, explain Weast. “For them, it be a new form of 
control.” 

5. Prove it to me that it’s work 
Participants be able to see how a driverless car be work by watch statistic on an in- 
vehicle display. But they often ignore the display to look outside, watch the road, and 
confirm that the driverless car is, well, driving, say Weast. “Rather than usual data such a 
mile per gallon, we may need something else — a proof — to satisfy passenger show 
how the driverless car be work well.” 

6. Alexa impact: Can I talk to it? 
While participant be comfort by the car’s human “voice,” many wondered, “Can I talk to 
the car?” Participants wonder if the driverless car would listen — and obey — when they 
want to change a route or stop the car because they, or their kids, be feel sick. Some 
participant be obviously use to have smart speaker like Amazon Echo to which they 
can ask question to and expect an answer, explain Weast. 

7. Should a driverless car follow rule to a T? 

EE Times - Intel Probes Man-Machine 'Trust' http://www.eetimes.com/author.asp?section_id=36&doc_id=1332188&pr... 

2 sur 4 28/08/2017 19:29 



Participants become aware of nuanced difference between a machine and a human when it 
come to the interpretation of safety. While acknowledge their own not-so-safe drive 
behavior, “many participant conclude that boring be safe,” say Weast. 

Voice, context, gesture 
Asked about takeaway from the study, Weast explain that participant like it voice 
interface, but they also want to talk to the car. “Especially when a car come close to a 
destination, we need a tool to fine-tune, make a vehicle understand a passenger’s needs.” 
More importantly, he added, “Voice may not be enough. People want to point to a certain 
thing and tell the car, ‘Take me there.’” 

So, beyond processing natural language and understand the context, note Weast, the 
car may have to understand “gesture.” 

Phil Magney, founder and principal advisor for Vision Systems Intelligence (VSI), told us, “In 
the automate vehicle space, there be really two track to consider.” 

One be active ADAS (from Level 1 to Level 3), he noted. “In these vehicles, trust be with the 
driver because they be always in the loop. In these deployments, trust be built up gradually 
but will not be an issue that prevents adoption of these features.” 

He added, “In this category of incremental automation, HMI be critical for well-known issue of 
monitoring driver state and readiness. How the car communicates with the driver will be 
adaptable through OTA update to the HMI functions.” 

Next page: In-vehicle vs. out-of-vehicle trust 

In-vehicle vs. out-of-vehicle trust 
The second market be the commercial Level 4 automate vehicle wherein the driver be out of 
the loop or not present at all. Magney stressed, “Here be where the challenge lie for human 
trust, and trust concern not only the passengers, but surround actor a well 
(passengers in other vehicles, pedestrian on foot, cyclists, etc.).” 

He explained, “In-vehicle trust with the passenger be go to be critical. Nobody really 
know how big this problem will be. It be too early to tell.” 

“The Intel sample be very small and the result be contradictory, so it be very hard to 
know what the right solution will be.” 

Magney added, “Out-of-vehicle trust be not talk about but be very important. For example, 
human-driven car be always communicate with other actor through signals, horns, and 
human visual contact. Take the driver out of the loop and communication with actor be 
challenged because you cannot make eye contact with a driver. For example, a pedestrian at 
a cross often proceeds to cross once visual contact be make with the driver. So, in L4 
driverless vehicles, there need to be a way for that vehicle to signal it intention to the 
outside actors.” 

In short, Magney be say that the automotive industry will need several iteration of trial and 
error before it can build a reasonable in-vehicle trust with passengers. When it come to out- 
of-vehicle trust, though, nothing be ready yet. 

Multiple dimension of trust 
Of course, a I note before, trust be a high bar. It’s not simple to build a trust relationship 
between me and a 3,000-pound, 70-mph robot. 

EE Times - Intel Probes Man-Machine 'Trust' http://www.eetimes.com/author.asp?section_id=36&doc_id=1332188&pr... 

3 sur 4 28/08/2017 19:29 



EMAIL THIS PRINT COMMENT 

For example, trust isn’t limited to technical design for the man-machine interface (although I 
understand that be Intel’s main concern). The issue be deeply related to other question like: 
Do I trust Intel? Do I trust the software — million of line of code — run in this driverless 
car? Do I trust the designer of this autonomous car? Are regulator do enough to protect 
passenger like me? When I have an accident in a driverless car, be the law on my side? All 
of these social and legal factor will play into building trust between me and My Mother the 
Car. 

The Linley Group’s Demler also wonder if Intel’s study start “in the wrong place.” 

The focus of Intel’s study be on the passenger experience in a driverless car under a 
scenario like a ride-hailing service. But Demler suggested, “I would have start by ask a 
more fundamental question that Intel only briefly touch on: ‘If you could have a car that 
drive itself, would you want one?’” 

Why should I want one? 
Demler said, “Acceptance of a self-driving car isn’t just a question of trust versus control. 
Why should I want one? What value and benefit do it deliver? These type of question 
be critical for any product development.” 

He stressed, “But this be where we too often see the technologist’s bias come into play, in just 
assume their invention be a good thing. From a product development point of view, it’s 
critical to first establish the customer’s wants. I haven’t heard anyone in autonomous vehicle 
development start from that basis. In all the projection of self-driving car penetration, what if 
people just don’t want one?” 

Demler sum up: “If you identify want first, then demonstrate that your product can 
deliver on those wants, trust come naturally. In this Intel test, it’s sort of like take people at 
an amusement park and ask them how they like the rides. Yeah, you’ll get different 
response to the experiences, but what do you really learn that will contribute to product 
success?” 

— Junko Yoshida, Chief International Correspondent, EE Times 

Copyright © 2017 UBM Electronics, A AspenCore company, All right reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of 
Service 

EE Times - Intel Probes Man-Machine 'Trust' http://www.eetimes.com/author.asp?section_id=36&doc_id=1332188&pr... 

4 sur 4 28/08/2017 19:29 


