






































Intelligent Animation | The UCSB Current 


Intelligent Animation 

UCSB engineers, Disney Research and Pixar Animation Studios collaborate to incorporate AI into a 
computer-based render system 

By James Badham 
Wednesday, July 26, 2017 - 09:15 
Santa Barbara, CA 

Modern film and TV show be fill with spectacular computer-generated sequence compute by render system 
that simulate the flow of light in a three-dimensional scene and convert the information into a two-dimensional 
image. But compute the thousand of light ray (per frame) to achieve accurate color, shadows, reflectivity and 
other light-based characteristic be a labor-intensive, time-consuming and expensive undertaking. An alternative be to 
render the image use only a few light rays. That save time and labor but result in inaccuracy that show up a 
objectionable “noise” in the final image. 

UC Santa Barbara electrical and computer engineering Ph.D. student Steve Bako and his advisor, Pradeep Sen, be 
advance on a solution. Over the past couple of years, the two have work with researcher at Disney Research 
and Pixar Animation Studios to develop a new technology base on artificial intelligence (AI) and deep learn to 
eliminate that noise and enable production-quality render at much high speeds. Bako will present the finding at 
the SIGGRAPH conference, the premier venue for technical research in computer graphics, to be held July 31-August 
3 in Los Angeles. 

Bako spent a year work at Pixar. The team test the software by use million of example from the film 
“Finding Dory” to train a deep-learning model know a a convolutional neural network. Through this process, the 
system learn to transform noisy image into noise-free version that resemble those compute with significantly 
more light rays. Once trained, the system successfully remove the noise on test image from entirely different films, 
such a Pixar’s late release, “Cars 3,” and their upcoming feature “Coco,” even though they have completely 
disparate style and color palettes. 

“Noise be a really big problem for production rendering,” say Tony DeRose, head of research at Pixar. “This new 

Intelligent Animation | The UCSB Current http://www.news.ucsb.edu/2017/018150/intelligent-animation 

1 sur 2 02/08/2017 09:12 



technology allows u to automatically remove the noise while preserve the detail in our scenes.” 

The work present a significant step forward over previous state-of-the-art denoising methods, which often left 
artifact or residual noise that require artist to either render more light ray or to tweak the denoising filter to 
improve the quality of a specific image. Disney and Pixar plan to incorporate the technology in their production 
pipeline to accelerate the movie-making process. 

“Other approach for remove image noise have grown increasingly complex, with diminish returns,” say Markus 
Gross, vice president for research at Disney Research. “By leverage deep learning, this work present an important 
step forward for remove undesirable artifact from animate films.” 

To facilitate further exploration of this excite area, the team will make their code and the deep learn model’s 
train weight available to the research community. 

Contact Info: 

Pradeep Sen 
(805) 893-4265 
psen at ece.ucsb.edu 

James Badham 
(805) 893-3648 
jbadham@engineering.ucsb.edu 

Copyright © 2017 The Regents of the University of California. 
All Rights Reserved. 
Privacy | Terms of Use | Accessibility | Webmaster 

Intelligent Animation | The UCSB Current http://www.news.ucsb.edu/2017/018150/intelligent-animation 

2 sur 2 02/08/2017 09:12 


