






































Inverse-Design Approach Leads to Metadevices | News 


Inverse-Design Approach Leads to 
Metadevices | News 

Jan 22, 2018 // Stephan Benzkofer 

Imagine wafer-thin eyeglass or a smartphone camera so small it be 

invisible to the naked eye. 

Imagine an aerodynamic sensor that can conform to the exact slope and 

angle of a jet airplane wing. 

Imagine a material that can coat a tank to make it seem to disappear. 

These vision of future technology emerge from a technical paper 

title “Inverse-designed broadband all-dielectric electromagnetic 

metadevices” publish online today in Scientific Reports. 

Koray Aydin 

The Northwestern Engineering team use inverse design principle and 

a basic 3D printer purchase from Amazon — technology not 

commonly use in their field — to create highly efficient, non-resonant, 

broadband metadevices at millimeter-wave frequency that could prove 

revolutionary for consumer products, defense, and telecommunications, 

include next-generation 5G wireless networks. 

“I feel like we’re really on the verge of something big,” say Koray Aydin, 

assistant professor of electrical engineering and computer science at the 

McCormick School of Engineering, who be lead the research effort in 

Inverse-Design Approach Leads to Metadevices | News http://www.mccormick.northwestern.edu/news/articles/2018/01/inverse-d... 

1 sur 4 29-01-18 à 22:52 



inverse-designed metadevices. “There’s a lot that need to be do in 

the research part, but we’re go in the right direction.” 

As oppose to forward design, inverse design start with a function and 

asks what structure be need to achieve the desire result. Using 

computer modeling, optimization software and complex algorithms, the 

team set out to build metadevices that could bend or focus millimeter 

wave but that avoid problem with conventional approaches, such 

low efficiency, narrow bandwidth and the bulkiness of the devices. 

Prem Kumar 

“What we’ve achieve here be a new way of create electromagnetic 

device that achieve certain function that conventionally seem 

impossible to do,” say Prem Kumar, professor of electrical engineering 

and computer science in McCormick and of physic and astronomy in 

the Weinberg College of Arts and Sciences. Kumar liken the process 

to machine learn and say it could produce unexpected outcomes, for 

example the functionality over a broad bandwidth. 

Francois Callewaert, a McCormick School of Engineering graduate 

student who work with Aydin, developed the inverse design algorithm 

and perform the numerical simulations. Vesselin Velev, a physic and 

astronomy graduate student who work with Kumar, help with the 

detailed millimeter-wave measurements. 

Inverse-Design Approach Leads to Metadevices | News http://www.mccormick.northwestern.edu/news/articles/2018/01/inverse-d... 

2 sur 4 29-01-18 à 22:52 



Alan Sahakian 

Aydin described the eye-opening moment a the algorithm spit out the 

design for a complex geometric shape. 

“These be not know shapes, not intuitive shapes,” Aydin said. 

And that present it own problem. 

“How on Earth be we go to make this?” Aydin recall thinking. 

Conventional manufacturing method would be difficult and expensive. 

The answer be additive, or 3D, printing. 

“This be the heart of the study,” Aydin said. “We’re the first to combine 

these two to make work devices.” 

Kumar agreed. “The important thing to me be the multidisciplinary 

nature of it,” he said. “We can design a lens in a way that it doesn’t look 

like a lens.” 

Another great strength of their process, Aydin said, be that it be 

imminently scalable from the microwave to the visible frequency range 

because of the flexibility of 3D printing. 

“It be an excite result,” say Alan V. Sahakian, the John A. Dever Chair 

and Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. “Where 

in the past somebody might have do a long analysis try to 

approximate the behavior, here we essentially input the behavior we 

want into a computer and the computer optimizes a structure that 

have that behavior and then it come out the other end of this three- 

dimensional printer. 

“It be truly a breakthrough in the way you can solve problem in a 

Inverse-Design Approach Leads to Metadevices | News http://www.mccormick.northwestern.edu/news/articles/2018/01/inverse-d... 

3 sur 4 29-01-18 à 22:52 



seamless and convenient way.” 

Inverse-Design Approach Leads to Metadevices | News http://www.mccormick.northwestern.edu/news/articles/2018/01/inverse-d... 

4 sur 4 29-01-18 à 22:52 


