






































Is There a Smarter Path to Artificial Intelligence? Some Experts Hope So 


Is There a Smarter Path to Artificial 
Intelligence? Some Experts Hope So 

Benjamin Grosof be the chief scientist at Kyndi, a Silicon 
Valley start-up that be use a decades-old program 
language to develop software that can generate facts, 
concept and inference from small amount of 
data.CreditJason Henry for The New York Times 

For the past five years, the hottest thing in artificial intelligence have 
be a branch know a deep learning. The grandly name statistical 
technique, put simply, give computer a way to learn by processing 
vast amount of data. Thanks to deep learning, computer can easily 
identify face and recognize spoken words, make other form of 
humanlike intelligence suddenly seem within reach. 

Companies like Google, Facebook and Microsoft have pour money 
into deep learning. Start-ups pursue everything from cancer cure to 
back-office automation trumpet their deep learn expertise. And the 
technology’s perception and pattern-matching ability be be 
apply to improve progress in field such a drug discovery and self- 
drive cars. 

But now some scientist be ask whether deep learn be really so 
deep after all. 

In recent conversations, online comment and a few lengthy essays, a 
grow number of A.I. expert be warn that the infatuation with 
deep learn may well breed myopia and overinvestment now — and 
disillusionment later. 

“There be no real intelligence there,” say Michael I. Jordan, a professor 
at the University of California, Berkeley, and the author of an essay 
publish in April intend to temper the lofty expectation 
surround A.I. “And I think that trust these brute force algorithm 
too much be a faith misplaced.” 

The danger, some expert warn, be that A.I. will run into a technical wall 
and eventually face a popular backlash — a familiar pattern in artificial 
intelligence since that term be coin in the 1950s. With deep learn 
in particular, researcher said, the concern be be fuel by the 
technology’s limits. 

Deep learn algorithm train on a batch of related data — like 
picture of human face — and be then fed more and more data, which 
steadily improve the software’s pattern-matching accuracy. Although 
the technique have spawn successes, the result be largely confine to 

Is There a Smarter Path to Artificial Intelligence? Some Experts Hope So https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/20/technology/deep-learning-artificial... 

1 sur 6 27-06-18 à 13:44 



field where those huge data set be available and the task be well 
defined, like label image or translate speech to text. 

Image 

Kyndi’s office in San Mateo, Calif. The company’s focus on 
the reason side of artificial intelligence distinguishes it 
from the branch know a deep learning, in which 
computer train themselves by processing massive amount 
of data.CreditJason Henry for The New York Times 

The technology struggle in the more open terrain of intelligence — 
that is, meaning, reason and common-sense knowledge. While deep 
learn software can instantly identify million of words, it have no 
understand of a concept like “justice,” “democracy” or “meddling.” 

Researchers have show that deep learn can be easily fooled. 
Scramble a relative handful of pixels, and the technology can mistake a 
turtle for a rifle or a parking sign for a refrigerator. 

In a widely read article publish early this year on arXiv.org, a site for 
scientific papers, Gary Marcus, a professor at New York University, 
pose the question: “Is deep learn approach a wall?” He wrote, 
“As be so often the case, the pattern extract by deep learn be 
more superficial than they initially appear.” 

If the reach of deep learn be limited, too much money and too many 
fine mind may now be devote to it, say Oren Etzioni, chief executive 
of the Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence. “We run the risk of 
miss other important concept and path to advance A.I.,” he said. 

Is There a Smarter Path to Artificial Intelligence? Some Experts Hope So https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/20/technology/deep-learning-artificial... 

2 sur 6 27-06-18 à 13:44 



Amid the debate, some research groups, start-ups and computer 
scientist be show more interest in approach to artificial 
intelligence that address some of deep learning’s weaknesses. For one, 
the Allen Institute, a nonprofit lab in Seattle, announce in February 
that it would invest $125 million over the next three year largely in 
research to teach machine to generate common-sense knowledge — an 
initiative call Project Alexandria. 

While that program and other effort vary, their common goal be a 
broader and more flexible intelligence than deep learning. And they be 
typically far less data hungry. They often use deep learn a one 
ingredient among others in their recipe. 

“We’re not anti-deep learning,” say Yejin Choi, a researcher at the 
Allen Institute and a computer scientist at the University of 
Washington. “We’re try to raise the sight of A.I., not criticize tools.” 

Those other, non-deep learn tool be often old technique 
employ in new ways. At Kyndi, a Silicon Valley start-up, computer 
scientist be write code in Prolog, a program language that 
date to the 1970s. It be design for the reason and knowledge 
representation side of A.I., which process fact and concepts, and 
try to complete task that be not always well defined. Deep learn 
come from the statistical side of A.I. know a machine learning. 

Benjamin Grosof, an A.I. researcher for three decades, join Kyndi in 
May a it chief scientist. Mr. Grosof say he be impressed by Kyndi’s 
work on “new way of bring together the two branch of A.I.” 

Kyndi have be able to use very little training data to automate the 
generation of facts, concept and inferences, say Ryan Welsh, the 
start-up’s chief executive. 

The Kyndi system, he said, can train on 10 to 30 scientific document of 
10 to 50 page each. Once trained, Kyndi’s software can identify 
concept and not just words. 

In work for three large government agency that it decline to disclose, 
Kyndi have be ask it system to answer this typical question: Has a 
technology be “demonstrated in a laboratory setting”? The Kyndi 
program, Mr. Welsh said, can accurately infer the answer, even when 
that phrase do not appear in a document. 

Image 

Is There a Smarter Path to Artificial Intelligence? Some Experts Hope So https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/20/technology/deep-learning-artificial... 

3 sur 6 27-06-18 à 13:44 



Is There a Smarter Path to Artificial Intelligence? Some Experts Hope So https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/20/technology/deep-learning-artificial... 

4 sur 6 27-06-18 à 13:44 



Ryan Welsh, the chief executive, say Kyndi’s technology 
could read a long scientific document, and infer the 
concepts, more than 275 time faster than a human 
analyst.CreditJason Henry for The New York Times 

And Kyndi’s reading and score software be fast. A human analyst, Mr. 
Welsh said, might take two hour on average to read a lengthy scientific 
document, and perhaps read 1,000 in a year. Kyndi’s technology can 
read those 1,000 document in seven hours, he said. 

Kyndi serf a a tireless digital assistant, identify the document 
and passage that require human judgment. “The goal be increase the 
productivity of the human analysts,” Mr. Welsh said. 

Kyndi and others be bet that the time be finally right to take on 
some of the more daunt challenge in A.I. That echo the trajectory 
of deep learning, which make little progress for decade before the 
recent explosion of digital data and ever-faster computer fuel leap 
in performance of it so-called neural networks. Those network be 
digital layer loosely analogous to biological neurons. The “deep” refers 
to many layers. 

There be other hopeful sign in the beyond-deep-learning camp. 
Vicarious, a start-up develop robot that can quickly switch from 
task to task like humans, publish promising research in the journal 
Science last fall. Its A.I. technology learn from relatively few 
example to mimic human visual intelligence, use data 300 time 
more efficiently than deep learn models. The system also broke 
through the defense of captchas, the squiggly letter identification test 
on website meant to foil software intruders. 

Vicarious, whose investor include Elon Musk, Jeff Bezos and Mark 
Zuckerberg, be a prominent example of the entrepreneurial pursuit of 
new path in A.I. 

“Deep learn have give u a glimpse of the promise land, but we 
need to invest in other approaches,” say Dileep George, an A.I. expert 
and co-founder of Vicarious, which be base in Union City, Calif. 

The Pentagon’s research arm, the Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency, have propose a program to seed university research and 
provide a noncommercial network for share idea on technology to 
emulate human common-sense reasoning, where deep learn fall 
short. If approved, the program, Machine Common Sense, would start 
this fall and most likely run for five years, with total funding of about 
$60 million. 

“This be a high-risk project, and the problem be big than any one 
company or research group,” say David Gunning, who manage 
Darpa’s personal assistant program, which end a decade ago and 
produce the technology that become Apple’s Siri. 

Is There a Smarter Path to Artificial Intelligence? Some Experts Hope So https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/20/technology/deep-learning-artificial... 

5 sur 6 27-06-18 à 13:44 



Follow Steve Lohr on Twitter: @SteveLohr. 

A version of this article appear in print on June 21, 2018, on Page B1 of 
the New York edition with the headline: Researchers Seek Smarter 
Paths to A.I.. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe 

Ocasio-Cortez Upsets a Top House Democrat 

1. 

How McKinsey Lost Its Way in South Africa 

2. 

Who Is Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez? 

3. 

Sotomayor Delivers Sharp Dissent in Travel Ban Case 

4. 

Is There a Smarter Path to Artificial Intelligence? Some Experts Hope So https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/20/technology/deep-learning-artificial... 

6 sur 6 27-06-18 à 13:44 


