






































Itâ•Žs True: False News Spreads Faster and Wider. And Humans Are to Blame. 


It’s True: False News Spreads Faster 
and Wider. And Humans Are to 
Blame. 

Steve Lohr 

Researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology examine true and 

false news story post on Twitter from the social network’s found in 

2006 through 2017. Mark Makela for The New York Times 

What if the scourge of false news on the internet be not the result of 

Russian operative or partisan zealot or computer-controlled bots? 

What if the main problem be us? 

People be the principal culprits, accord to a new study examine 

the flow of story on Twitter. And people, the study’s author also say, 

prefer false news. 

As a result, false news travel faster, farther and deeper through the 

social network than true news. 

The researchers, from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, found 

that those pattern apply to every subject they studied, not only 

politics and urban legends, but also business, science and technology. 

It’s True: False News Spreads Faster and Wider. And Humans Are to Blame. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/08/technology/twitter-fake-news-rese... 

1 sur 7 09-03-18 à 20:18 



False claim be 70 percent more likely than the truth to be share on 

Twitter. True story be rarely retweeted by more than 1,000 people, 

but the top 1 percent of false story be routinely share by 1,000 to 

100,000 people. And it take true story about six time a long a false 

one to reach 1,500 people. 

Many false story post in 2014’s third quarter involve a patent 

lawsuit between Apple and Samsung. 

Many false story at end of 2016 involve the November 2015 terror 

attack in Paris. 

tweet contain false claim 

Many false story at end of 2016 involve the November 2015 

terrorist attack in Paris. 

It’s True: False News Spreads Faster and Wider. And Humans Are to Blame. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/08/technology/twitter-fake-news-rese... 

2 sur 7 09-03-18 à 20:18 



Many false story post in 2014’s third quarter involve a patent 

lawsuit between Apple and Samsung. 

Software robot can accelerate the spread of false stories. But the M.I.T. 

researchers, use software to identify and weed out bots, found that 

with or without the bots, the result be essentially the same. 

“It’s sort of dishearten at first to realize how much we human be 

responsible,” say Sinan Aral, a professor at the M.I.T. Sloan School of 

Management and an author of the study. “It’s not really the robot that 

be to blame.” 

Here be other finding from the research. 

Covering the history of Twitter 

The research, publish on Thursday in Science magazine, examine 

true and false news story post on Twitter from the social network’s 

found in 2006 through 2017. The study’s author tracked 126,000 

story tweet by roughly three million people more than 4.5 million 

times. “News” and “stories” be define broadly — a claim of fact — 

regardless of the source. And the study explicitly avoid the term “fake 

news,” which, the author write, have become “irredeemably polarize in 

our current political and medium climate.” 

The story be classify a true or false, use information from six 

It’s True: False News Spreads Faster and Wider. And Humans Are to Blame. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/08/technology/twitter-fake-news-rese... 

3 sur 7 09-03-18 à 20:18 



independent fact-checking organization include Snopes, PolitiFact 

and FactCheck.org. To ensure that their analysis held up in general — 

not just on claim that drew the attention of fact-checking group — the 

researcher enlist student to annotate a true or false more than 

13,000 other story that circulate on Twitter. Again, a tilt toward 

falsehood be clear. 

The way information flow online — and, occasionally, spread rapidly 

like a virus — have be study for decades. There have also be 

small study examine how true and false news and rumor 

propagate across social networks. But expert in network analysis say 

the M.I.T. study be large in scale and well designed. 

“The comprehensiveness be important here, span the entire history 

of Twitter,” say Jon Kleinberg, a computer scientist at Cornell 

University. “And this study shine a spotlight on the open question of 

the success of false information online.” 

tweet contain false claim 

It’s True: False News Spreads Faster and Wider. And Humans Are to Blame. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/08/technology/twitter-fake-news-rese... 

4 sur 7 09-03-18 à 20:18 



tweet contain false claim 

Novelty win retweets 

The M.I.T. researcher point to factor that contribute to the appeal 

of false news. Applying standard text-analysis tools, they found that 

false claim be significantly more novel than true one — maybe not a 

surprise, since falsehood be make up. 

The study’s author also explore the emotion evoke by false and true 

stories. The goal, say Soroush Vosoughi, a postdoctoral researcher at 

the M.I.T. Media Lab and the lead author, be to find clue about what 

be “in the nature of human that make them like to share false news.” 

The study analyze the sentiment express by user in reply to 

claim post on Twitter. As a measurement tool, the researcher use a 

system create by Canada’s National Research Council that associate 

English word with eight emotions. False claim elicit reply 

express great surprise and disgust. True news inspire more 

anticipation, sadness and joy, depend on the nature of the stories. 

Two stories: one true, one false 

It’s True: False News Spreads Faster and Wider. And Humans Are to Blame. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/08/technology/twitter-fake-news-rese... 

5 sur 7 09-03-18 à 20:18 



The researcher provide an example of two business stories, and how 

much more time it take the true one to reach 200 retweets. The 

example also show the judgment call make by fact-checking 

organizations. 

• In 2014, the fashion chain Zara introduce children’s pajama with 

horizontal stripe and a gold star. The company say the design be 

inspire by what a cowboy sheriff would wear. But Twitter user post 

message say the pajama resemble Nazi concentration camp 

uniforms. Snopes: True. Time to reach 200 retweets: 7.3 hours. 

• In 2016, a website republish a portion of a satirical article about 

how the Chick-fil-A restaurant chain have decide to begin a “We don’t 

like black either” marketing campaign to stir up controversy and boost 

sales. It come after the company’s president do say he oppose gay 

marriage. Snopes: False. Time to 200 retweets: 4.2 hours. 

What can be done? 

The M.I.T. researcher say that understand how false news spread 

be a first step toward curb it. They conclude that human behavior 

play a large role in explain the phenomenon, and mention possible 

interventions, like good labeling, to alter behavior. 

For all the concern about false news, there be little certainty about it 

influence on people’s belief and actions. A recent study of the browsing 

history of thousand of American adult in the month before the 2016 

election found that false news account for only a small portion of the 

total news people consumed. “We have to be very careful about make 

the inference that fake news have a big impact,” say Duncan Watts, a 

principal researcher at Microsoft Research. 

Another author of the M.I.T. study, Deb Roy, former chief medium 

scientist at Twitter, be engage in a project to improve the health of the 

information ecosystem. In fall 2016, Mr. Roy, an associate professor at 

the M.I.T. Media Lab, become a founder and the chairman of Cortico, a 

nonprofit that be develop tool to measure public conversation 

online to gauge attribute like share attention, variety of opinion and 

receptivity. The idea be that improve the ability to measure such 

attribute would lead to good decision-making that would counteract 

It’s True: False News Spreads Faster and Wider. And Humans Are to Blame. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/08/technology/twitter-fake-news-rese... 

6 sur 7 09-03-18 à 20:18 



misinformation. 

Mr. Roy acknowledge the challenge in try to not only alter 

individual behavior but also in enlist the support of big internet 

platform like Facebook, Google, YouTube and Twitter, and medium 

companies. 

“Polarization,” he said, “has turn out to be a great business model.” 

It’s True: False News Spreads Faster and Wider. And Humans Are to Blame. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/08/technology/twitter-fake-news-rese... 

7 sur 7 09-03-18 à 20:18 


