






































Japanese scientist use artificial intelligence to decode thought 


Japanese scientist use artificial 
intelligence to decode thought 

Catherine Clifford 

Imagine a reality where computer can visualize what you be thinking. 

Sound far out? It's now closer to become a reality thanks to four 

scientist at Kyoto University in Kyoto, Japan. In late December, 

Guohua Shen, Tomoyasu Horikawa, Kei Majima and Yukiyasu Kamitani 

release the result of their recent research on use artificial 

intelligence to decode thought on the scientific platform, BioRxiv. 

Machine learn have previously be use to study brain scan (MRIs, 

or magnetic resonance imaging) and generate visualization of what a 

person be think when refer to simple, binary image like black 

and white letter or simple geographic shape (as show in Figure 2 

here). 

But the scientist from Kyoto developed new technique of "decoding" 

thought use deep neural network (artificial intelligence). The new 

technique allows the scientist to decode more sophisticated 

"hierarchical" images, which have multiple layer of color and structure, 

like a picture of a bird or a man wear a cowboy hat, for example. 

"We have be study method to reconstruct or recreate an image a 

person be see just by look at the person's brain activity," Kamitani, 

one of the scientists, tell CNBC Make It. "Our previous method be to 

assume that an image consists of pixel or simple shapes. But it's know 

that our brain process visual information hierarchically extract 

different level of feature or component of different complexities." 

And the new AI research allows computer to detect objects, not just 

binary pixels. "These neural network or AI model can be use a a 

proxy for the hierarchical structure of the human brain," Kamitani says. 

For the research, over the course of 10 months, three subject be 

show natural image (like photograph of a bird or a person), artificial 

geometric shape and alphabetical letter for vary length of time. 

Japanese scientist use artificial intelligence to decode thought https://www.cnbc.com/2018/01/08/japanese-scientists-use-artificial-intell... 

1 sur 5 11-01-18 à 10:48 



In some instances, brain activity be measure while a subject be 

look at one of 25 images. In other cases, it be log afterward, 

when subject be ask to think of the image they be previously 

shown. 

Once the brain activity be scanned, a computer reverse-engineered (or 

"decoded") the information to generate visualization of a subjects' 

thoughts. 

The flowchart, embed below, be make by the research team at the 

Kamitani Lab at Kyoto University and break down the science of how a 

visualization be "decoded." 

The two chart embed below show the result the computer 

reconstruct for subject whose activity be log while they be 

look at natural image and image of letters. 

Japanese scientist use artificial intelligence to decode thought https://www.cnbc.com/2018/01/08/japanese-scientists-use-artificial-intell... 

2 sur 5 11-01-18 à 10:48 



As for the subjects' whose brain wave be measure base on 

remember the images, the scientist have another breakthrough. 

"Unlike previous methods, we be able to reconstruct visual imagery a 

person produce by just think of some remember images," 

Kamitani says. 

As see in the chart embed below, when decode brain signal 

Japanese scientist use artificial intelligence to decode thought https://www.cnbc.com/2018/01/08/japanese-scientists-use-artificial-intell... 

3 sur 5 11-01-18 à 10:48 



result from a subject remember images, the AI system have a 

harder time reconstructing. That's because it's more difficult for a 

human to remember an image of a cheetah or a fish exactly a it be 

seen. 

"The brain be less activated" in that scenario, Kamitani explains to 

CNBC Make It. 

As the accuracy of the technology continue to improve, the potential 

application be mind-boggling. The visualization technology would 

allow you to draw picture or make art simply by imagine something; 

your dream could be visualize by a computer; the hallucination of 

psychiatric patient could be visualize aid in their care; and brain- 

machine interface may one day allow communication with imagery or 

thoughts, Kamitani tell CNBC Make It. 

While the idea of computer reading your brain may sound positively 

Jetson-esque, the Japanese researcher aren't alone in their futuristic 

Japanese scientist use artificial intelligence to decode thought https://www.cnbc.com/2018/01/08/japanese-scientists-use-artificial-intell... 

4 sur 5 11-01-18 à 10:48 



work to connect the brain with compute power. 

For example, former GoogleX-er Mary Lou Jepsen be work to build a 

hat that will make telepathy possible within the decade, and 

entrepreneur Bryan Johnson be work to build computer chip to 

implant in the brain to improve neurological functions. 

Japanese scientist use artificial intelligence to decode thought https://www.cnbc.com/2018/01/08/japanese-scientists-use-artificial-intell... 

5 sur 5 11-01-18 à 10:48 


