






































Lensless Camera Captures Highly Detailed 3D Images 


An experimental camera can produce extremely detailed image 

without even use a lens. 

Scientists from the University of California, Berkeley have create 

an easy-to-build lensless camera that produce 3D image from 

a single 2D image. 

“The DiffuserCam can, in a single shot, capture 3D information 

in a large volume with high resolution,” research team leader 

Laura Waller, Ph.D., an associate professor from the University 

of California, Berkeley, say in a statement. “We think the 

camera could be useful for self-driving cars, where the 3D 

information can offer a sense of scale, or it could be use with 

machine learn algorithm to perform face detection, track 

people or automatically classify objects.” 

The compact and inexpensive camera—called the DiffuserCam 

—consists of only a diffuser place on top of an image sensor. 

The researcher found that the prototype could be use to 

reconstruct 100 million voxels or 3D pixels, from a 1.3- 

Kenny 

Walter 

Lensless Camera Captures Highly Detailed 3D Images https://www.rdmag.com/article/2017/12/lensless-camera-captures-highly... 

1 sur 3 31-12-17 à 13:11 



megapixel image without any scanning. 

“Our new camera be a great example of what can be 

accomplish with computational imaging—an approach that 

examines how hardware and software can be use together to 

design image systems,” Waller said. “We make a concert 

effort to keep the hardware extremely simple and inexpensive. 

“Although the software be very complicated, it can also be easily 

replicate or distributed, allow others to create this type of 

camera at home,” she added. 

A DiffuserCam can be create use any type of image sensor. It 

can image object that range from microscopic in scale to the 

size of a human being. The camera offer a resolution in the 

ten of micron range when image object closer to the 

sensor. While the resolution decrease when image a scene 

farther away from the sensor, it be still high enough to 

distinguish that one person be stand several foot closer to the 

camera than another person. 

The camera capture how much light be strike a pixel on the 

image sensor, a well a the angle from which the light hit the 

pixel. 

Light field camera have be limited in spatial resolution until 

now because some spatial information be lose while the 

directional information be collected. The microlens array use in 

the camera be also expensive and must be customize for a 

particular camera or optical component use for imaging. 

The researcher use various item include privacy glass 

stickers, Scotch tape and plastic conference badge holder to 

improve on traditional light field camera capability by use 

compress sense to avoid the typical loss of resolution that 

come with microlens arrays. 

“I want to see if we could achieve the same image 

capability use simple and cheap hardware,” Waller said. “If 

we have good algorithms, could the carefully designed, 

expensive microlens array be replace with a plastic surface 

with a random pattern such a a bumpy piece of plastic?” 

The researcher be now attempt to eliminate the need to 

acquire a few image of a move point of light to calibrate the 

software prior to image by use the raw data for calibration. 

They also want to improve the accuracy of the software and 

make the 3D reconstruction faster. 

The researcher plan to initially use the camera to watch 

microscopic neuron activity in living mouse without a microscope. 

Eventually, the camera could be use in a number of 

Lensless Camera Captures Highly Detailed 3D Images https://www.rdmag.com/article/2017/12/lensless-camera-captures-highly... 

2 sur 3 31-12-17 à 13:11 



application involve 3D capture. 

The study be publish in Optica. 

BMW Strikes Solid-State Battery 
Development Deal for Electric Vehicles 

• 

Avatar — The critical parameter in 

need of improvement for vehicle propulsion 

battery be cost per kWh and a recharge time 

Artificial Intelligence Helps Reduce 
Construction Injuries 

• 

Avatar — I have some experience in the 

construction industry and I think the 

researcher overlook the fact that younger, 

Key to Immune System's Memory Revealed 
• 

Avatar — why dont they have a 

gene therapy now? What's hold them up? 

They could've have ab AIDS cure already if they 

R&D Market Pulse: Microsoft Foldable 
Tablet Could Be on Horizon 

• 

Avatar — I have exactly no interest in "video 

articles". Lose'em. If you can't read, go 

elsewhere. 

R&D MAGAZINE 

0 Comments R&D Magazine Login1 

Share Sort by Best 

LOG IN WITH OR SIGN UP WITH DISQUS 

Start the discussion… 

? 

Recommend 

Lensless Camera Captures Highly Detailed 3D Images https://www.rdmag.com/article/2017/12/lensless-camera-captures-highly... 

3 sur 3 31-12-17 à 13:11 


