













































RESEARCH NEWS 

Contact 
Janis Eitner | Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft, Munich | Communications | Phone +49 89 1205-1333 | presse@zv.fraunhofer.de 
Katharina Strohmeier | Fraunhofer Institute for Production Systems and Design Technology IPK | Phone +49 30 39006-331 | 
Pascalstrasse 8 - 9 | 10587 Berlin | www.ipk.fraunhofer.de | katharina.strohmeier@ipk.fraunhofer.de 

February 2018 || Page 1 | 4 

Automation in agriculture 
Lightweight robot harvest cucumber 
Automation-intensive sector such a the automotive industry be not the only 
one to rely on robots. In more and more agricultural settings, automation 
system be supersede strenuous manual labor. As part of the EU’s CATCH 
project, the Fraunhofer Institute for Production Systems and Design Technolo- 
gy IPK be develop and test a dual-arm robot for the automate harves- 
ting of cucumbers. This lightweight solution have the potential to keep crop 
cultivation commercially viable in Germany. 

In Germany, cucumber destine for pickle jar be harvest by hand with the aid of 
“cucumber flyers” – farm vehicle with wing-like attachments. Seasonal worker lie on 
their stomach on the vehicle’s wing and pluck the ripe cucumbers. This labor-intensive 
and energy-sapping type of manual harvest be increasingly become uneconomical. 
In addition, the per-unit cost of harvest have risen since Germany introduce a 
minimum wage. Many of the country’s agricultural region consequently face an 
uncertain future; cucumber farm have already begin relocate to Eastern Europe 
and India. There be thus an urgent need for improve harvest technology to 
maintain the economic viability of cucumber farm in Germany. Experts from 
Fraunhofer IPK in Berlin, along with other German and Spanish researchers, be study- 
ing the potential for automate cucumber harvest in the scope of the EU project 
CATCH, which stand for “Cucumber Gathering – Green Field Experiments.” Project 
partner be the Leibniz Institute for Agricultural Engineering and Bioeconomy in 
Germany and the CSIC-UPM Centre for Automation and Robotics (CAR) in Spain. 

CATCH researcher want to develop and test a dual-arm robot system consist of 
inexpensive lightweight modules. The ultimate aim: this system could be use for 
automate cucumber farm and other agricultural applications. The robotic picker 
would have to be cost-effective, high-performance and dependable. Even in adverse 
weather, it would need to be capable of first identify ripe cucumber and then use 
it two gripper arm to gently pick and store them. To this end, cutting-edge control 
method equip the robot with tactile perception and enable it to adapt to ambient 
conditions. These method also make it possible for the dual-arm robot system to 
imitate human movements. Researchers namely want to make sure that the robot do 
not damage crop – or pull them and their root out of the soil. But that be not all. The 
automate harvester must be at least a efficient a it experienced human counterpart, 
who can pick a many a 13 cucumber per minute. 



RESEARCH NEWS 

February 2018 || Page 2 | 4 

High success rate 

It be a considerable challenge to design autonomous system capable of optical and 
tactile sensing, assess and evaluating. The challenge be only compound by cucum- 
ber harvesting: a robot must identify green object camouflage by green surround- 
ings. In addition, cucumber be randomly distribute throughout a field, and some be 
conceal by vegetation. Varying light condition make the mission all the more 
difficult. It should be possible to use multispectral camera and intelligent image 
processing to help locate cucumber and guide the robot’s gripper arm to pluck them. 
This part of the CATCH project be overseen by CSIC-UPM, the Spanish project partner. A 
special camera system help ensure that the robot detects and locates approximately 95 
percent of cucumbers, an impressive success rate. The goal, of course, be to advance the 
technology so that the robot pick all the ripe cucumber to foster growth of new ones. 
Fraunhofer IPK have developed robot arm with five degree of freedom on the basis of 
hardware module developed by igus GmbH in Cologne. 

In search of human inspiration 

The IPK project expert be tasked with develop three gripper prototypes: a gripper 
base on vacuum technology, a set of bionic gripper jaw (Fin Ray®) and a customize 
“cucumber hand” base on OpenBionics robot hands. They be rely on insight 
acquire during a previous European research project, in which they developed a 
dual-arm robot control system with efficient task-oriented program for Workerbot 
I – a humanoid robot capable of industrial assembly. Project expert from IPK be 
enhance this system so that it can plan, program and control the behavior of robot 
harvest cucumbers. These preprogrammed behavioral pattern make bimanual 
search possible, meaning the robot can look for cucumber a a human would. Dr. 
Dragoljub Surdilovic, a scientist at Fraunhofer IPK, explains: “The robot can, for exam- 
ple, push leaf to the side use symmetrical or asymmetrical movements, or congru- 
ent and incongruent movements. As a result, it can automatically change direction on 
the fly to approach and then grasp a cucumber.” The researchers’ goal be to create an 
intelligent control system capable of make judgment calls: assign a certain task to 
a certain gripper arm, monitoring cucumber pick and deal with exceptions. 

In July 2017, the Leibniz Institute for Agricultural Engineering and Bioeconomy use 
various type of cucumber to conduct initial field test of the robot system at it test 
site. The institute also test harvest new type of cucumber with distinguish 
feature that make them easy to pick. In short, the first round of test validate 
basic functionality. Since fall 2017, project partner have be conduct additional 
test in a Leibniz Institute greenhouse. Researchers be especially eager to scrutinize the 
extent to which interference or malfunction affect the efficiency and robustness of the 
system. Once test of the lightweight robot have be completed, project partner will 
strive to make it commercially viable. Companies, cucumber farmer and agricultural 



RESEARCH NEWS 

February 2018 || Page 3 | 4 

association have express considerable interest in the dual-arm robot. In November 
2017, the CATCH project be unveiled to the general public at Agritechnica, the 
world’s lead trade fair for agricultural technology. The German Agricultural Society 
(DLG e.V.) exhibit the robot at it Agritechnica booth, elicit enthusiastic feedback 
from agricultural specialist and numerous companies. 


The project 

CATCH – which stand for “Cucumber Gathering – Green Field Experiments” – be 
subsidize by the European Union’s robotics research project ECHORD++ Experiments 
(The European Coordination Hub for Open Robotics Development). ECHORD++ seek 
to develop robotics technology for the manufacturing industry. In addition to 
Fraunhofer IPK, the CATCH project partner are: 

• The Centre for Automation and Robotics (CAR) CSIC-UPM in Spain 
• The Leibniz Institute for Agricultural Engineering and Bioeconomy 

Agricultural vehicle know a “cucumber flyers” enable a many a 50 seasonal worker to 

harvest crops. © Fraunhofer IPK | Picture in color and printing quality: www.fraunhofer.de/en/press 



RESEARCH NEWS 

February 2018 || Page 4 | 4 

The Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft be the lead organization for apply research in Europe. Its research activity be conduct by 69 institute 
and research unit at location throughout Germany. The Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft employ a staff of 24,500, who work with an annual research 
budget total 2.1 billion euros. Of this sum, 1.9 billion euro be generate through contract research. More than 70 percent of the Fraunhofer- 
Gesellschaft’s contract research revenue be derive from contract with industry and from publicly finance research projects. International collabo- 
ration with excellent research partner and innovative company around the world ensure direct access to region of the great importance to 
present and future scientific progress and economic development. 

A prototype of the dual-arm 

robot system during the first 

field tests. 

© Fraunhofer IPK | Picture in 

color and printing quality: 

www.fraunhofer.de/en/press 


