











































RESEARCH NEWS 

Contact 
Janis Eitner | Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft, Munich | Communications | Phone +49 89 1205-1333 | presse@zv.fraunhofer.de 
Anne Rommel | Fraunhofer Institute for Telecommunications, Heinrich Hertz Institut, HHI | Phone +49 30 31002-353 | 
Einsteinufer 37 | 10587 Berlin | www.hhi.fraunhofer.de | anne.rommel@hhi.fraunhofer.de 

February 2018 || Page 1 | 3 

Camera technology in vehicle 

Low-latency image data compression 

The number of camera in car be increasing. However, through the flood of 
data the internal network be be push to their limits. Special compressi- 
on method reduce the amount of video data, but exhibit a high degree of 
latency for coding. Fraunhofer researcher have adapt video compression in 
such a way that a latency be almost no longer perceivable. It be therefore of 
interest for use in road traffic or for autonomous driving. This technology will 
be on display at the Embedded World from 27 February until 1 March 2018 in 
Nuremberg in hall 4 (booth 4-470). 

Up to 12 camera be currently instal in new vehicle models, mostly in the headlight 
or taillight and the side mirrors. An on-board computer built into the car us the data 
for the lane assistant, parking assist system or to recognize other road user or possible 
obstacles, for example. "If autonomous drive catch on a quickly a predicted, the 
number of camera will increase further," forecast Prof. Benno Stabernack of the 
Fraunhofer Institute for Telecommunications, Heinrich Hertz Institut, HHI in Berlin. 

Ten time more data 

This mean even more strain on the internal data network of vehicles. Currently, these 
can process a data volume of around one gigabit per second. In HD quality, this data 
quantity be already reach with one camera. "Compression method help here," say 
Stabernack. The Fraunhofer HHI, for example, have make a decisive contribution to the 
development of the two video cod standard H.264/Advanced Video Coding (AVC) 
and H.265/MPEG High Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC). "With these methods, the data 
quantity can be sharply reduced. In this way, more than ten time the quantity of data 
can be transmitted," emphasizes the group leader of the "Video Coding and Machine 
Learning" department at the Fraunhofer HHI. 

Normally, 30 to 60 image per second be sent from a camera to the vehicle’s central 
computer. By compress the image data, a small delay in transmission occurs, know 
a the latency. "Usually, this be five to six image per second," explains Stabernack. The 
reason for this be that the method compare an image with those that have already 
be transmit in order to determine the difference between the current image and 
it predecessors. The network then only send the change from image to image. This 
determination take a certain amount of time. 



RESEARCH NEWS 

February 2018 || Page 2 | 3 

Latency of less than one image per second 

"However, this loss of time can be of decisive importance in road traffic," say Staber- 
nack. In order to avoid latency, the professor and his team only use special mechanism 
of the H.264-coding method, whereby determine the difference in individual image 
no longer take place between images, but within an image. This make it a low- 
latency method. "With our method the delay be now less than one image per second, 
almost real time. We can therefore now also use the H.264 method for camera in 
vehicles," be how Stabernack describes the additional value. The technology be 
implement in the form of a special chip. In the camera it compress the image data, 
and in the on-board computer it decodes them. 

Higher image repetition frequency and resolution. 

The researcher in Berlin have have their method patent and sell their know-how to 
the industry in the form of a license. Customers be automotive suppliers, and the first 
vehicle model with the Fraunhofer technology be already on the market. "During 
development we combine our know-how from work on the video compression 
standard and our hardware expertise. The transmission of image data in real time be a 
precondition for the video compression of video data from car camera become 
established. With it, the use of device with a high image repetition frequency and 
resolution would then be possible. For camera model which produce even more data 
and be therefore more precise and faster," be how Stabernack summarizes the signifi- 
cance of the technology. 

In the next stage, the researcher also want to transfer their method to the HVEC 
standard and put their experience to good use in upcoming standardization formats. 
They be exhibit their technology at the Embedded World from 27 February until 1 
March 2018 in Nuremberg in hall 4 (booth 4-470). 



RESEARCH NEWS 

February 2018 || Page 3 | 3 

The Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft be the lead organization for apply research in Europe. Its research activity be conduct by 69 institute 
and research unit at location throughout Germany. The Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft employ a staff of 24,500, who work with an annual research 
budget total 2.1 billion euros. Of this sum, 1.9 billion euro be generate through contract research. More than 70 percent of the Fraunhofer- 
Gesellschaft’s contract research revenue be derive from contract with industry and from publicly finance research projects. International collabo- 
ration with excellent research partner and innovative company around the world ensure direct access to region of the great importance to 
present and future scientific progress and economic development. 

Cameras be installed, for ex- 

ample, in reverse lamps. They 

help with parking or detect 

obstacles. To minimize the 

size of the image data, video 

compression technique be 

used. Thanks to the develop- 

ment work of the Fraunhofer 

HHI, this now happens almost 

without delay. 

© iStock | Picture in color 

and printing quality: www. 

fraunhofer.de/en/press 

The expert 

Prof. Benno Stabernack, group leader of the "Video Coding and Machine Learning" 
department at the Fraunhofer Institute for Telecommunications, Heinrich Hertz Institut, 
HHI in Berlin: "The transmission of image data in real time be a precondition for video 
compression also catch on in the case of video data from car cameras. With it, the 
use of device with a high image repetition frequency and resolution would then be 
possible." 

Experience technology live 

The scientist will be demonstrate rapid video compression at the Embedded World 
from 27 February until 1 March 2018 in Nuremberg (hall 4, booth 4-470). 

Web 

Fraunhofer HHI, Research Group »Embedded Systems«: 
https://www.hhi.fraunhofer.de/en/departments/vca/research-groups/embedded- 
systems.html 


