






































Machine-learning earthquake prediction in lab show promise 


Contact 

Nancy 
Ambrosiano 
(505) 667-0471 
Email 

“At any give 
instant, the 
noise come 
from the lab 
fault zone 
provide 
quantitative 
information 
on when the 
fault will slip,” 
say Paul 
Johnson. 

Listening to faultline’s grumble give 
countdown to future quake 

LOS ALAMOS, N.M., Aug. 30, 2017—By listen to the acoustic 
signal emit by a laboratory-created earthquake, a computer 
science approach use machine learn can predict the time 
remain before the fault fails. 

“At any give instant, the noise come from the lab fault zone 
provide quantitative information on when the fault will slip,” 
say Paul Johnson, a Los Alamos National Laboratory fellow and 
lead investigator on the research, which be publish today 
in Geophysical Research Letters. 

“The novelty of our work be the use of machine learn to 
discover and understand new physic of failure, through 
examination of the record auditory signal from the 
experimental setup. I think the future of earthquake physic 
will rely heavily on machine learn to process massive 
amount of raw seismic data. Our work represent an 
important step in this direction,” he said. 

Not only do the work have potential significance to 
earthquake forecasting, Johnson said, but the approach be far- 
reaching, applicable to potentially all failure scenario 
include nondestructive test of industrial material brittle 
failure of all kinds, avalanche and other events. 

Machine learn be an artificial intelligence approach to 
allow the computer to learn from new data, update it 
own result to reflect the implication of new information. 

The machine learn technique use in this project also 
identifies new signals, previously thought to be low-amplitude 
noise, that provide forecasting information throughout the 
earthquake cycle. “These signal resemble Earth tremor that 

Machine-learning earthquake prediction in lab 
show promise 
A computer science approach use machine learn can predict the 
time remain before the fault fails 

August 30, 2017 

Machine-learning earthquake prediction in lab show promise http://www.lanl.gov/discover/news-release-archive/2017/August/0830-m... 

1 sur 3 03/09/2017 23:35 



occurs in association with slow earthquake on tectonic fault 
in the low crust,” Johnson said. “There be reason to expect 
such signal from Earth fault in the seismogenic zone for 
slowly slip faults.” 

Machine learn algorithm can predict failure time of 
laboratory quake with remarkable accuracy. The acoustic 
emission (AE) signal, which characterizes the instantaneous 
physical state of the system, reliably predicts failure far into 
the future. This be a surprise, Johnson point out, a all prior 
work have assume that only the catalog of large event be 
relevant, and that small fluctuation in the AE signal could be 
neglected. 

To study the phenomena, the team analyze data from a 
laboratory fault system that contains fault gouge, the ground- 
up material create by the stone block slide past one 
another. An accelerometer record the acoustic emission 
emanate from the shear layers. 

Following a frictional failure in the labquake, the shear 
block move or displaces, while the gouge material 
simultaneously dilates and strengthens, a show by 
measurably increase shear stress and friction. “As the 
material approach failure, it begin to show the 
characteristic of a critical stress regime, include many small 
shear failure that emit impulsive acoustic emissions,” Johnson 
described. 

“This unstable state concludes with an actual labquake, in 
which the shear block rapidly displaces, the friction and 
shear stress decrease precipitously, and the gouge layer 
simultaneously compact,” he said. Under a broad range of 
conditions, the apparatus slide-slips fairly regularly for 
hundred of stress cycle during a single experiment. And 
importantly, the signal (due to the gouge grind and 
creak that ultimately lead to the impulsive precursors) 
allows prediction in the laboratory, and we hope will lead to 
advance in prediction in Earth, Johnson said. 

The paper: "Machine learn predicts laboratory earthquakes" 
Geophysical Research Letters. 

The funding: Los Alamos National Laboratory Directed 
Research and Development (LDRD). 

Machine-learning earthquake prediction in lab show promise http://www.lanl.gov/discover/news-release-archive/2017/August/0830-m... 

2 sur 3 03/09/2017 23:35 



About Los Alamos National Laboratory 

Los Alamos National Laboratory, a multidisciplinary 
research institution engage in strategic science on behalf 
of national security, be operate by Los Alamos National 
Security, LLC, a team compose of Bechtel National, the 
University of California, BWXT Government Group, and URS, 
an AECOM company, for the Department of Energy’s 
National Nuclear Security Administration. 

Los Alamos enhances national security by ensure the 
safety and reliability of the U.S. nuclear stockpile, 
develop technology to reduce threat from weapon of 
mass destruction, and solve problem related to energy, 
environment, infrastructure, health, and global security 
concerns. 

Machine-learning earthquake prediction in lab show promise http://www.lanl.gov/discover/news-release-archive/2017/August/0830-m... 

3 sur 3 03/09/2017 23:35 


