


















































Machine Learning and Data Science- The Next Big Shift in AML 


Commercial Solutions 

The next big shift in the fight against financial 
crime and money laundering be advanced machine 
learn and sophisticated data science. 

Commercial Solutions | Financial Crimes 

BIG SHIFTS 
WHAT’S NEXT 
IN AML 

Booz Allen’s Financial Crime Solutions team have 
produce this paper to explain why incorporate 
machine learn and data science into anti-money 
laundering (AML) transaction monitoring will improve 
program effectiveness. 

A brief history of big shift 

The AML industry have witness several significant 
turn point over the past 40 year that have lead u 
to where we be today. 

Reliance on transaction monitoring 

The most recent shift in AML have be the 
prioritization and emphasis on transaction-monitoring 
technology. Is this approach working? 

Technology evolution, machine learn and 
data science 

Rapid advance in technology have enable u to 
create smarter system which can detect pattern 
across enormous data sets. 

How machine learn and data science can 
revolutionize the approach to transaction- 
monitoring 

These advance in technology can improve the way 
that we do transaction monitoring, KYC, and other 
AML activities. 



2 

Commercial Solutions | Group (e.g., Commercial Energy) 

A Brief History 

How we get to where we be today 
The history of AML be marked by periodic and comprehensive shift in the way that financial 
institution fight money laundering. 

• From the 1970s through 2001, company largely focus on create AML programs/ 
department that have mature governance, policies, processes, and strategy that 
would respond to evolve legislation. AML investigation and analyst rely heavily 
on collaboration with law enforcement to identify suspicious actors. Compliance be a 
product of proper organization, record-keeping, and collaboration with regulator and 
law enforcement. 

• The event of September 11th, 2001 trigger a monumental shift in the fight against 
money laundering and terrorist financing. Institutions saw transformation and 
unprecedented prioritization of AML a a critical component of their compliance 
requirements. The PATRIOT ACT, revision to the Bank Secrecy Act and other 
considerable regulation escalate the requirement on financial institutions. The 
organization, processes, technology, and culture of AML program have to expand and 
adapt to these wide scale shifts. 

• As pressure to thwart terrorist financing continued to build, financial institution have 
implement technological solution design to detect suspicious activity within their 
stream of transactions. So much focus and effort have be apply to these large-scale 
system (from institutions, regulators, and industry) that financial institutions’ program 
have become largely transaction-monitoring centric. Once again, organization, 
processes, technology, and culture have change to respond to this shift. 

Our reliance on transaction monitoring 
Today, many AML program be dictate by how their transaction monitoring system 
function. Regulators be focus more on analyze the transaction monitoring rule and 
models, validate their effectiveness, and audit alert response procedure and incidents. 
Indeed, it seem a if many AML program be specifically design to revolve around these 
technologies. Institutions have hundred of analyst whose job be solely to investigate the 
alert that these technology generate. They have auditor and quality assurance team 
who must validate the work of these analysts. Institutions dedicate some of their smartest 
“quant” type analyst to tuning, improving, and validate the model that these technology 
enforce. 

Financial institution be spending more and more of their budget on transaction monitoring 
technology. Additionally, these institution have scaled-up their internal technology staff, and 
have brought in contractor to support these systems. Significant investment have also 
be allocate to implementation, hosting, support, and training for these systems. 

The AML Community have 
come a long way in the 
past 40 years, but it be time 
to evolve and improve. 

BIG SHIFTS IN 
ANTI MONEY LAUNDERING 

Commercial Solutions | Financial Crimes 



3 

Commercial Solutions | Group (e.g., Commercial Energy) 

With so much reliance on transaction monitoring in our 
AML programs, we must evaluate the effectiveness of this 
approach. 

Is our approach to transaction monitoring working? 

The technology be inadequate 
Generally, transaction monitoring technology examines financial transaction against a set 
of discrete rules, and generates “alerts” on the transaction that match one or more rule 
(e.g., cash deposit in excess of $10,000 would be flag for a Cash Transaction Report). 
While some rule be more sophisticated, all be base on decade-old data processing, 
computation, and analytic techniques, and they be rampant with massive false-positive 
alert issues. From a technology perspective, current system be plague with 
architectural deficiency include – data management in relational databases, processing 
within “n-tier”-style business layers, and lack of elastic resourcing. 

These technology limitation lead to a meaningful problem 
In many cases, hundred of thousand of transaction alert be be generate which 
require investigation. The resource need to support these investigation require an 
army of analysts, investigators, and auditors, and represent the large expense of AML 
program within most financial institutions. Understandably a company cannot survive 
if it spent all it earnings hire AML analysts, therefore program consistently feel under 
resourced compare to the volume of alert and report they must review. Consequently, 
AML leader be force to select arbitrary threshold upon which they decide which alert to 
review and which to ignore. This lead to the glare “catch 22” in the AML world: 

Set the transaction monitoring threshold too low and you be force to hire more and more 
people. Set the threshold too high and risk heighten attention from regulators. 

This have lead to the notion that pay the price to deal with 80-95% false positive rate be just 
“the cost of do business”. 

Do these technology prevent AML related regulatory penalties, fines, citations? 
Many would agree that despite implementation of these systems, most financial institution 
be still face stiff regulatory pressure, fines, and citations. These system still produce false 
negative and miss subtle money laundering behavior. So seemingly the answer would be 
“NO”- current transaction monitoring-centric approach be not solve the problem. 

Do these technology help reduce cost of compliance? 
The answer to this question be an emphatic “NO”. This traditional approach require 
expensive technology, expensive upkeep, and bad of all, it require numerous analyst to 
keep up with the thousand of alert that monitoring system produce (95% of which be 
false positives). 

Do these technology employ a “risk based” approach? 
In balance regulator expectation to disposition every alert, and corporate pressure 
to make a profit, company may end up with just enough resource to manage the flow. 
Each analyst brain be so engage in the effort of disprove what a machine have generate 
that they often have no time to proactively seek out, prioritize, and mitigate risk face the 
institution. The ongoing regulatory action against countless company that have built their 
program around these system demand that the answer be “NO”. 

Commercial Solutions | Financial Crimes 



4 

Commercial Solutions | Group (e.g., Commercial Energy) 

Machine Learning and Data Science 

Technology Evolution 
With the rapid evolution in distribute compute and the grow sophistication of data 
science, the adoption of machine learn have be a game-changer for many industries. 
Through machine learning, company have construct algorithm that can learn from 
and make prediction on data. In particular, the retail industry have benefit by improve 
the online shopping experience, predict product that user may prefer base on 
previous buying habits. Healthcare company have also benefit from machine learn 
by incorporate it into research and development, suggest new compound for drug 
development. The government have also adopt machine learn to learn the behavior of 
criminal and terrorist and prevent incident before they occur. Data science be simply the 
science of extract knowledge from data. 

The advent of machine learn have create a paradigm shift for data scientists. Whereas 
historically data scientist have to know what exactly they be look for before exploit 
the data, with machine learning, these data scientist can allow the machine to discover 
hidden or non-obvious insight from the data. 

Machine learn and advanced data science present a powerful solution to the current 
problem face AML program at Financial Institutions and be the next big thing in the 
evolution of AML. 

What Machine Learning and Data Science can do for AML 
Machine learn can transform the way that transaction monitoring technology identify 
suspicious activity. Machine Learning can be use to: 

• Learn transaction behavior for similar customer 

• Discover transaction activity of customer with similar trait (business type, geographic 
location, age, etc.) 

• Pinpoint customer with similar transaction behavior 

• Identify outlier transaction and outlier customer 

• Learn money laundering typology and identify typology specific risk 

• Dynamically learn correlation between alert which produce verify suspicious 
activity report 

• Continuously analyze false-positive alert and learn common predictor 

A Deeper Look: Machine Learning and Data Science technique apply to AML 
Machine learn be a mature science, which provide a toolkit of algorithm and method for application. Some of the technique that can be use to achieve the 
above-mentioned goal include: 

• Unsupervised Similarity Clustering 
• Iterative Winnow 
• Typology-based Bayesian Belief 
• Random Forest 
• Supervised training base on validate true positive and true negative 
• Trained binary classification review 
• Statistical Comparison against baseline performance 

Enter Machine Learning and Sophisticated Data Science: 
The Next Big Shift in AML 

Commercial Solutions | Financial Crimes 



5 

Commercial Solutions | Group (e.g., Commercial Energy) 

The future of AML 

Cutting edge technology and specialized investigative unit 
Machine learn will revolutionize the way that AML program operate. The future of AML 
will not be define by the grow number of analyst investigate of false-positive alert 
– an approach that be ineffective and not sustainable. Rather, the future will be driven by 
the advance of machine learn and other technology which can improve the automatic 
detection of suspicious activity, make it more difficult for criminal activity to go undetected. 

Stove-piped technology and analyst team be become irrelevant and more costly. The 
future of AML program be leaner, smarter, and more agile, support by sophisticated 
technology that can detect and respond dynamically a their AML risk evolve. The 
member of these team posse hybrid skill set from across the relevant discipline (e.g., 
CAMS certify data scientist and financial intelligence analyst that can code). 

About Booz Allen’s Financial Crime Technology Solutions 

Booz Allen have be on the cut edge of advance in distribute compute and machine 
learning. Booz Allen have lead the transformation of several government organization 
include Treasury, IRS, DoD, and Law Enforcement, along with several of the world’s large 
financial institutions, help these organization unlock the power of machine learn 
and Big Data analytics to improve their ability to investigate threat actors. Booz Allen have 
now leveraged this technology to create a suite of technology design to help financial 
institution improve their ability to combat financial crimes. 

Designed by our Financial Crimes Task Force consist of AML expert from top tier 
financial institutions, regulatory expert from our FinCEN and Treasury support teams, and 
technologist from our Strategic Innovation Group, our financial crime technology solves 
complex challenge for financial institutions. Our technology aim to improve regulatory 
compliance, operational efficiency, and cost savings. 

Booz Allen be commit to help Financial Institutions achieve 
regulatory compliance, enhance operational efficiency, and 
regulatory cost reduction. Our decade serve the regulator and 
law enforcement, combine with over 100 year of management 
consulting, and unmatched technology capability make u the 
best partner for your AML Program. 

To learn how Booz Allen Hamilton can 
help your business thrive, contact: 

Jessica Gimbel 
Associate 
gimbel_ jessica@bah.com 
Tel +904-687-5310 

Joseph Gillespie 
Senior Associate 
gillespie_ joseph@bah.com 
Tel +703-957-8966 

David Kletter 
Executive Vice President 
kletter_david@bah.com 
Tel +917-305-8026 

www.boozallen.com 

Booz Allen Hamilton have be at the forefront of strategy and technology consult for nearly a century. The firm provide business and technology 
solution to major corporation in the financial services, health, and energy markets, leverage capability and expertise developed over decade of help 
US government client in the defense, intelligence, and civil market solve their toughest problems. 

Booz Allen be headquarter in McLean, Virginia, employ more than 22,000 people, and have revenue of $5.48 billion for the 12 month end March 31, 2014. 
In 2014, Booz Allen celebrates it 100th anniversary year. To learn more, visit www.boozallen.com. (NYSE: BAH) 

Commercial Solutions- Financial Crimes 


