









































Making Bitcoin Legal 

Ross Anderson, Ilia Shumailov and Mansoor Ahmed 
Cambridge University Computer Laboratory 

When you come to a fork in the road, take it – Yogi Berra 

Abstract 

What would happen if the exist law be actually enforce on 
the rich and powerful? Social reformer often clamour for new rule 
but ignore the huge change that might happen if our exist rule 
be apply equally to all. And in the brave new world of ICOs and 
thousand percent cryptocurrency inflation, the rich and powerful be 
the bitcoin exchanges. What would happen if FinCEN regulation and 
the law against money laundering be apply to them, and extend 
by sensible case law? We argue that this could mitigate most of the 
bad excess of cryptocurrency world, and turn a dangerous system 
into a much safer one. The curious thing about this change be that it 
would not involve change the protocol. It would not even necessarily 
involve change the law. It might be enough to take some information 
that’s already public, publishing it again in a more easily understood 
format. 

1 Introduction 

Bitcoin set out to provide a work online currency outside the control of 
governments, and have developed from a cypherpunk toy through a way to buy 
drug online to a mean of get flight capital out of country with exchange 
control – to an investment product quote on major exchanges. It have be 
criticise for waste a lot of electricity, for be a classic investment bubble, 
for provide no consumer protection to it users, and for facilitate crime 
– from old crime such a drug dealing, to new one such a ransomware. 

1 



The purpose of this paper be twofold. First, we discus how the law might 
actually regulate bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies so a to provide the ben- 
efits, range from low-cost international money transfer and decentralise 
resilient operation to competitive innovation, while mitigate the harm – 
specifically the use of cryptocurrencies in extortion, money laundering and 
other crimes, and the difficulty that crime victim experience in get re- 
dress. We show that where the relevant case law be use a a basis, it becomes 
much easy to track steal bitcoins than previously thought. 

Second, we use this discussion to illustrate that the characteristic of a 
payment protocol can depend much more sensitively than one might expect 
on the surround context. This may be of scientific interest to the protocol 
community, and also of practical interest to regulators. Payment system 
suffer from strong network effect and it may be harder than it seem to 
sustain a government-backed ‘GoodCoin’ in competition with establish 
system such a Bitcoin and Ethereum. It be therefore important to explore 
the practical option for tame the system that already exist. 

On the policy front, we have repeatedly see a pattern whereby the pro- 
moter of an online platform claim that old law will not apply. The Internet 
be suppose to interpret censorship and route around it; yet child sex abuse 
image be ban almost everywhere. Napster set out to free all music from 
the surly bond of copyright; it be close down. Uber be go to create a 
single taxi firm that work worldwide from a convenient app, regardless of 
local legacy monopolies; yet when legacy taxi driver complain about their 
new competitor work sixteen hour a day, and passenger safety issue 
pile up, Uber be ban in one city after another. Yet such innovation 
often make a real difference once a new legal equilibrium be achieved. The 
music-company mafia have yield to Spotify and YouTube, which make 
most music available to anyone who’ll listen to occasional ads; competition 
from Uber have cut Cambridge taxi fare by over 20%; and the Internet have 
make many more good thing available to all. 

The key be make online challenger obey the law – and the law may 
not need to change much, or even at all. Fixing new problem use exist 
law be usually preferable, give the difficulty of get primary legislation 
passed. 

So where do this leave Bitcoin? 
In this paper we assume the reader be familiar with the mechanic of 

Bitcoin and of blockchains in general. A late paper will present more detail 
for reader interested in law or policy. 

2 



2 Ideal Regulation 

The obvious first step towards regulation be to bring bitcoin exchange 
within the financial system by apply anti-money-laundering (AML) reg- 
ulations to them. Thus anyone wish to exchange bitcoin for cash, or for 
ether or any other mean of payment, have to satisfy know-your-customer 
(KYC) rule just a if they be opening a bank account, typically by show- 
ing government-issue photo ID plus two utility bill a proof of address. This 
start in 2013, when the Financial Crimes Enforcmeent Network (FinCEN) 
direct bitcoin exchange to register a money service business [3]. Most 
country have now follow suit, partition the world of exchange into 
compliant and rogue components. 

The second step would be for both enforcement agency and exchange to 
have effective mean of track taint coins. If my bitcoin wallet be steal 
I can now go to the police and report it. The steal asset be completely 
traceable through the blockchain and whenever anybody try to bank them 
at an exchange, they can be seized. How might the court actually do that? 

2.1 Clayton’s case 

Until now, there be two algorithm use for taint track in the blockchain 
– poison and haircut [12]. These taint multisource transactions, of which one 
input be tainted, either completely, or in proportion. Thus a transaction 
whose input be three steal bitcoin and then seven good bitcoin have an 
output on ‘poison’ of ten steal bitcoin, and on ‘haircut’ of ten bitcoin each 
of which be marked a 30% stolen. 

However, this ignores the precedent of Clayton’s case, where a court in 
1816 have to tackle the problem of mix good and bad fund through an 
account after a bank go bust and the outcome depend on which deposit 
to an account be to be match with which late withdrawals. The Master 
of the Rolls set a simple rule of first-in-first-out (FIFO): withdrawal from 
an account be deem to be drawn against the deposit first make to it [16]. 

In order to test this rule, we cod FIFO and haircut taint tracking, and 
ran them from the genesis block to 2016, start from 132 well-publicised 
bitcoin crimes. FIFO turn out to be very much more precise. The 2012 theft 
of 46,653 bitcoin from Linode taint 2,694,051 addresses, or almost 5% of 
the total, use the haircut algorithm, while with FIFO, it’s 371,544 or just 
over 0.67%. The effect be even more pronounce with a shorter propagation 

3 



period; for example, the 2014 Flexcoin hack (where ‘the world’s first bitcoin 
bank’ close after all their coin be stolen) taint only 18,208 account 
by 2016 use FIFO, but 1,429,794 use haircut. Overall, most bitcoin 
accounts1 have zero taint use FIFO, while less than 24% escape taint if we 
use a haircut approach. 

This be a very strike result. Many people assume that bitcoin track 
be usually impractical, because the taint spread widely a coin circulate. 
However once we apply the law and use FIFO, track turn out to be much 
more practical. And FIFO track be reversible; you can track forward from 
a coin that’s be report stolen, or backwards from a coin you’ve just be 
offered. This isn’t possible with haircut tainting, a it loses information. 

We also look at bitcoin laundry or mixes. These be base on the idea 
that if you put one black coin in a bag with nine white one and shake hard 
enough, you’ll get ten white one out. But depend on the algorithm in use, 
FIFO taint will decide that one of the output be black (and no owner of 
a white coin will want to risk that outcome), or that all coin be a sandwich 
of black and white component (which be also an undesirable outcome). In 
any case, mix have never have the scale, throughput or latency to cope with 
the proceeds of serious crime; the bitcoin steal from Mt Gox be trace to 
BTC-e which be raid and it operator arrest [8]. 

There be an interest piece of research to be do here on protocols, 
document the precise effect of FIFO taint on the various mix and 
money-laundering strategy propose to date, or document in the wild [11, 
13, 14]. People who have be do research on financial anonymity without 
pay attention to Clayton’s case have simply be use the wrong metric. 

Efficient coin trace may damage the fungibility of bitcoin. A commodity 
be call fungible if one unit can replace another; example be gold coins, 
and ear of corn. Technology have in the past reduce fungibility. If ten sheep 
wander in Roman time from Marcus’s field into Pliny’s, then the court 
would let Marcus take any ten of Pliny’s sheep; but today, all sheep have 
electronic tags, so Marcus can get the right sheep back. So too with bitcoin. 

2.2 Nemo Dat Quod Non Habet 

‘Nobody can give what isn’t theirs’ be a fundamental principle of law in 
England, with variant in many other jurisdictions. You cannot get effective 

1slightly over 72% of all bitcoin account with a nonzero balance 

4 



title to steal good simply by buying them; indeed, you can be prosecute 
for receive them. If Alice steal Bob’s horse and sell it to Charlie, Charlie 
doesn’t own it; whenever Bob seem him rid it, he can demand it back. 

There be a few exceptions. For centuries, if steal good be sell at a 
‘market overt’ – a designate public market – between sunrise and sunset, 
then the buyer would get good title. (So if Charlie have bought Bob’s horse in 
Cambridge market, all Bob could now do would be to sue her for the value, 
or perhaps have her transport to the colonies.) This rule be abolish in 
the UK in 1995, follow abuse by antique thieves, but it survives in specific 
form in some market to which the idea have spread in the meantime. The 
relevant case for our purpose be money. 

Where good start to function a money – a with gold – regulation 
developed to accommodate it. Banks start in some country a goldsmith 
who would give receipt for gold, and on demand would give an appropriate 
amount of gold back, though not necessarily the same bars. So a gold thief 
might lodge his loot at a goldsmith, and take the receipt back a week late 
to get clean bar instead2. 

Fast forward through a lot of history, and you can now get good title to 
steal money in two main cases. 

1. You get the money in good faith for value. For example, you bought 
a microwave oven at a high street store and get a £10 note in your 
change. That note be now yours even if it be steal in a bank robbery 
last year. 

2. You get the money from a regulate institution, such a from an ATM. 
Then even if it be steal in a robbery last year, that’s now the bank’s 
problem, not yours. 

It be not surprising that the cryptocurrency industry would very much 
like to have bitcoins declare to be money, a this would enable everyday 
user to stop worry about the possibility that some of their bitcoin be 
stolen. And this be a real fear; the major report robbery alone account 
for about 6–9% of all bitcoin in circulation [10]. If we add the proceeds 

2Monetary law over the century have have the same ambivalent attitude about whether 
money consists of the physical good that use to embody it, such a coin or notes, or 
the value they embody – just a bitcoin promoter claim that cryptocurrencies be money 
or good depend on which will best help them escape regulation 

5 



of crime more generally we will get a much large figure but will encounter 
many complexity of definition, jurisdiction and so on. The proceeds of drug 
crimes, in particular, be expose to quite draconian seizure law in a number 
of countries. 

However nothing in life be free, and be a regulate financial institution 
have significant cost of it own: capital adequacy requirements, criminal- 
record background check for staff, and (most important for our purposes) 
‘know your customer’ (KYC) rule feed into anti-money-laundering (AML) 
surveillance systems. Large transaction be reported, a be pattern of 
small ones, and bank demand your passport and a couple of utility bill 
when you open an account. 

Since 2013, the US Treasury Department’s Financial Crimes Enforcement 
Network (FinCEN) have direct bitcoin exchange to register and follow these 
rules; other country have be follow suit. Since 2017, several non- 
compliant exchange have be prosecute [6]. The late development be 
that the EU proposes to amend the 4th Anti-Money Laundering Directive so 
a to extend regulation, include a KYC duty, to firm that operate host 
wallet services. That may eventually bring most bitcoin user under the 
umbrella. The question then will be how the regulator will discharge the 
responsibility they have now assumed. Might they do something to reassure 
ordinary investor that they won’t lose money a a result of buying steal 
bitcoin? Of course they could demand that register exchange make good 
any customer to whom they sell bitcoin that late turn out to be stolen, but 
be there anything else? 

2.3 Registering or even insure title 

One way of insure title would be for the state to register ownership, a it 
do in many country with real estate, motor vehicle and patents. But 
there be subtlety here about whether or not the register be constitutive of 
ownership, a with patents, or not, a with cars; and whether it provide a 
guarantee, a with property. 

But give the scale of bitcoin theft and robberies, and the anonymity 
preference of bitcoin users, state guarantee be unlikely to be an attractive 
option for many stakeholders. A government-controlled blockchain would 
give neither the platform for innovation that cryptocurrencies do, nor the 
price, performance and market responsiveness of ordinary bank accounts. 

6 



2.4 Might the court do the job? 

So far, no government have declare bitcoin to be money, although Japan and 
Italy have tiptoed around the edge of this. However, court may find that 
bitcoin can be treat a money for some purposes. A relevant precedent 
establish that carbon credit be property, and they posse many of the 
same characteristic a bitcoins [5]. 

Monetary status might be thought ideal for investor who hold cryp- 
tocurrencies in the hope of capital gains. At present, the investor can only 
check that her asset have not yet be report a crime proceeds – but most 
crime report don’t come with public list of affected addresses. If bitcoin 
be money, and she get her bitcoin directly from a regulate exchange, she 
would have good title. 

If someone hack your Bitcoin wallet, or us ransomware to extort bitcoin 
from you, or hold you up at gunpoint and force you to transfer your saving 
to them – a crime that’s become extremely fashionable of late [15] – then the 
steal bitcoin can be traced. Now that coin trace be practical, the victim 
can trace the steal bitcoin through the blockchain, and sue the current 
holder – or any regulate exchange through which it passed. 

So honest customer would like the exchanges’ address to be public, 
so that anyone trace steal fund could see that a coin go through a 
regulate exchange before they bought it. The exchange will resist, not 
want to make it easy for theft victim to sue them. Bitcoin enthusiast 
might well side with the exchanges, on the principle that bitcoin public key 
be pseudonyms. But it’s increasingly the investor who’re float the boat. 

3 Changing the Rules of the Game 

This pressure point may give an opportunity to change the rule of the game. 
Fox note “Information about the taint provenance of individual cyber- 
coin may be discoverable by specialise forensic techniques. But there be 
a yet no standard practice of apply them to routine payments” [4, 5]. 
We have show that coin provenance can be tracked very much more easily 
than people assumed. The economic pressure point sits on a technical fis- 
sure, between the technical community’s insistence that the only concept of 
ownership of bitcoin be control of the private key for the wallet in which it’s 
store [1] versus the lawyers’ insistence that the registration of a bitcoin on 

7 



the blockchain be not ‘constitutive of ownership’ a be the case with register 
property right such a patents. 

Cryptocurrency promoter and investor will continue to lobby for a law 
make bitcoin fungible, argue that government make money from sell 
bitcoin confiscate a the proceeds of crime [7] – even if in the past they have 
ineptly sell bitcoin at way below market value [2]. They will also point out 
that when the government of Korea try to crack down on cryptocurrencies, 
it suffer a public backlash [9]. 

But even if bitcoin becomes money, the law and the blockchain will still 
diverge when you buy a bitcoin know it to be steal – or be on notice 
that it might be, or be negligent that it might be. 

For bitcoin to work a some of it promoter wish, government would 
have to go further than declare it to be money. They would have to declare 
the blockchain to be constitutive of ownership. This would be an extreme 
measure, and seem unlikely, give that even register of motor vehicle don’t 
have such a status. The register simply record where speed fine and 
unpaid toll should be sent; it do not establish ownership. If we want to 
make ownership of bitcoin more certain, we need a different approach. 

4 Taintchain: a Public Trail of Breadcrumbs 

As Fox noted, taint provenance can be discover use forensics, yet ap- 
ply these to routine payment be not standard practice. 

Our critical new assumption be this. Suppose there exists free and open- 
source software that make an up-to-date taint analysis publicly available. 
This will follow the blockchain forward from all report crimes, and also 
from crime whose existence can be reliably deduce from the internal evi- 
dence of the blockchain, and will mark every bitcoin in existence with a taint. 
Either the coin be clean, or some part of it be stolen. In that case, the taint 
will document the chain of evidence back to the crime and quantify it under 
certain assumption (which we discus later). We call this public trace the 
Taintchain, and propose to make our FIFO trace software public so that 
anyone can build one. 

There may well be multiple versions. For example, if a Chinese national 
us bitcoin to extract money from China in contravention of it exchange 
control laws, that will not be a crime in the UK which have no exchange 
controls. Similarly, if a software company in Estonia pay a developer in 

8 



Ukraine in bitcoin so she can evade both exchange control and tax, the 
authority in Tallinn may well not be interested. Different legislature take 
different view of right and wrong; different taintchains be the inevitable 
result. The machinery of international law – MLATs, dual-criminality check 
for extradition warrants, evidence rule – may eventually find it expression 
in protocol and in chain analysis code. 

Let u ignore issue of jurisdiction for the time being, and consider two 
possible way forward. First, what might happen under optimal but light- 
touch regulation? And second, might private law get u there instead – in 
other words, if the victim of bitcoin crime be to sue to get their asset 
back, then might decision in the court get u to roughly the same place? 

4.1 Protocol research problem 

Suppose the government simply declares that people who purchase bitcoin 
in good faith from regulate exchange follow establish AML and KYC 
rule will get good title, and that the exchange must refund theft victims. 

Thus when someone pay in a bitcoin amount, of which (say) 8.4% have 
be report stolen, the exchange will seize that portion of the deposit 
amount and apply due process to return either the actual coin or their value 
to the rightful owners. 

There be many technical protocol aspect to explore. Can we support 
protocol that will let an exchange customer check whether a bitcoin payment 
will be accepted, or whether some of it will be confiscate a crime proceeds? 
If an identify customer say ‘Hi, what will you give me for UTXO x?’ 
and the exchange replies, ‘Sorry, 22% of that be steal in a robbery last 
Tuesday, so we’ll only give you 78%’ do the customer then have to turn 
over the crime proceeds? We’d presume so. (The exchange have her passport 
and utility bill on file, after all.) 

If someone invent a protocol to check value in zero knowledge, they 
might be prosecute for obstruction of justice. Even if not, the exchange 
would be a leery of that a the credit card company be at present of small 
transaction which might be use by thief to check whether a card’s be 
report steal yet. In fact, the difficulty of do pre-purchase coin check 
be a strong argument for a public taintchain. 

Then there be issue familiar to the protocol community, of revocation 
and freshness. Suppose Alice check a UTXO against the taintchain, see 
that it’s OK, and then transfer it to an exchange in good faith in order to 

9 



cash it for dollars. Meanwhile the victim of a bitcoin robbery report some 
of it stolen, and by the time Alice’s transaction be mine into the blockchain, 
it’s tainted. Or perhaps the miner refuse to touch it a they don’t want 
taint mining fees. How do you sort out the mess? What combination of 
technical measures, social norm and legal rule might put u in a sweet spot? 
Presumably the exchange will have to pick up some of the tab, a bank do 
at present, but what rule might work and what protocol might support 
them? 

This be actually an old problem. Under the common-law statute of limi- 
tations, I can sue for negligence for up to seven years, and there be no limit in 
England for return of steal goods. Under the old system for cheque clear- 
ing, I might be able to claw back fund for a few day to weeks. Under the 
EU Payment Services Directive, payment become irrevocable after 48 hours, 
and customer complaint must be make within 13 months. The disparity of 
rule indicates a role for the lawgiver in clarify grace period for cryp- 
tocurrencies. Clearly law enforcement will lobby for a long period while the 
exchange will lobby for a short one. 

Further rule need to be be explored. Where we can identify clearly 
conspiratorial behaviour, such a a mix, the whole of the output may be 
strongly consider tainted, at least in the case of bitcoin be money – 
where the requirement for good title be to transact ‘in good faith’. Curiously, 
make cryptocurrencies into money would make anonymity harder, at least 
insofar a it’s provide by detectable technical mechanisms. Cryptocurrencies 
such a Monero and Zcash might forever be incapable of be treat a 
money, because of their built-in laundromats. There, a default assumption 
of bad faith seem prudent. 

4.2 So what might government do? 

Up till now, cryptocurrency promoter have campaign for monetary sta- 
tus (often under the slogan of ‘fungibility’) while government have largely 
drag their heels, no doubt fear that control would be completely lost, 
and that the trace and recovery of crime proceeds would become even 
harder. We hope we’ve show that it’s not that simple. 

One possible way forward would be the creation of a ‘nemo dat exception’ 
for regulate bitcoin exchanges, with a suitable notice period, and more 
detailed provision for the extent to which crime victim might be make 
good beyond that. We propose that exchange should also maintain a reserve 

10 



proportional to their trading activities, a bank do, so that they can continue 
to make victim good even when there be spike of claims. 

An alternative approach might be private-sector title insurance; once we 
have a good public taintchain, a bitcoin exchange or a bank might simply 
guarantee title to any bitcoin it sells, and publish it wallet address so that 
the track can stop and start there. 

A useful start point for negotiation between government and exchange 
operators, or just for incremental policy development, might be the EU’s 
second Payment Services Directive, which encapsulates Europe’s experience 
to date in deal with consumer-facing payment systems. Just a Uber be 
brought to heel by mayor say ‘We don’t care if you claim to be a platform, 
whatever that is; you’re a taxi company, and you’ll get a license or we’ll run 
you out of town’, so a sound opening gambit would be to start enforce the 
law a it stands. 

For any of this to be feasible, a public taintchain may be the key. En 
route, there be many interest protocol problem to tackle. 

5 Conclusions 

The bitcoin protocol be fascinating. It have create what appear to be a global 
trust computer out of a mixture of cryptography and incentives, despite 
the fact that many of the actor be shady and many of the circulate 
cryptocoins have be steal at least once. 

Out of this swamp, the value of bitcoins have soar to peak that few 
would have predict two year ago. The demand be now largely for invest- 
ment rather than transactions; so now may be the time to clean up bitcoin. 
How can we start? 

Tracking steal coins, so that crime victim can sue to get their property 
back, be the key. Up to now, people have be use haircut taint to 
track steal bitcoin. We’ve show that’s wrong, a a matter of both law and 
engineering. The law say you should use FIFO, and when you do so, the 
engineering work way better. It’s much more precise, and be also reversible: 
in addition to trace forward from a steal bitcoin to see where it went, you 
can trace backwards from any UTXO and get it entire genealogy. In short, 
FIFO track be a powerful new analytic tool. 

The way be now clear for financial regulator to apply the exist law on 
steal property and on payment service to bitcoin exchanges. 

11 



The thought experiment in this paper illustrates a deeper fact. A proto- 
col’s security property can depend in very subtle way on context. There 
be some precedent for this; for example, the bug in shared-secret Needham- 
Schroeder become apparent once people start to consider insider threats. 

The contextual change need for bitcoin be really just a matter of clarity. 
The taint information be right there in the blockchain, and in the public theft 
reports; but combine the two so a to work out the taint on even one single 
UTXO have involve a key conceptual insight (FIFO) and some engineering 
effort. The output it a public taintchain that make steal coin visible to 
all. Then a test case, or regulation, might create a soft fork between good 
coin and bad. And a investment demand trump transaction demand, good 
coin might drive out bad ones; and miner might also avoid bad one a they 
won’t want taint transaction fees. 

Honest user of bitcoin would then buy them from regulate exchanges, 
and pay them in again directly. Bitcoin would still support peer-to-peer pay- 
ments, and would not in any engineering sense be ‘centralised’ or otherwise 
changed3. But most user would start to use bitcoin rather like they use 
other electronic money, which pass from the bank to the customer to the 
merchant and back to the bank. 

In short, we might be able to turn a rather dangerous system into a much 
safer one – simply by take some information that be already public (the 
blockchain) and publishing it in a more accessible format (the taintchain). 
Is that not remarkable? 

Acknowledgements 

We acknowledge helpful discussion with David Fox, Shehar Bano, Tyler 
Moore, Nicolas Christin, Rainer Böhme, Johann Bezuidenhoudt, Lawrence 
Esswood, Joe Bonneau and various attendee at Financial Cryptography 
2018 where we present some of the idea here at a rump session talk. 

References 

[1] J. Bonneau, J. Clark, A. Narayanan, J. Kroll, and E. Felten. Sok: Research 
Perspectives and Challenges for Bitcoin and Cryptocurrencies. IEEE S&P 

3the maintenance of the taintchain could and should be open, which in itself give rise 
to interest question of governance, which will lead to protocol design question too 

12 



2015, 2015. 

[2] E. Cheng. US government miss out on $600 million payday by sell dirty 
bitcoins too early. CNBC, 3 Oct 2017. 

[3] Financial Crimes Enforcement Network. Application of FinCEN’s Regulations 
to Persons Administering, Exchanging, or Using Virtual Currencies. 2013. 

[4] D. Fox. Property Rights in Money. Oxford, 2008. 

[5] D. Fox. Cyber-currencies in private law. University of Edinburgh, 2016. 

[6] P. Hardy. Failure to register with fincen sustains guilty please by virtual 
currency exchangers. Money Laundering Watch, 24 April 2017. 

[7] S. Higgins. US Marshals Service to Auction Off $54 Million in Bitcoin. Coin- 
desk, 11 Jan 2018. 

[8] S. Hudak. FinCEN Fines BTC-e Virtual Currency Exchange $110 Million 
for Facilitating Ransomware, Dark Net Drug Sales. 2017. 

[9] C. Kim and H. Yang. Uproar over crackdown on cryptocurrencies divide 
South Korea. Reuters, 12 Jan 2018. 

[10] T. Lee. A brief history of bitcoin hack and frauds. Ars Technica, 12 May 
2017. 

[11] S. Meiklejohn, M. Pomarole, G. Jordan, K. Levchenko, D. McCoy, G. Voel- 
cker, and S. Savage. A fistful of bitcoins: Characterising payment among 
men with no names. IMC 2013, 2013. 

[12] M. Möser, R. Böhme, and D. Breuker. Towards Risk Scoring of Bitcoin 
Transactions. Financial Cryptography, 2014. 

[13] M. Möser, R. Böhme, and D. Breuker. An Inquiry into Money Laundering 
Tools in the Bitcoin Ecosystem. IEEE, eCrime 2013. 

[14] A. Narayanan, J. Bonneau, E. Felten, A. Miller, and S. Goldfeder. Bitcoin 
and Cryptocurrency Technologies. Princeton, 2016. 

[15] N. Popper. Bitcoin Thieves Threaten Real Violence for Virtual Currencies. 
New York Times, 18 February 2018. 

[16] D. v Noble. 35 er 767, 781, 1816. 

13 


