






































Mayor de Blasio Announces First-In-Nation Task Force To Examine Automated Decision Systems | City of New York 


MayorFirst LadyNewsOfficials 

Mayor de Blasio Announces First-In- 
Nation Task Force To Examine 
Automated Decision Systems Used By 
The City 

May 16, 2018 

NEW YORK— Today, Mayor de Blasio announce the creation of the Automated 
Decision Systems Task Force which will explore how New York City us algorithms. 
The task force, the first of it kind in the U.S., will work to develop a process for 
review “automated decision systems,” commonly know a algorithms, through the 
lens of equity, fairness and accountability. 
“As data and technology become more central to the work of city government, the 
algorithm we use to aid decision make must be align with our goal and values,” 
say Mayor de Blasio. “The establishment of the Automated Decision Systems Task 
Force be an important first step towards great transparency and equity in our use of 
technology.” 

“Fairness and equity be at the heart of human rights, and we be pleased to be 
partner with leader in and out of government to make sure City government itself 
aligns with these core values,” say Chair and Commissioner of the NYC 
Commission on Human Rights, Carmelyn P. Malalis. “The NYC Commission on 
Human Rights be proud to be part of New York City’s groundbreaking effort to ensure 
equity and transparency in the City’s use of algorithmic tool and we look forward to 
work with member of the task force and NYC diverse community on this effort.” 

The Task Force, the product of a law pass by City Council in December 2017, aim to 
produce a report in December 2019 recommend procedure for review and 
assess City algorithmic tool to ensure equity and opportunity. 

“We be excite to be the first city in the country bring our best technology and policy 
mind together to understand how algorithm affect the daily life of our constituents. 
Whether the city have make a decision about school placements, criminal justice, or the 
provision of social services, this unprecedented legislation get u one step closer to 
make algorithm accountable, transparent, and free of potential bias. I thank my 
former colleague, James Vacca, for spearhead this effort while he be in the Council, 
and the Mayor for his support,” say Speaker Corey Johnson. 

The task force will be co-chaired by Emily W. Newman, Acting Director of the Mayor’s 
Office of Operations, and Brittny Saunders, Deputy Commissioner for Strategic 

Mayor de Blasio Announces First-In-Nation Task Force To Examine Au... http://www1.nyc.gov/office-of-the-mayor/news/251-18/mayor-de-blasio-... 

1 sur 3 06-06-18 à 19:13 



Initiatives at the Commission on Human Rights. It will be compose of City agency 
commissioner or their designees, a well a representative from a variety of fields, 
include individual from academic and legal communities, expert in data and 
technology, and leader of nonprofit and think tanks. Representatives from the 
Department of Social Services, the New York City Police Department, the Department of 
Transportation, the Mayor’s Office of Criminal Justice, the Administration for Children’s 
Services, and the Department of Education be will also be name to the task force. 

“I’m honor to co-chair the ADS Task Force, a it work will no doubt contribute to 
make New York City the fairest big City in the country,” say Emily W. Newman, 
Acting Director of the Mayor’s Office of Operations. “With equity and fairness a our 
guide principles, I look forward to work alongside leader and expert from multiple 
field a we examine how the city us algorithm to guide it decision making.” 

“As emerge technology evolve, it be imperative that they be developed and use with 
equity in mind,” say Deputy Commissioner for Strategic Initiatives at the 
Commission on Human Rights, Brittny Saunders. “I be honor to co-chair this 
important task force and look forward to work alongside leader and expert to 
increase transparency around these critical tools.” 

“Cities must operate through the lens of understand the many facet that make up 
their diverse mosaics,” say Brooklyn Borough President Eric L Adams. “This 
algorithmic data task force, which have an incredibly broad cross-section of members, be 
a welcome step in ensure that the City’s day-to-day function and resource allocation 
meet New Yorkers’ need while address generational disparities. Equity should be at 
the forefront of all service delivery in every function of our municipal government.” 

"Open data promotes open government. Today, our city make another big step towards 
a more transparent government for all New Yorkers," say Council Member Peter Koo, 
Chair of the Committee on Technology. "The finding of the Automated Decision 
Systems Task Force will allow u to good understand what data be used, and how it be 
used, and will help u create a more equal system for all of our residents. I thank Mayor 
De Blasio and the NYC Commission on Human Rights for make our government more 
open, fair, and accountable, and I look forward to work with the new task force to 
ensure these value remains a priority for all city agencies." 

Task Force Co-Chairs: 

Emily W. Newman, Acting Director of the Mayor’s Office of Operations 

Brittny Saunders, Deputy Commissioner for Strategic Initiatives at the NYC Commission 
on Human Rights 

Task Force member include: 

Solon Barocas, Assistant Professor, Cornell University 

Shelby Chestnut, National Organizing and Policy Strategist, Transgender Law Center 

Khalil Cumberbatch, Associate Vice President for Policy, The Fortune Society 

Mayor de Blasio Announces First-In-Nation Task Force To Examine Au... http://www1.nyc.gov/office-of-the-mayor/news/251-18/mayor-de-blasio-... 

2 sur 3 06-06-18 à 19:13 



Judith H. Germano, Esq., Founder, GermanoLaw LLC; Senior Fellow on Cybersecurity, 
NYU Center on Law & Security 

Afaf Nasher, Esq., Executive Director, Council on American-Islamic Relations – New 
York 

Jennifer Rodgers, Esq., Executive Director, Center for the Advancement of Public 
Integrity at Columbia Law School 

Julie Samuels, Esq., Executive Director, Tech:NYC 

Vincent Southerland, Esq., Executive Director, Center on Race, Equality, and the Law at 
NYU Law School 

Julia Stoyanovich, Assistant Professor of Computer Science, Drexel University; Data, 
Responsibly 

Meredith Whittaker, Co-Founder, AI Now Institute; Distinguished Research Scientist, 
NYU 

Maya D. Wiley, Esq., Senior Vice President for Social Justice, The New School; Co- 
Director, Digital Equity Laboratory at The New School 

Jeannette M. Wing, Avanessians Director of the Data Science Institute and Professor of 
Computer Science at Columbia University 

pressoffice@cityhall.nyc.gov 

(212) 788-2958 

Mayor de Blasio Announces First-In-Nation Task Force To Examine Au... http://www1.nyc.gov/office-of-the-mayor/news/251-18/mayor-de-blasio-... 

3 sur 3 06-06-18 à 19:13 


