






































Measuring distance with a single photo 


Measuring distance with a single photo 

26 July 2017 

Most camera just record colour but now the 3D shape of objects, capture through only a single lens, can be accurately estimate use new software 
developed by UCL computer scientists. 

Measuring distance with a single photo http://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/0717/260717-Measuring-distance-with-a-single-photo 

1 sur 7 02/08/2017 09:10 



Measuring distance with a single photo http://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/0717/260717-Measuring-distance-with-a-single-photo 

2 sur 7 02/08/2017 09:10 



Video 

The method, publish today at CVPR 2017, give state-of-the-art result and work with exist photos, allow any camera to map the depth for 
every pixel it captures. 

The technology have a wide variety of applications, from augment reality in computer game and apps, to robot interaction, and self-driving cars. 
Historical image and video can also be analyse by the software, which be useful for reconstruction of incident or to automatically convert 2D film 
into immersive 3D. 

“Inferring object-range from a simple image by use real-time software have a whole host of potential uses,” explain supervise researcher, Dr 
Gabriel Brostow (UCL Computer Science). 

“Depth mapping be critical for self-driving car to avoid collisions, for example. Currently, car manufacturer use a combination of laser-scanners and/or 
radar sensors, which have limitations. They all use camera too, but the individual camera couldn’t provide meaningful depth information. So far, 
we’ve optimise the software for image of residential areas, and it give unparalleled depth mapping, even when object be on the move.” 

The new software be developed use machine learn method and have be train and test in outdoor and urban environments. It successfully 
estimate depth for thin structure such a street sign and poles, a well a people and cars, and quickly predicts a dense depth map for each 512 x 256 
pixel image, run at over 25 frame per second. 

Currently, depth mapping system rely on bulky binocular stereo rig or a single camera pair with a laser or light-pattern projector that don’t work 
well outdoors because object move too fast and sunlight dwarf the project patterns. 

There be other machine-learning base system also seek to get depth from single photographs, but those be train in different ways, with some 
need elusive high-quality depth information. The new technology doesn’t need real-life depth datasets, and outperforms all the other systems. Once 
trained, it run in the field by processing one normal single-lens photo after another. 

“Understanding the shape of a scene from a single image be a fundamental problem. We aren’t the only one work on it, but we have get the high 
quality outdoors results, and be look to develop it further to work with 360 degree cameras. A 360 degree depth map would be fantastically useful – 
it could drive wearable tech to assist disabled people with navigation, or to map real-life location for virtual reality gaming, for example,” add first 
author and UCL PhD student, Clément Godard (UCL Computer Science). 

Co-author, Dr Oisin Mac Aodha, previously at UCL and now at Caltech, added: “At the moment, our software require a desktop computer to process 
individual images, but we plan on miniaturise it, so it can be run on hand-held device such a phone and tablets, make it more accessible to app 
developers. We’ve also only optimise it for outdoor use, so our next step be to train it on indoor environments.” 

The team have patent the technology through UCL Business, but have make the code available free for non-commercial use. Funding for the research 
be kindly provide by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council. 

Measuring distance with a single photo http://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/0717/260717-Measuring-distance-with-a-single-photo 

3 sur 7 02/08/2017 09:10 


