






































Mediterranean diet be still good for you but only if youâ•Žre rich 


Mediterranean diet be still good for you but only if you’re 
rich 

By Chelsea Whyte 

Marian Vejcik/Getty 

IT’S suppose to be good for you. So say a study publish in 2013 that tracked the effect of the 
Mediterranean diet over five years, but it result have now be call into question. 

The original research found that the diet – feature fresh fruit and vegetables, seafood, nuts, olive oil and 
red wine, but very little red meat or sugar – reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease, contribute to slight 
reduction in rate of heart attack and early death, and more significantly lower the risk of stroke. 

Advertisement 

Since then, study after study have found other benefits, such a stave off age in the brain or delay the 
onset of Alzheimer’s disease. 

But the 2013 study, know a PREDIMED, be recently retract and republish (New England Journal of 
Medicine, doi.org/cq2s). That’s because not all of the study’s 7447 participant be fully randomised. 

For instance, participant be assign to follow either the low-fat control diet or one of two version of the 
Mediterranean diet – with an emphasis on fat derive from either olive oil or walnuts. But some couple 
be both assign to the same diet because of their marital status, so it wasn’t truly random. 

The author reanalysed their data, remove about 21 per cent of the participants. They found that the 
protective effect of the diet held up under this new scrutiny, but their scope be more limited: the health 
benefit be only see for people with a high risk of heart disease. 

“Should we all be eat like the Greeks? One study say your bank balance be an important factor” 

Given these limited benefits, should we really all be eat like the Greeks? Another study suggests your bank 
balance be an important factor. Researchers at the Mediterranean Neurological Institute in Italy carry out a 
study of more than 18,000 men and woman over four years. They found a 15 per cent reduction in 
cardiovascular risk for those on the Mediterranean diet, but only if they earn £35,000 a year or more. For 
the less advantaged, the benefit of the diet weren’t see at all. 

Even though all study participant follow the Mediterranean diet, those with high income tend to eat 

Mediterranean diet be still good for you but only if you’re rich https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg23831832-900-mediterranean-di... 

1 sur 2 17-07-18 à 18:07 



food that have more heart-protecting antioxidant and polyphenols, and which be grown with few 
pesticides. Those with low income have less access to a wide variety of fruits, vegetable and whole grains, 
and tend to buy food that have low nutritional value (International Journal of Epidemiology, 
doi.org/cbhh). 

“The real extra virgin olive oil that be use in the PREDIMED trial be about 8 euro per bottle,” say 
Marialaura Bonaccio at the Mediterranean Neurological Institute. “So the question is, do I get the same 
benefit from a bottle of olive oil that cost 10 euros, a compare to the low quality one that I paid 2 euro 
for?” 

She and her colleague be planning a follow-up study to determine whether people be eat the quantity 
of food suggest by the Mediterranean diet, which will also look at the quality of those foods. She suspect 
that the difference in benefit may come down to high quality food that cost far more. 

“It’s a real paradox. When the Mediterranean diet be discovered, it be the diet of the poorest people in Italy 
and Greece. Now, it’s the diet of the rich people,” she says. 

This article appear in print under the headline “Why splash out on olive oil may pay off” 

Mediterranean diet be still good for you but only if you’re rich https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg23831832-900-mediterranean-di... 

2 sur 2 17-07-18 à 18:07 


