






































Mimicking the reflexive detection ability of the animal visual system for computer detection of move object 


Home Technology Computer Sciences August 22, 2017 

Mimicking the reflexive detection ability of the animal visual system 
for computer detection of move object 
August 22, 2017 

more » 

A fast motion detection algorithm break new ground in the rapid detection of move object in 
video sequences. Credit: KAUST 

The detection of move object be one of the most fundamental and 

important mechanism of the animal visual system, have evolve to quickly 

detect both predator and prey. Yet reproduce the ability of animal to 

reflexively detect move object have remain elusive. 

Ganesh Sundaramoorthi and his 

KAUST Master's student Dong Lao 

have developed a new approach to 

this problem use a statistics- 

base computational framework 

that minimizes the detection time 

for a give level of detection 

accuracy. 

"Studies in human and animal 

vision indicate that motion play a 

key role in detect object in a 

scene a the animal moves," 

explains Sundaramoorthi. 

"Researchers have try to use motion cue to detect object in video, but so 

far the problem be unsolved." 

The difficulty in detect move object in video stem from the ambiguity 

in compute motion between sequential frames—there be many possible 

motion that could create the image sequence—and the essentially infinite 

dimensionality of the computational problem. Detection scheme also have to 

deal with the apparent motion of pixel in the image, due to movement of the 

camera or observer, and distinguish this from object motion. Image noise and 

nuisances, such a change in light and deformation of objects, also add 

to the difficulty of compute and segment motion. 

"We address a fundamental problem that may be solve by the animal visual 

system—the tradeoff between speed and accuracy," say Sundaramoorthi. 

"For instance, an antelope's visual system must be able to quickly detect a 

cheetah or it will be eat and can afford a high level of false detection a 

long a they happen quickly. We be the first to address this problem in 

computer vision, which be important not only in model the animal visual 

system, but also in real-world applications, such a robotic control and 

Featured Last comment 

Phys.org on facebook 

S’abonner 
1,3 M personnes sont abonnées à 
Phys.org. Inscription pour voir qui vos 
amis suivent. 

Relevant PhysicsForums post 

Forty year on, Voyager still hurtles 
through space Aug 27, 2017 5 

Face scans, robot baggage handler 
—airports of the future Aug 27, 2017 

0 

New way to make steel that be both 
strong and more ductile Aug 25, 
2017 5 

Kepler satellite discovers variability in 
the Seven Sisters Aug 25, 2017 0 

Elevated zinc and germanium level 
bolster evidence for habitable 
environment on Mars Aug 25, 2017 

1 

Holographic see through 5 hour ago 

What software do you use in your field of study? 

Popular 

Nanotechnology Physics Earth Astronomy & Space Technology Chemistry Biology Other Sciences 

Top 

Home 

Medical Xpress 

Search 

Help 

FAQ 

About 

Contact 

Phys.org Account 

Sponsored Account 

Newsletter 

RSS feed 

Feature Stories 

Latest news 

Week's top 

Archive 

iPhone iPad Apps 

Android App 

Amazon Kindle 

Mobile version 

Connect 

Privacy Policy Terms of Use© Phys.org 2003 - 2017, Science X network 

Mimicking the reflexive detection ability of the animal visual system for... https://phys.org/news/2017-08-mimicking-reflexive-ability-animal-visual... 

1 sur 3 28/08/2017 19:05 



Please sign in to add a comment. Registration be free, and take less than a minute. Read more 

Sign in 

Click here to reset your password. 
Sign in to get notify via email when new comment be made. 

Journal reference: arXiv 

Provided by: King Abdullah University of Science and 

Technology 

feedback to editor 

surveillance." 

Lao and Sundaramoorthi adapt what be know a the quick detection 

framework in statistics, which convert the problem into a stochastic process 

with minimum detection time set accord to a statistical detection threshold. 

"The problem be technically challenge because the quick detection 

framework be meant for 1D data not for the infinite dimensional time series of 

sequential video images," say Sundaramoorthi. "However, we be able to 

construct the optimization tool need to solve the problem with reasonable 

speed." 

Tests of the mathematical framework use a selection of video show that 

Lao and Sundaramoorthi's detection scheme consistently beat other state- 

of-the-art method in both speed and accuracy and with further optimization 

could one day achieve real-time object detection. 

Explore further: Using a camera to spot and track drone 

More information: Lao, D. & Sundaramoorthi, G. Minimum delay move 

object detection. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition arXiv, 

arxiv.org/abs/1605.07369 

Aug 27, 2017 

New motherboard or not? Aug 26, 2017 

Encrypted USB Flash Drives Aug 26, 2017 

What be the Software that have this Plotting Style? 
Aug 24, 2017 

buying a second-hand laptop Aug 24, 2017 

More from Computing and Technology 

Related Stories Recommended for you 

Using a camera to spot and track 
drone August 17, 2017 
EPFL researcher have show that a simple camera can 
detect and track fly drones. Plus, the lightweight, energy- 
efficient and inexpensive technology could be instal 
directly on the drone themselves and enhance safety ... 

Software that automatically recognizes 
surface within complex three- 
dimensional image can benefit 
petroleum extraction October 17, 2016 
The deep crack fault that lie within the Earth's crust be 

significant geologic surface for oil exploration and earthquake prediction. A 
team from KAUST developed an algorithm that smoothly detects fault and 
other three-dimensional ... 

High-frequency chip brings researcher 
closer to next generation technology 
August 24, 2017 

novel, high-frequency electronic chip potentially capable of 
transmit ten of gigabit of data per second—a rate that be 
order of magnitude above the fast internet speed 

available today—has be developed by ... 

Shopping by voice on Amazon or Google 
device could cost you August 24, 2017 
In the name of convenience, Amazon and Walmart be push 
people to shop by just talk to a digital assistant. 

Samsung eye reset with new Galaxy 

User comment 

3 share 

Mimicking the reflexive detection ability of the animal visual system for... https://phys.org/news/2017-08-mimicking-reflexive-ability-animal-visual... 

2 sur 3 28/08/2017 19:05 


