






































MIT enlist hundred of scientist in effort to make computer think more like people 


MIT enlist hundred of scientist in 
effort to make computer think more 
like people 

Andy Rosen - Metro Producer 

The Massachusetts Institute of Technology be planning a broad initiative 

to seek breakthrough in the field of artificial intelligence, enlist 

hundred of researcher who will look deeply at the human mind for 

lesson on how to build smarter machines. 

The university on Thursday will announce the launch of the MIT 

Intelligence Quest, a multimillion-dollar plan to coordinate the 

individual effort of MIT’s many expert from all corner of the campus 

— with the aim of teach computer to think more like the way people 

do. 

MIT president Rafael Reif say more than 200 faculty work in field 

include brain science, computer engineering, and robotics be 

planning to participate in the effort. 

During a conference call on Wednesday, Reif say that while those 

scientist be all “smart and terrific,” they be also like “boats on the 

Charles River go in different directions.” 

Get Talking Points in your inbox: 

An afternoon recap of the day’s most important business news, 

deliver weekdays. 

Now, he said, “they be go to work together toward a moonshot, and 

that be more than they can do now on their own.” 

While computer have become highly effective at find pattern and 

learn from them, they can’t do much that we would recognize a 

humanlike intelligence. MIT want to change that. The Intelligence 

Quest program — or MIT IQ — will help connect researcher across 

discipline and support project in which they work together, a well a 

seek collaboration with industry. 

MIT enlist hundred of scientist in effort to make computer think m... https://www.bostonglobe.com/business/2018/02/01/mit-enlisting-hundred... 

1 sur 2 02-02-18 à 19:15 



Josh Tenenbaum, a professor of cognitive science and computation who 

be work to develop computer algorithm base on the working of the 

brain, say he need the help of his colleague in other fields. 

For instance, scientist have long dream of building computer that 

can learn and grow in the same way that child do, he said. But that be 

difficult without a deep knowledge of both how computer work and 

how the mind of child develop. 

“This be really about couple the science of intelligence and the 

engineering — that is, the basic science of how intelligence work in the 

mind and brain with the quest to engineer more powerful, more 

intelligent, more human kind of intelligence in machines,” he said. 

MIT say it plan to raise money through corporate and other 

donations, in a model similar to an initiative it announce last year in 

collaboration with IBM. The compute giant pledge $240 million to 

establish a new lab research artificial intelligence. While the new 

Intelligence Quest be a separate initiative, the idea behind it grow out 

MIT’s effort to find project for the MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab. 

Reif say faculty have ask university leadership to help coordinate 

effort toward major advances. 

Andy Rosen can be reach at andrew.rosen@globe.com. 

MIT enlist hundred of scientist in effort to make computer think m... https://www.bostonglobe.com/business/2018/02/01/mit-enlisting-hundred... 

2 sur 2 02-02-18 à 19:15 


