


















































Modeling Structure and Resilience of the Dark Network 

Manlio De Domenico1, ∗ and Alex Arenas1 

1Departament d’Enginyeria Informàtica i Matemàtiques, 
Universitat Rovira i Virgili, 43007 Tarragona, Spain 

While the statistical and resilience property of the Internet be no more change significantly 
across time, the Darknet, a network devote to keep anonymous it traffic, still experience rapid 
change to improve the security of it users. Here, we study the structure of the Darknet and we 
find that it topology be rather peculiar, be characterize by non-homogenous distribution of 
connection – typical of scale-free network –, very short path length and high cluster – typical 
of small-world network – and lack of a core of highly connect nodes. 

We propose a model to reproduce such features, demonstrate that the mechanism use to 
improve cyber-security be responsible for the observe topology. Unexpectedly, we reveal that it 
peculiar structure make the Darknet much more resilient than the Internet – use a a benchmark 
for comparison at a descriptive level – to random failures, target attack and cascade failures, a 
a result of adaptive change in response to the attempt of dismantle the network across time. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Since when Internet become a publicly accessible in- 
frastructure and communication network, it resilience 
to random failure – caused, for instance, by unexpected 
crash due to nodes’ malfunction or protocol’s error – or 
attack – action devote to isolate node that play a vital 
role in the network – have be widely investigated[1–5]. 
In fact, the Internet exhibit highly nontrivial structural 
and dynamical properties, from heavy-tail distribution 
of connection – know a scale-free property[6] – to a 
moderate amount of cluster – proportional to the frac- 
tion of node that form close triangle –, whose model- 
ing have be the subject of intense research activity[7– 
11]. In fact, several year after the Internet first proper 
crash, in 1980, the focus of many study have been, and 
still is, to improve it resilience[10, 12–17]. In late 90s, 
about 30 year after the first Internet prototype, the US 
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) 
and the Office of Naval Research start to develop a 
communication network, at the application layer, base 
on anonymous connection and, in principle, resistant to 
both eavesdropping and traffic analysis[18]. This net- 
work be base on onion routing, a special infrastructure 
for private communication over a public network that be 
able to hide the content of a message and the identity of 
peer who be exchange it[19]. Nowadays, this infras- 
tructure be good know a Tor network and represent 
the backbone of the Darknet, an Web of hidden service 
that be not reachable from within the Internet. The 
Darknet turn out to be the most suitable communica- 
tion network to exchange sensitive information, both licit 
and illicit, become soon the target of government try- 
ing to identify dissident or of intelligence agencies, such 
a CIA and GCHQ[20], to contain unauthorized news 
leaks, distribution of illegal content or trade of illegal 
substances. 

∗ To whom correspondence should be addressed; E-mail: man- 
lio.dedomenico@urv.cat. 

Here, we characterize the structural property of the 
Darknet across time, from 2013 to 2015, and we compare 
them against the Internet topology. It be worth remark- 
ing that throughout the manuscript we model and char- 
acterize the Darknet from a complex system perspective, 
meaning that we attach to the representation of both the 
Internet and the Darknet from available data, while fo- 
cusing the study on the particular network structure 
they provide. Note that this comparison be perform at 
a descriptive level, use the structure of the Internet a a 
benchmark to highlight the salient feature of the Dark- 
net. The Autonomous Systems data capture connection 
at the Internet layer (IP packages), while Tor work on 
the application layer, which mean that be built on top of 
the Internet and transport layers. We propose a model, 
base on how Tor functions, to reproduce with high ac- 
curacy the most salient characteristic of the Darknet. 
Finally, we perform a thorough analysis, base on simula- 
tions, of the resilience of both network to three different 
type of failures, static – due to random disruption or 
target attacks[1] – and dynamical – due to the cascade 
failure induces by attack a single specific node of the 
network[21, 22], and show that the Darknet be much more 
robust than the Internet under any perspective. 

II. OVERVIEW OF THE DATA SETS 

For our analysis, we use publicly available data set for 
both the Internet and the Darknet. The Internet topol- 
ogy, at the level of autonomous system (AS), be sample 
from historical AS-level topology data derive from Bor- 
der Gateway Protocol (BGP) monthly snapshots, con- 
sisting of IPv4 and IPv6 link appear between differ- 
ent endpoint during that month. The data be host 
by the UCLA Computer Science Department’s Internet 
Research Lab[23]. 

The Darknet topology be sample from the data ob- 
tained by probe the Tor network to improve it 
performance[24]. The link between endpoint be ex- 
tracted from the chain of circuit built by Tor client to 

ar 
X 

iv 
:1 

61 
2. 

01 
28 

4v 
1 

[ 
ph 

y 
ic 

s. 
so 

c- 
ph 

] 
5 

D 
ec 

2 
01 

6 

lphilippe 
Zone de texte 
Finally publish a http://journals.aps.org/pre/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevE.95.022313 



2 

probe the network. The network be directed, but we will 
treat it a undirected, in the following. The full raw data 
be available upon request and a partial release can be 
download from a public repository[25]. Although such 
data be obtain to study the performance of the Tor 
network and not it topology, they provide the best ap- 
proximation to the underlie topology of the Darknet 
to date. 

In both cases, we have be able to build three tem- 
poral snapshots, correspond to the network in De- 
cember 2013, May 2014 and January 2015. The Internet 
network snapshot have 46,462, 47,626 and 49,635 node 
with 195,446, 204,254 and 221,470 connections, in the 
three periods, respectively. The Darknet network snap- 
shot have 5,921, 4,953 and 5,535 node with 2,017,542, 
536,287 and 274,831 connections, in the three periods, re- 
spectively. The structure of both network for the 2015 
period be show in Fig.1A. 

III. THE STRUCTURE OF THE DARKNET 

A. Characterizing the Darknet topology 

Let u indicate with A 
[ξ] 
ij (t) the entry of the adjacency 

matrix of each network (ξ = Internet and Darknet) at 
time t (t = 2013, 2014 and 2015), with value equal to 
one if i and j be connected, and zero otherwise (here 
i, j = 1, 2, ..., N [ξ](t), where N indicates the number of 
node in the network and E the number of edges). 

For any node i in each network, we calculate the de- 

gree k 
[ξ] 
i (t) = 

∑ 
j 

A 
[ξ] 
ij (t) – characterize the number of 

connection of each node – and the local cluster co- 

efficient c 
[ξ] 
i (t) – characterize the tendency of node to 

form triangle –, define by the ratio between the num- 
ber of close triangle involve node i and the maximum 

number of triangle 12k 
[ξ] 
i (t)[k 

[ξ] 
i (t) − 1] node i might be 

part of. The mean degree be define by k̄[ξ](t) = 〈k[ξ]i (t)〉, 
whereas the average local cluster coefficient if give 

by c̄[ξ](t) = 〈c[ξ]i (t)〉. Another macroscopic structural 
descriptor of interest be the global cluster coefficient 
C [ξ](t), define by the ratio between the total number 
of close triplet and the total number of connect 
triplet of node in the network. In general, the value of 
c̄[ξ](t) and C [ξ](t) be different for network with a non- 
homogeneous connectivity. Throughout the analysis no 
power-law fitting be performed, the power law indicate 
in the plot be a simple eye-guide. 

The degree distribution be show in Fig. 1 and exhibit 
highly inhomogeneity, with evident heavy tail that re- 
semble two different truncate power law with cut-off. 
The distribution of the local cluster coefficient be also 
different in the two cases, with much more unclustered 
node in the Internet than the Darknet. In the Inter- 
net, a significant fraction of node have local cluster 
equal to 1 and few node have intermediate values, at 

variance with the Darknet where the local cluster be 
more uniformly distribute and peaked around 0.3. On 
average, Darknet node have mean degree close to 100 
and be more cluster than Internet nodes, which have 
mean degree close to 10. 

To quantify how easy be to transmit information be- 
tween any two node of each network, we calculate the 
average path length `[ξ](t), obtain by average the 
length of all shortest path connect any pair of nodes, 
and the diameter D[ξ](t), define a the length of the 
long shortest path. The Internet have average path 
length close to 3.5, with diameter between 10 and 12, 
whereas the average path length in the Darknet range 
between 2 and 2.5, with diameter between 4 and 5 (see 
Supplementary Figure 1). Therefore, assume no time 
constraint in the propagation of the information for both 
networks, communication in the Darknet is, in princi- 
ple, much faster than the Internet, with the two most 
extremal node separate by no more than 5 hops, less 
than half of the Internet. Given that the traffic in the 
Darknet be encrypt and the rout be decentralized, at 
variance with the Internet, the shortest path for commu- 
nicating compensate the high latency and throughput 
of the channels. 

In Fig. 1C be show the relationship between the size 
of the networks, their average path length and their 
global cluster for the three snapshot under consider- 
ation. The presence of high cluster and short average 
path length be strong indicator that the two network 
have nontrivial topology and formation mechanisms. In 
fact, both network exhibit the property know a small- 
worldness[26]. Small-world network be characterize by 
high clustering, with respect to random expectation, and 
characteristic length scale a ` ∼ logN . The average 
local cluster of the Internet be more than 1000 time 
high than it uniformly random expectation, whereas 
the cluster of the Darknet be between 7 and 32 time 
large than it uniformly random expectation, suggest 
nontrivial triadic closure mechanism underlie both 
networks. The characteristic length of the Darknet be 
large than it uniformly random expectations, whereas 
this be not the case for the Internet. Although small- 
worldness be good understood a a tendency, rather than 
be quantify by a single number, it be worth remark- 
ing that `(t) ≈ logN(t) – a in small world – for the 
Internet snapshot and `(t) ≈ log logN(t) – a in ultra- 
small worlds[27] – for the Darknet ones. 

The Internet and the Darknet also exhibit different 
type of higher-order correlations, a show in Fig. 1D, 
where the average nearest-neighbors’ degree and the av- 
erage local cluster coefficient be scatter against the 
degree. This kind of analysis be generally use to shade 
light on the degree-degree correlation of the network: 
if the degree or the cluster of each node be inde- 
pendent on the node in the neighborhood, no trend 
be expected. Instead, the two system present highly 
anti-correlations, with hub (i.e. node with large de- 
gree) tend to be connected, on average, to node with 



3 

INTERNET DARKNET 

A B 

C D 

FIG. 1. Structural analysis of Internet and Darknet topologies. Force-directed visualization of the (A) Internet and 
the Darknet in 2015, with node color to put in evidence the underlie mesoscale structure. (B) Density of the degree (solid 
line be for guidance only) and local cluster coefficient for the two network in 2015. (C) Scatter plot of network sizes, average 
path length and global cluster coefficient for the three temporal snapshot consider in this study. (D) Average nearest- 
neighbors’ degree (left) and average local cluster coefficient (right) against degree, to characterize higher-order correlation 
(see Supplementary Figure 1 for other structural descriptor and their evolution between 2013 and 2015). 

much small degree and local cluster coefficient. This 
tendency be confirm by the negative assortative mix- 
ing measure in both network (see Supplementary Fig- 
ure 1), define by the Pearson’s correlation coefficient of 
the degree of link pair of nodes[28, 29]. 

From this structural analysis we find that while struc- 
tural descriptor of the Internet do not change over time, 
this be not the case for the Darknet, that be still evolv- 
ing (see Supplementary Figure 1 for other structural de- 
scriptors and their evolution between 2013 and 2015). 
Nevertheless, while the Internet have be widely investi- 
gate and several model have be propose to explain 
it structure, the peculiar property of the Darknet and 
the previous unavailability of data about it structure 
call for a model that be able to reproduce it most salient 
characteristics. 

B. Modeling the Darknet structure 

To model the Darknet, it be crucial to understand 
how the Tor network functions. Any Tor client initially 
query the Directory Authorities to get the consensus, 
a table provide information about all active node in 

the network and their metadata. The metadata be then 
evaluate to build a circuit, a chain of three node use 
to connect the client to the server where the (possibly 
hidden) service be located. The choice of the node of 
the circuit be subject to severe constraints, by default. 
For instance, the same node can not be chosen twice and 
node run by the same operator be usually avoided. The 
choice of the first node be not perform uniformly ran- 
dom: instead, node with large bandwidth be favored, 
with priority to long-lived node call “guard”. 

We model the above procedure with the follow sim- 
ple grow model. At time τ = 0 a small random net- 
work with n0 � N node and e0 edge be create first. We 
assign a timestamp T (n) to such node (n = 1, 2, ..., n0), 
that will allow to calculate their age A(n, τ) late at 
any time τ , and a property B(n), not vary on time, 
whose value be sample from a heavy-tailed distribution, 
to mimic the empirical bandwidth distribution. In the 
following, we will use a log-normal distribution. 

At each time step τ = 1, 2, ..., N−n0, a new node n and 
M link enter the network. The timestamp T (n) = τ and 
a bandwidth be assign to n, a previously described. 
It be crucial to remark that the M link do not involve 
node n necessarily, at variance with process base on 



4 

FIG. 2. Modeling the Darknet structure in 2015. De- 
gree distribution obtain from an ensemble of 50 random 
realization of our model compare against the empirical dis- 
tribution (the dash line be for guidance only, to show the 
deviation of the degree distribution from a pure power-law 
with scale exponent equal to -1. 

the traditional preferential attachment. In fact, in a trust 
network like the Darknet, new node have to increase 
their reputation before be trust and this be more 
likely to happen with aging. Nevertheless, link have to 
be create between trust node at time τ , therefore 
2M node be randomly chosen with probability 

pn′(τ) = 
Aβ(n′, τ)Bγ(n′) 
n∑ 
i=1 

Aβ(i, τ)Bγ(i) 
, (1) 

where A(n′, τ) = τ − T (n′) be the age of node n′ at time 
τ . The node be then randomly link into M pairs. 
Crucially, the degree of each node at each time step do 
not play any role in the grow process, that be com- 
pletely driven by exogenous node’s property such age 
and bandwidth. The final step be to rewire node ran- 
domly, while preserve the degree distribution: this last 
stage destroys possible structural correlation due to the 
previous stage of the model and it be crucial to introduce 
a high level of randomness in connectivity. 

This Darknet stochastic model be very general and, 
vary the exponent β and γ, it be possible to explore 
different scenarios, e.g. where probability be inversely 
proportional to age (β < 0) and proportional to band- 
width (γ > 0). In practice, the value of M be fix by the 
data a M = (E − e0)/(N − n0) and therefore, the only 
free parameter of the model are, in general, β and γ. In 
the following, we do not fit the parameter and we just 
consider the simplest scenario with linear proportionality 
(β = γ = 1). 

Our simulation reveal that this model generates 
network that be remarkably close to the observe one 
from different perspectives. The high cluster and 
small characteristic length be satisfactorily reproduced, 

although the main find here be that the degree dis- 
tribution of simulated network reproduce with excellent 
accuracy the empirical one, a show in Fig. 2. 

This result be of particular interest because, in general, 
network with degree distribution scale a power law 
with exponent small than -2 (and especially close to 
-1) and cutoff be very difficult to model. Mechanisms 
involve degree-based preferential attachment and the 
influence of some exogenous properties, like age and 
cost, have be proposed[30] although they be able to re- 
produce power-law scale with exponent equal or large 
than -2 with cutoff. 

The ensemble of random realization of our model be 
sufficient to reproduce the main topological property 
of the Darknet, include it structural resilience a we 
will see later. Figure 3 show the comparison between 
observe value and their expectation accord to our 
model. 

C. Lack of “rich club” effect in the Darknet 

It have be show that in many complex networks, 
especially the Internet, node that be very central tend 
to interconnect more each other. This effect, call rich 
club, produce a core of node that be really important for 
the stability and the robustness of the network and can be 

quantified[31, 32]. Let u denote by E 
[ξ] 
>k(t) the number of 

connection among the N 
[ξ] 
>k(t) node with degree large 

than the threshold k. The rich-club coefficient be define 
by 

φ 
[ξ] 
k (t) = 

2E 
[ξ] 
>k(t) 

N 
[ξ] 
>k(t)[N 

[ξ] 
>k(t)− 1] 

. (2) 

However, to understand to which extent the observe 
rich-club effect be not due to chance, we generate an en- 
semble of 1000 random network preserve the empirical 
degree distribution and calculate the expect coefficient 

φ̃ 
[ξ] 
k (t). Therefore we study how the ratio φ 

[ξ] 
k (t)/φ̃ 

[ξ] 
k (t) 

change a a function of k: when this ratio be close to 1 
the observe rich-club be compatible with random fluc- 
tuations, whereas when it be large (smaller) than 1 it 
indicates the existence (absence) of a rich core of nodes. 
We show in Fig. 4 the calculate value of the ratio for 
the Internet and the Darknet in 2015. The Internet ex- 
hibits a clear rich-club effect for node with intermediate 
degree, around k = 50, with large hub tend to be 
not interconnect each other. Conversely, the Darknet 
do not exhibit a rich core, with slight tendency of the 
large hub to be not interconnect each other, effect 
that in be magnitude significantly small than the case 
of the Internet. 

Summing up, the Internet consists of a backbone of 
high-centrality nodes, whereas the Darknet do not. 
This result be compatible with the fact that nowadays 
Internet be a very centralize network provide an easy 
way to manage and search for online services, whereas 



5 

FIG. 3. Reproducing the Darknet (2015) structural descriptors. Different structural descriptor obtain from an 
ensemble of 400 random realization of our model compare against the observe values. In the last panel, we report the mean 
relative difference between the value calculate from the data and the value calculate from the model (“D” be for diameter, 
“APL” be for average path length and “GC” be for global clustering). 

the Darknet be very decentralize (as the Usenet, the an- 
cestor of the Internet) but it be more difficult to manage 
and search for hidden online services. 

IV. RESILIENCE OF THE DARKNET 

A. Resilience to static failure 

Here we investigate how the structural property of the 
Darknet and the Internet be reflect in their resilience 
to perturbations. We consider three different type of 
disturbance base on topological and dynamical pertur- 
bations. Topological perturbation be static removal 
of node that might mimic either random disruption or 
target attacks[1]. Dynamical perturbation start with 
the disruption of a single node, generally the one with 
high degree, that trigger a cascade of failures[21, 22]. 

In random disruptions, a fraction pfail of node be cho- 
sen uniformly random in the network and removed. In 
target disruptions, the fraction pfail of node be chosen 
accordingly to their rank with respect to a measure 
of centrality. Usually, the degree be used, but also the 
betweenness[33] – quantify centrality with respect to 
the communication flow – and k-coreness[34] – base on 
the core decomposition of a network and characterize 
to which nest shell a node belongs to. It be common 
to quantify the resilience of a network to such pertur- 
bations by observe how the relative size of the large 
connect component change a a function of 1− pfail, 
i.e. the fraction of survive nodes. This method allows to 
quantify if the survive node be cluster all together 
or if they form small disconnect cluster which hinder 
the network’s function. 

Non-homogeneous random network be know to be 
very robust to random disruption but very sensitive to 
target attacks. In fact, our finding confirm that both 
the Internet and the Darknet be fairly robust to random 

failures, whereas they be more damage by target at- 
tack (see Supplementary Figures 2, 3 and 4). It be worth 
remark that the critical point, i.e. the fraction of dis- 
ruptions for which the size large connect component 
of the network be minimum, be very different for the two 
networks. In fact, while it be enough to target the 10% 
of Internet node to reach the critical point, in the case 
of the Darknet much more effort be needed, require a 
40% of disruption (this result be in excellent agreement 
with expectation from our model, see Supplementary Fig- 
ure 6). The correspond relative difference between 
the two network be explicitly show in Fig. 5A, where 
it be evident that the Darknet be by order of magnitude, 
more resilient than the Internet, even with respect to 

FIG. 4. “Rich club” structure of Internet and Darknet 
in 2015. Ratio between the rich-club coefficient calculate 
for the empirical network and it random expectation (see the 
text for further details) a a function of the degree threshold. 
Coefficient not show for degree value for which the number 
of node be small than 100 (about 2% of Darknet and 0.2% 
of Internet). 



6 

random disruptions. 

B. Resilience to dynamical failure 

Another type of disruption, very suitable for commu- 
nication networks, be base on the induce cascade fail- 
ures. The rationale behind this method be that a node 
i in a communication network be characterize by a cer- 
tain capacity Ci, a fix feature quantify the maximum 
amount of load they can operate with, and a load Li(τ), 
a dynamical feature depend on the state of the net- 
work. Nodes with high degree be assume to be the 
one with high capacity, and at any time the total load 
of the network be constant, i.e. L = 

∑ 
i 

Li(τ). If a node 

with high capacity be disrupted, it load must be redis- 
tributed among the other node of the network: but if the 
new load exceed their capacities, a new set of node will 
suffer a disruption, redistribute the load through the 
remain node and so on, thus generate a cascade of 
failure that can paralyze the system. The dynamic of 
cascade failure and the resilience of the network can be 
study a a function of a parameter α which improves 
the capacity of each node to (1 + α)Ci. By vary α 
and calculate the relative size of the large connect 
component at the end of the cascade, we can estimate 
the require enhancement in capacity to make the net- 
work resilient to this attack. The detailed result be 
show in Supplementary Figures 2, 3 and 4, whereas the 
difference be show in Fig. 5B. Again, the Darknet be 
much more resilient than the Internet to this catastrophic 
cascade of failures, require just α ≈ 0.2 to remain fully 
operative, whereas the Internet require at least α = 0.28 
to keep operative almost the 90% of it node (full op- 
erations be guaranteed for value of α close to 1). This 
result is, one more time, in excellent agreement with ex- 
pectation from our model (see Supplementary Figure 6). 
The relative difference between the resilience of the two 
network clearly indicate that before and close to the crit- 
ical point the Darknet be more resilient than the Internet. 
This property have direct economic implications, because 
large the value of α high the cost to make the network 
more robust. 

V. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 

We have investigate the structural property of the 
Darknet, the communication network developed in the 
last two decade to guarantee safe and anonymous nav- 
igation. The Darknet exhibit some interest feature 
that be not share by the structure of the Internet. 
Triadic closure in the Darknet be more likely than in 
the Internet, with communication path much shorter in 
the former. Like the Internet, the Darknet be character- 
ized by a non-homogenous connectivity distribution and 
the presence of higher-order degree-degree correlations. 

However, the topology of the Darknet be more interest 
because of the peculiar heavy-tailed scale of the degree 
distribution, with scale exponent close to -1 and cut- 
off, at variance with the Internet, appear more like a 
power-law with scale exponent close to -2 and no evi- 
dent cutoff. 

The rich-club analysis have reveal the lack of a core of 
highly central node interconnect each other, at vari- 
ance with the Internet where this effect be remarkable. We 
argue that such topological difference be responsible for 
the different resilience exhibit by the two communica- 
tion system in response to random disruption, target at- 
tack and induced cascade failures. We have thoroughly 
show that the peculiar topology of the Darknet, charac- 
terized by highly cluster communication circuits, small 
characteristic distance between hop and lack of a rich 
core, make this network much more resilient than the 
Internet a a result of adaptive change in response to 
the attempt of dismantle it across time. 

While the resilience of the Internet be not significantly 
change over time, the resilience of the Darknet be still 
changing. In fact, it resilience to topological disruption 
slightly decrease between 2013 and 2014, remain un- 
change in 2015, whereas in the same year the Darknet 
become slightly less resilient to induced cascade failures. 
Together with the trend reveal by other structural de- 
scriptors, such a decrease clustering, slightly increas- 
ing characteristic length and increase assortativity, we 
argue that the Darknet might be undergo a transition 
from decentralization to centralization of it services. It 
will be interest to confirm this prediction in the future, 
when longer historical data will be available. 

By mimic how the Darknet actually works, we 
have propose a model – base on a preferential at- 
tachment mechanism depend on exogenous property 
such a age and bandwidth and independent on endoge- 
nous property such a node’s degree – to reproduce the 
empirical degree distribution with remarkable accuracy. 
The analysis show that our model be sufficient to under- 
stand the structural correlation and the robustness of 
the Darknet. 

We recognize that there be many possible flaw in the 
representation of both systems, the Darknet and the In- 
ternet, a to claim to have the true topological networks. 
Nevertheless, from the data available it be indeed possible 
to start think about property of the structure and it 
implications. The comparison between both structure 
have be developed at a descriptive level from the under- 
lie graphs, with no other goal than use the Internet 
a a benchmark to good highlight some salient feature 
of the Darknet. Finally, the proposal of a model driven 
by the main feature of the Darknet seem to be enough 
to capture it more prominent topological features. 

Summing up, the main result of this work be the indica- 
tion that the mechanism adopt to guarantee anony- 
mous traffic in the Darknet and to improve the cyber- 
security of it user could be the main responsible for the 
peculiar topology of the Darknet observe so far, and it 



7 

A B 

FIG. 5. Relative difference in resilience. (A) Differences between the Darknet and the Internet in resilience to random 
and target attack (see Supplementary Figure 5 for the difference in topological resilience in 2013 and 2014) and (B) induced 
cascade failures. 

resilience. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The author thank Robert Annessi and Martin 
Schmiedecker for provide the Tor raw data and sup- 
port on data processing. MDD acknowledges financial 
support from the Spanish program Juan de la Cierva 
(IJCI-2014-20225). AA acknowledges financial support 
from ICREA Academia and James S. McDonnell Foun- 
dation and Spanish MINECO FIS2015-71582. 

[1] R. Albert, H. Jeong, and A.-L. Barabási, Nature 406, 
378 (2000). 

[2] R. Cohen, K. Erez, D. Ben-Avraham, and S. Havlin, 
Physical review letter 85, 4626 (2000). 

[3] D. S. Callaway, M. E. Newman, S. H. Strogatz, and D. J. 
Watts, Physical review letter 85, 5468 (2000). 

[4] R. Pastor-Satorras, A. Vázquez, and A. Vespignani, 
Physical review letter 87, 258701 (2001). 

[5] R. Pastor-Satorras and A. Vespignani, Evolution and 
structure of the Internet: A statistical physic approach 
(Cambridge University Press, 2007). 

[6] A.-L. Barabási and R. Albert, science 286, 509 (1999). 
[7] A. Vázquez, M. Boguná, Y. Moreno, R. Pastor-Satorras, 

and A. Vespignani, Physical Review E 67, 046111 (2003). 
[8] M. A. Serrano, M. Boguná, and A. Dı́az-Guilera, Phys- 

ical review letter 94, 038701 (2005). 

[9] M. Á. Serrano, M. Boguná, and A. Diaz-Guilera, The 
European Physical Journal B-Condensed Matter and 
Complex Systems 50, 249 (2006). 

[10] M. Boguná, F. Papadopoulos, and D. Krioukov, Nature 
communication 1, 62 (2010). 

[11] F. Papadopoulos, M. Kitsak, M. Á. Serrano, M. Boguná, 
and D. Krioukov, Nature 489, 537 (2012). 

[12] S. Savage, T. Anderson, A. Aggarwal, D. Becker, 
N. Cardwell, A. Collins, E. Hoffman, J. Snell, A. Vah- 

dat, G. Voelker, et al., Micro, IEEE 19, 50 (1999). 
[13] B. Fortz and M. Thorup, Computational Optimization 

and Applications 29, 13 (2004). 
[14] J. C. Doyle, D. L. Alderson, L. Li, S. Low, M. Roughan, 

S. Shalunov, R. Tanaka, and W. Willinger, PNAS of the 
United States of America 102, 14497 (2005). 

[15] M. Boguna, D. Krioukov, and K. C. Claffy, Nature 
Physics 5, 74 (2009). 

[16] M. Boguná and D. Krioukov, Physical review letter 102, 
058701 (2009). 

[17] B. Briscoe and J. Manner, Internet Engineering Task 
Force RFC, 7141 (2014). 

[18] P. F. Syverson, M. G. Reed, and D. M. Goldschlag, 
Journal of Computer Security 5, 237 (1997). 

[19] D. Goldschlag, M. Reed, and P. Syverson, Communica- 
tions of the ACM 42, 39 (1999). 

[20] The Guardian, “NSA and GCHQ target Tor network 
that protects anonymity of web users,” http://goo.gl/ 
UiZyPd, accessed: 2016-05-20. 

[21] A. E. Motter and Y.-C. Lai, Physical Review E 66, 
065102 (2002). 

[22] A. E. Motter, Physical Review Letters 93, 098701 (2004). 
[23] UCLA Computer Science Department’s Internet Re- 

search Lab, “Internet AS-level Topology Archive,” http: 
//irl.cs.ucla.edu/topology/. 

http://goo.gl/UiZyPd 
http://goo.gl/UiZyPd 
http://irl.cs.ucla.edu/topology/ 
http://irl.cs.ucla.edu/topology/ 


8 

[24] R. Annessi and M. Schmiedecker, in IEEE European 
Symposium on Security and Privacy (2016). 

[25] R. Annessi and M. Schmiedecker, “NavigaTor,” https: 
//naviga-tor.github.io/. 

[26] D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz, nature 393, 440 (1998). 
[27] R. Cohen and S. Havlin, Physical Review Letters 90, 

058701 (2003). 
[28] M. E. Newman, Physical review letter 89, 208701 

(2002). 
[29] M. E. Newman, Physical Review E 67, 026126 (2003). 

[30] L. A. N. Amaral, A. Scala, M. Barthelemy, and H. E. 
Stanley, PNAS 97, 11149 (2000). 

[31] V. Colizza, A. Flammini, M. A. Serrano, and A. Vespig- 
nani, Nature physic 2, 110 (2006). 

[32] T. Opsahl, V. Colizza, P. Panzarasa, and J. J. Ramasco, 
Physical review letter 101, 168702 (2008). 

[33] L. C. Freeman, Sociometry , 35 (1977). 
[34] S. B. Seidman, Social network 5, 269 (1983). 

https://naviga-tor.github.io/ 
https://naviga-tor.github.io/ 

Modeling Structure and Resilience of the Dark Network 
Abstract 
I Introduction 
II Overview of the data set 
III The structure of the Darknet 
A Characterizing the Darknet topology 
B Modeling the Darknet structure 
C Lack of ``rich club'' effect in the Darknet 

IV Resilience of the Darknet 
A Resilience to static failure 
B Resilience to dynamical failure 

V Conclusions and Discussion 
Acknowledgments 
References 




