






































Nanoscale logic machine go beyond binary compute 


Home Nanotechnology Nanophysics March 14, 2017 

Nanoscale logic machine go beyond binary compute 
March 14, 2017 by Lisa Zyga feature 

Top 

Home 

Medical Xpress 

Search 

Help 

FAQ 

About 

Contact 

Phys.org Account 

Sponsored Account 

Newsletter 

RSS feed 

Feature Stories 

Latest news 

Week's top 

Archive 

iPhone iPad Apps 

Blackberry App 

Android App & Widget 

Amazon Kindle 

Mobile version 

Connect 

Privacy Policy Terms of Use© Phys.org 2003 - 2017, Science X network 

This website us cooky to ensure you get the best experience on our website. More info 

Nanotechnology Physics Earth Astronomy & Space Technology Chemistry Biology Other Sciences 

Nanoscale logic machine go beyond binary compute https://phys.org/news/2017-03-nanoscale-logic-machines-binary.html 

1 sur 7 19-03-17 18:29 



operate completely differently than conventional logic device do. Instead of rely 

on the binary switch paradigm like that use by transistor in today's computers, 

the new nanoscale logic machine physically simulate the problem and take 

advantage of the inherent randomness that governs the behavior of physical 

system at the nanoscale—randomness that be usually consider a drawback. 

The team of researchers, Barbara Fresch 

et al., from university in Belgium, Italy, 

Australia, Israel, and the US, have 

publish a paper on the new nanoscale 

logic machine in a recent issue of Nano 

Letters. 

"Our approach show the possibility of a 

new class of tiny analog computer that 

can solve computationally difficult 

problem by simple statistical algorithm 

run in nanoscale solid-state physical 

devices," coauthor Francoise Remacle at 

the University of Liege told Phys.org. 

The new nanologic machine consist of individual phosphorous atom that be 

precisely position and embed in a silicon crystal at a density of about 200 

billion atom per square centimeter. Single electron randomly move in and out of 

the atom due to quantum tunneling. Since each atom can hold one or two of these 

electrons, and each electron can occupy a few different energy levels, each atom 

can occupy one of four possible states. Each atom be constantly transition 

between it four state accord to a certain set of probabilities, correspond to 

the random movement of electron tunnel in and out of the atom and change 

their energy levels. 

The researcher recognize that this physical picture can be use to simulate 

Phys.org on facebook 

Relevant PhysicsForums post 

Egyptian statue recently unearthed be 
not Ramses II Mar 16, 2017 

Astronomers observe a die red giant 
star's final act Mar 17, 2017 

LHCb observes an exceptionally large 
group of particle Mar 17, 2017 

1.3M people like this. Sign Up to see what your 
friend like. 

LikeLike 

LHCb observes 5 new particle (excited hadrons) 
1 hour ago 

Nanoscale logic machine go beyond binary compute https://phys.org/news/2017-03-nanoscale-logic-machines-binary.html 

2 sur 7 19-03-17 18:29 



certain computational problems. As a proof-of-concept, they look at a relatively 

simple example involve the flow of visitor in a maze consist of four room 

connect by gates. The task be to find the optimal combination of rate for opening 

the gate in order to maximize the time that visitor spend in one particular room. 

Solving this type of problem use conventional compute require a significant 

amount of effort, since it typically involves analyze the dynamic of visitor in the 

maze to gather information before attempt to optimize the rate of the gate 

openings. 

However, use the new logic devices, it's possible to find the solution more directly 

because the problem be physically embody by the atomic "hardware" itself. For 

this particular problem, the topology of the maze corresponds to an atom's states, 

and the movement of visitor corresponds to the tunnel of the electrons. 

Using scan tunnel spectroscopy, the researcher could measure the 

electron tunnel rates, and could also control these rate by control the 

voltage to the tip of the microscope along with the distance between the tip and the 

substrate. So the maze problem becomes a problem of find the combination of 

voltage and tip distance that maximize the time an atom occupies a certain state. 

Due to the variability of single-electron dynamics, each atom have slightly different 

electron transport properties, which mean some atom have good optimal value 

than others. If the atom be use a switch devices, like transistors, then this 

variability would be consider a drawback because it could introduce error. But 

here the variability becomes an advantage because it allows billion of logic 

device to be compare against each other to determine which electron transport 

property help keep the atom in a certain state for the long time. 

Utilisez Google AdWords 

how could we produce a secondary beam of long 
neutral kaon 2 hour ago 

What be pure eigenstate? 9 hour ago 

Nuclear decay Mar 18, 2017 

Problem understand crosssection 

Any think in apply evolutionary algorithm to 
fusion? Mar 17, 2017 

More from High Energy, Nuclear, Particle Physics 

Nanoscale logic machine go beyond binary compute https://phys.org/news/2017-03-nanoscale-logic-machines-binary.html 

3 sur 7 19-03-17 18:29 



The researcher expect that the result will lead to nanoscale logic device capable 

of solve a wide variety of problem of increase complexity—all by directly 

simulate the problem rather than reframing them a binary processes. 

"Nanoscale and molecular device use a hardware for logic have potentially 

many advantages, from high pack density and low-power dissipation to the high 

number of state that can be use to encode information," Remacle said. 

"However, their dynamic be rule by probabilistic law because of the fundamental 

stochastic nature of thermally activate and quantum processes. The most 

straightforward application be then to use nanoscale device for the implementation 

of probabilistic algorithm that require significant overhead in conventional 

deterministic hardware. For example, the mere sample a pseudo-random number 

from a probability distribution require hundred of instruction on a modern 

computer while electron tunnel at truly random time be a natural process." 

In the future, the researcher plan to design other type of nanologic devices, 

whose implementation will require position the component with extreme 

precision. 

"On the theoretical side, we will continue to develop different information 

processing paradigm tailor on the physic of nanoscale and molecular systems, 

with special attention to potentiality emerge from their quantum nature," 

Remacle said. "This be a fundamental effort for turn into useful technology the 

increase ability to control and manipulate the matter at the nanoscale. 

Experimentally, the big challenge be to achieve full control of the position of 

dopant atom in the silicon matrix with atomic precision and the design of their 

transport characteristics." 

Explore further: Proposed method to cause an atom to emit the same light 

a another atom 

More information: Barbara Fresch et al. "A Probabilistic Finite State Logic 

Nanoscale logic machine go beyond binary compute https://phys.org/news/2017-03-nanoscale-logic-machines-binary.html 

4 sur 7 19-03-17 18:29 



Particle Analytical. 

Ad particle.dk 

No Big Bang? 
Quantum... 
phys.org 

$100K Graduate 
Research Prize -... 
Ad bell-labs.com 

Journal reference: Nano Letters 

feedback to editor 

Machine Realized Experimentally on a Single Dopant Atom." Nano Letters. DOI: 

10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b05149 

© 2017 Phys.org 

Related Stories Recommended for you 

Proposed method to cause an atom to 
emit the same light a another atom 
February 27, 2017 

(Phys.org)—A team of researcher at Princeton University 
have found a way to cause any atom to mimic the light 
emission of any other atom. In their paper publish in the 

journal Physical Review Letters, the team reveals ... 

Nanotube film may resolve longevity 
problem of challenger solar cell March 
17, 2017 

Five year ago, the world start to talk about third- 
generation solar cell that challenged the traditional silicon 
cell with a cheaper and simpler manufacturing process that 

use less energy. 

2455 share 

Nanoscale logic machine go beyond binary compute https://phys.org/news/2017-03-nanoscale-logic-machines-binary.html 

5 sur 7 19-03-17 18:29 


