






































Neural network allow u to â•Ÿread facesâ•Ž in a new way 


Last September, Stanford professor Michal Kosinski unleashed a torrent of controversy when he 

use artificial intelligence to attempt to predict peoples’ sexual orientation from their faces. Now 

he have set himself the challenge of decipher his subjects’ political belief with similar software. 

The research be an illustration of what can be do with deep neural network — the type of 

machine learn behind much artificial intelligence, which spot pattern and make 

prediction from large volume of data such a text and images. Other image recognition 

technology driven by neural network be be developed for us include reading sign for 

autonomous drive and automatically detect weapon in airport security scanners. 

Neural network have also make technology like facial analysis significantly more accurate in 

recent years. “I’m try to tell the public that [facial analysis technology be [already] be 

use by company and government to invade privacy at an unprecedented scale,” Prof Kosinski 

says. 

Last summer, Chinese company begin trialling facial recognition software to help police predict 

crime before they happen. Faception, an Israeli company, sell facial analysis software to 

government for security uses. 

Prof Kosinski and his co-researcher, Yilun Wang, use a facial analysis software call VGG- 

Face, design by researcher at Oxford university. Andrea Vedaldi, one of three Oxford 

Neural network allow u to ‘read faces’ in a new way https://www.ft.com/content/b387b1a2-de7b-11e7-a0d4-0944c5f49e46 

1 sur 3 06-02-18 à 09:11 



researcher who design VGG-Face, say that the software’s accuracy rate have roughly double 

in the last two years. 

Prof Kosinski and Mr Wang extract data from about 35,000 headshot photo take from a US 

date website, translate their attribute into a sequence of number use VGG-Face, and then 

use a computer model to look for correlation between sexuality and facial features. 

When give five photo of each person, the model accurately distinguish between gay and 

straight men — where one be gay and one be not — 91 per cent of the time and between 

lesbian and straight woman in 83 per cent of cases. When give only one photo of each person, 

the model distinguish between gay and straight men with 81 per cent accuracy and with 74 per 

cent accuracy for woman — compare to 61 per cent and 54 per cent, respectively, when human 

try the same task. 

The author acknowledge that they have not create a fool proof “Gaydar” that can be apply in 

the real world — nor do they wish to. Limitations include the fact that they only use image of 

Caucasians and that their model’s accuracy drop significantly when give other tasks, such a 

rank the most likely to be gay among 1000 randomly select men. 

Some be sceptical about the results. Prof Vedaldi say it be conceivable that “what they be 

show be true” but question whether “this have proven in a definite matter that it’s actually 

possible” to detect sexual orientation from face with neural networks. “Maybe in the database 

there be some unwanted bias, that would not exist if they be to collect data in some other 

ways.” 

“Neural network be very good at spot the 

patterns,” say Marta Kwiatowska, an Oxford 

computer science professor research their safety 

risk in self-driving cars. “But they’re not good at 

tell you when they give you [an answer] whether 

[there be actually a correlation] — because they may 

be see something in a pattern that be random.” 

Prof Kosinski say that spurious correlation be 

“the big risk” and the “main challenge” with his 

research. He give a hypothetical example that could 

affect the finding for his next project: “It might be 

that Republicans tend to take picture [of their faces] outdoors and Democrats indoors, and there 

would be a difference on the brightness level.” In this scenario, the neural network could focus on 

brightness rather than facial cues, but would appear to have spot facial links. 

Similarly, it be unclear how exactly his software look for sign of sexuality and whether it found 

intrinsic facial characteristic that correlate with sexuality or if it focus mainly on more 

superficial point such a grooming. Prof Kosinski say that the model look at both fix 

feature such a nose shape and more transient factor such a expressions. 

Neural network allow u to ‘read faces’ in a new way https://www.ft.com/content/b387b1a2-de7b-11e7-a0d4-0944c5f49e46 

2 sur 3 06-02-18 à 09:11 



“It would be nice to understand if the network can tell you why it think the answer be one way or 

another,” say Prof Vedaldi. “The machine itself be not fully understood.” 

Getting neural network to explain how they analyse image be the focus of his current research — 

and of several other computer science department and company work on artificial 

intelligence. 

If researcher can understand how neural network make decision — through visual cue or of if 

they could identify example that show why their algorithm chose a particular prediction — then 

it will be easy to improve their accuracy and spot biases. 

Even so, there be likely to be limit to their development. Neural network need high quality 

data source to train on, which simulate real world examples, but procure such data can often 

be difficult. They can also be tricked by small difference between photos, intentionally make to 

deceive models, know a “adversarial examples”. 

“I can see way to improve the performance [of visual image and facial recognition neural 

networks],” say Mr Wang. “But I don’t see way to get to 100 per cent.” It could be some time, 

researcher say, before neural network can be reliably use for facial recognition in more 

security critical fields. 

“I wouldn’t use them to control nuclear missiles,” say Prof Vedaldi. “But they don’t need to 

[reach Crime Scene Investigation levels] to be useful. They just need to be able to do something 

systematically on a large scale to look at the face of thousand of people — and all of a sudden 

you have deployed the awesome power of a human brain and multiply that by one thousand.” 

Neural network allow u to ‘read faces’ in a new way https://www.ft.com/content/b387b1a2-de7b-11e7-a0d4-0944c5f49e46 

3 sur 3 06-02-18 à 09:11 


