






































New AI can tell if you're male or female from the way you smile 


New AI can tell if you're male or female 
from the way you smile 

New research detail the difference between male and female 
smile 
The research give way to AI that can predict a person's sex base 
on their smile 
The AI be the first of it kind that can make the prediction base 
on video footage 
Previous AI could make the prediction after look at a photo of 
a smile 

By Maggie O'Neill For Dailymail.com 

Published: 22:24 GMT, 14 March 2018 | Updated: 19:18 GMT, 15 March 2018 

New artificial intelligence can predict your sex base on your smile. 

Researchers at England's University of Bradford developed the AI after notice 
marked difference between males' and females' smiles. 

They hope to study the way in which cosmetic procedure affect these difference 
a well a how the research applies to transgender people in the future. 

Their study be publish in The Visual Computer: International Journal of 
Computer Graphics. 

Copy link to paste in your message 

New research from the University of Bradford in England give way to artificial 
intelligence that can predict a person's sex base on a video of them smiling. 
Researchers mapped out the difference between male and female smile for the 
report 

The University of Bradford researchers' new AI platform be a step above already 
exist technology that can determine one's sex base on a photograph of their 
smile. 

The new report said: 'Although automatic gender recognition be already available, 
exist method use static image and compare fix facial features. 

'The new research be the first to use the dynamic movement of the smile to 
automatically distinguish between men and women.' 

For the study the researcher mapped out 49 facial landmarks, found mostly 
around the eyes, down the nose and near the mouth. 

'They use these to ass how the face change a we smile cause by the 
underlie muscle movement - include both change in distance between the 
different point and the "flow" of the smile: how much, how far and how fast the 

New AI can tell if you're male or female from the way you smile http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-5501469/New-AI-tell-you... 

1 sur 42 17-03-18 à 08:47 



different point on the face move a the smile be formed,' the analysis said. 

Next the researcher analyze whether or not there be significant difference 
between woman and men's smiles. 

They conclude that there were, and the scientist learn that women's smile 
be more expansive. 

Researcher Professor Hassan Ugail said: 'Anecdotally, woman be thought to be 
more expressive in how they smile, and our research have borne this out. 

'Women definitely have broader smiles, expand their mouth and lip area far 
more than men.' 

The team built an algorithm base on their analysis, and it be subsequently 
test use video footage of more than 100 people smiling. 

Copy link to paste in your message 

The researcher found that men's smile be less 'expansive' than women's. One of 
the scientist say that woman expand their lip area and mouth more than men 
do when they smile 

'The computer be able to correctly determine gender in 86 percent of case and 
the team believe the accuracy could easily be improved,' the report said. 

Professor Ugail confirm that the researcher think the technology can get 
better. 

He said: 'We use a fairly simple machine classification for this research a we 
be just test the concept, but more sophisticated AI would improve the 
recognition rates.' 

The study say the point of the research be to 'enhance machine learn 
capabilities' but that the research have raise question the team member want to 
investigate in the future. 

Copy link to paste in your message 

The researcher want to now study whether or not cosmetic surgery would impact 
the new AI's predicitons 

'One be how the machine might respond to the smile of a transgender person, and 
the other be the impact of plastic surgery on recognition rates,' the study said. 

Professor Ugail said: 'Because this system measure the underlie muscle 
movement of the face during a smile, we believe these dynamic will remain the 
same even if external physical feature change, follow surgery, for example. 

'This kind of facial recognition could become a next-generation biometric, a it's 

New AI can tell if you're male or female from the way you smile http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-5501469/New-AI-tell-you... 

2 sur 42 17-03-18 à 08:47 



not dependent on one feature but on a dynamic that's unique to an individual and 
would be very difficult to mimic or alter.' 

Elon Musk call for regulation of AI before 'it's too late' 

WHY ARE PEOPLE SO WORRIED ABOUT AI? 

It be an issue trouble some of the great mind in the world at the moment, 
from Bill Gates and Elon Musk. 

SpaceX and Tesla CEO Elon Musk described AI a our 'biggest existential threat' 
and liken it development a 'summoning the demon.' 

He believe super intelligent machine could use human a pets. 

Professor Stephen Hawking say it be a 'near certainty' that a major technological 
disaster will threaten humanity in the next 1,000 to 10,000 years. 

They could steal job 

More than 60 per cent of people fear that robot will lead to there be few job 
in the next ten years, accord to a 2016 YouGov survey. 

And 27 per cent predict that it will decrease the number of job 'a lot' with 
previous research suggest admin and service sector worker will be the hardest 
hit. 

As well a pose a threat to our jobs, other expert believe AI could 'go rogue' and 
become too complex for scientist to understand. 

New AI can tell if you're male or female from the way you smile http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-5501469/New-AI-tell-you... 

3 sur 42 17-03-18 à 08:47 



A quarter of the respondent predict robot will become part of everyday life in 
just 11 to 20 years, with 18 per cent predict this will happen within the next 
decade. 

They could 'go rogue' 

Computer scientist Professor Michael Wooldridge say AI machine could become 
so intricate that engineer don't fully understand how they work. 

If expert don't understand how AI algorithm function, they won't be able to 
predict when they fail. 

This mean driverless car or intelligent robot could make unpredictable 'out of 
character' decision during critical moments, which could put people in danger. 

For instance, the AI behind a driverless car could choose to swerve into 
pedestrian or crash into barrier instead of decide to drive sensibly. 

They could wipe out humanity 

Some people believe AI will wipe out human completely. 

'Eventually, I think human extinction will probably occur, and technology will 
likely play a part in this,' DeepMind's Shane Legg say in a recent interview. 

He single out artificial intelligence, or AI, a the 'number 1 risk for this century.' 

In August last year, Musk warn that AI pose more of a threat to humanity than 
North Korea. 

'If you're not concerned about AI safety, you should be. Vastly more risk than 
North Korea,' the 46-year-old write on Twitter. 

'Nobody like be regulated, but everything (cars, planes, food, drugs, etc) that's 
a danger to the public be regulated. AI should be too.' 

Musk have consistently advocate for government and private institution to 
apply regulation on AI technology. 

He have argue that control be necessary in order protect machine from 
advance out of human control 

Most watch News video 

Embed Most Watched Videos 
<iframe style="width:1px;min-width:100%; 
height:352px" 
src="http://www.dailymail.co.uk/api/most- 
watched-videos/news/dark" frameborder="0" 
scrolling="no"></iframe> 

DON'T MISS 

New AI can tell if you're male or female from the way you smile http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-5501469/New-AI-tell-you... 

4 sur 42 17-03-18 à 08:47 


