






































Using machine learn to detect software vulnerability 


Using machine learn to detect software vulnerability 

July 24, 2018 by Ingrid Fadelli, Tech Xplore 

Home 
Security 
July 24, 2018 

Credit: Markus Spiske on Unsplash 

A team of researcher from R&D company Draper and Boston University developed a new large-scale 
vulnerability detection system use machine learn algorithms, which could help to discover software 
vulnerability faster and more efficiently. 

Hackers and malicious user be constantly come up with new way to compromise IT system and 
applications, typically by exploit software security vulnerabilities. Software vulnerability be small error 
make by the programmer who developed a system that can propagate quickly, especially through open- 
source software or through code reuse and adaptation. 

Every year, thousand of these vulnerability be publicly report to the Common Vulnerabilities and 
Exposures database (CVE), while many others be spot and patch internally by developers. If they be 
not adequately addressed, these vulnerability can be exploit by attackers, often with devastate effects, 
a prove in many recent high-profile exploits, such a the Heartbleed bug and the WannaCry ramsomware 
cryptoworm. 

Generally, exist tool to analyze program can only detect a limited number of potential errors, which be 
base on predefined rules. However, the widespread use of open-source repository have open new 
possibility for the development of technique that could reveal code vulnerability patterns. 

The researcher from Draper and Boston have developed a new vulnerability detection tool that us machine 
learn for automate detection of vulnerability in C/C++ source code, which have already show 
promising results. 

The team compile a large dataset with million of open-source function and label it use three static 
(pre-runtime) analysis tools, namely Clang, Cppcheck and Flawfinder, which be design to identify 
potential exploits. Their dataset include million of function-level example of C and C++ code drawn from 
the SATEIV Juliet Test Suite, Debian Linux distribution, and public Git repository on GitHub. 

"Using these datasets, we developed a fast and scalable vulnerability detection tool base on deep feature 
representation learn that directly interprets lexed source code," the researcher write in their paper. 

As program language be in some way similar to human languages, the researcher design a 
vulnerability detection technique that us natural language processing (NLP), an AI strategy that allows 
computer to understand and interpret human language. 

Using machine learn to detect software vulnerability https://techxplore.com/news/2018-07-machine-software-vulnerabilities.html 

1 sur 2 03-08-18 à 19:40 



"We leverage feature-extraction approach similar to those use for sentence sentiment classification with 
convolutional neural network (CNNs) and recurrent neural network (RNNs) for function-level source 
vulnerability classification," the researcher explain in their paper. 

They combine NLP with random forest (RM); a powerful algorithm that creates an ensemble of decision 
tree from randomly select subset of the training dataset and then merges them together, generally 
achieve more accurate predictions. 

The researcher test their tool on both real software package and the NIST STATE IV benchmark dataset. 

"Our result demonstrate that deep feature representation learn on source code be a promising approach 
for automate software vulnerability detection," they wrote. "We apply a variety of ML technique inspire 
by classification problem in the natural language domain, fine-tuned them for our application, and achieve 
the best overall result use feature learn via convolutional neural network and classify with an 
ensemble tree algorithm." 

So far, their work have focus on C/C++ code, but their method could also be apply to any other 
program language. They specifically chose to create a custom C/C++ lexer a this would produce a 
simple and generic representation of function source code, which be ideal for machine learn training. 

Explore further: What be software vulnerabilities, and why be there so many of them? 

More information: Automated Vulnerability Detection in Source Code Using Deep Representation 
Learning. arXiv:1807.04320v1 [cs.LG]. arxiv.org/abs/1807.04320 

Abstract 
Increasing number of software vulnerability be discover every year whether they be report publicly 
or discover internally in proprietary code. These vulnerability can pose serious risk of exploit and result 
in system compromise, information leaks, or denial of service. We leveraged the wealth of C and C++ open- 
source code available to develop a large-scale function-level vulnerability detection system use machine 
learning. To supplement exist label vulnerability datasets, we compile a vast dataset of million of 
open-source function and label it with carefully-selected finding from three different static analyzer that 
indicate potential exploits. Using these datasets, we developed a fast and scalable vulnerability detection tool 
base on deep feature representation learn that directly interprets lexed source code. We evaluate our 
tool on code from both real software package and the NIST SATE IV benchmark dataset. Our result 
demonstrate that deep feature representation learn on source code be a promising approach for automate 
software vulnerability detection. 

© 2018 Tech Xplore 

Using machine learn to detect software vulnerability https://techxplore.com/news/2018-07-machine-software-vulnerabilities.html 

2 sur 2 03-08-18 à 19:40 


