






































Voter ID Laws Really Do Discriminate, a New Study Shows 


Voter ID Laws Really Do Discriminate, 
a New Study Shows 

Author: Issie LapowskyIssie Lapowsky 

Being able to match voter with their record in ID database use just a few 

basic detail might help dispel some myth about whom law do and don’t 

hurt. 

Frank Augugliaro 

After announce the closure of his short-lived commission to end voter 

fraud, President Trump make it clear Thursday that he want more 

state to require identification at the ballot box to prevent what he 

believe be rampant—but still unproven—election rigging. 

Ever since the Supreme Court struck down a key part of the Voting 

Rights Act in 2013, law require voter to show identification when 

they vote have speckle the nation, pop up in state from Rhode 

Island to Arizona. Almost a quickly, voting right advocate have take 

state like Texas and Alabama to court, argue that these law 

intentionally discriminate against minority voters. Just last summer, a 

federal judge toss out Texas’s voter ID law, in a case that’s now be 

Voter ID Laws Really Do Discriminate, a New Study Shows https://www.wired.com/story/voter-id-law-algorithm/ 

1 sur 5 06-01-18 à 13:28 



revisit by an appeal court. But prove exactly how discriminatory 

these law be require far more complexity than it might seem. 

Sure, there be endless anecdote of well-meaning, well-prepared 

citizen be turn away on election day, but anecdote be not data. 

There be ample survey ask voter whether these law come 

between them and the ballot box, but people can always misrepresent 

themselves on surveys, and court tend to dismiss them, anyway. Seven 

state include Social Security number in voter file and driver's license 

records, but across the rest of the country, determine whether a single 

individual voter be also list in any number of identification database 

have become a complex and nettlesome problem for voting access 

advocate and statistic researcher alike. 

Recently, however, researcher at Tufts University and Harvard 

University demonstrate that it's possible to match individual across 

government database with nearly perfect accuracy, use just a few 

basic identifier like a person’s name, date of birth, and address. They 

developed the algorithm while work a expert witness in the 

Department of Justice's case against Texas. Now, in a newly publish 

paper, researcher Stephen Ansolabehere of Harvard and Eitan Hersh 

of Tufts have explain the underlie methodology. Their goal, 

accord to Hersh, be to create a system court can easily understand, 

which can not only be use in future voter ID law cases, but can also 

help dispel some myth about who those law do and don’t hurt. 

“The more we can agree on method that be easy to explain, the good 

off we are,” say Hersh. 

A Better Model 

If all data be clean and complete, it wouldn’t be so hard to figure out 

if a voter named, say, John Smith, be the same John Smith list in 

the federal driver’s license database. According to Hersh and 

Ansolabehere’s research, only 1 in 2.7 billion individual have the same 

zip code, gender, date of birth, and last name, make those four detail 

combine a fairly spot-on indicator of a person’s identity. But often, 

government record contain typos, incomplete fields, nicknames, or 

outdated addresses. To link databases, researcher often need to make 

do with less information. 

Voter ID Laws Really Do Discriminate, a New Study Shows https://www.wired.com/story/voter-id-law-algorithm/ 

2 sur 5 06-01-18 à 13:28 



They also need to be able to show their work in a way that lawyer and 

judge can understand. So many algorithm that purport to match 

people across database run up against the so-called black box problem. 

They may be able to make statistically sound decisions, but they can't 

easily explain how they make them. In a recent Supreme Court hearing 

over partisan gerrymander in Wisconsin, Chief Justice John Roberts 

dismiss research-backed method to measure gerrymander a 

"sociological gobbledygook." Hersh and Ansolabehere want to 

develop a tool that could be easily understood. 

'The more we can agree on method that be easy to explain, the good 

off we are.' 

Eitan Hersh, Tufts University 

So, work with the Department of Justice, the researcher set out to 

determine whether they could match voter on the voter roll with their 

correspond record in ID database use just a few basic details. To 

do that, they developed an algorithm that scan the state of Texas’s 

voter roll and compare it to the federal list of driver licenses, state 

IDs, and conceal handgun permits, among other form of acceptable 

identification. It scan each record by address, date of birth, gender, 

and name, to see if, for instance, a combination of address, gender, and 

name would be a accurate a predictor a a combination of date of birth, 

gender, and name. 

To check their results, the researcher rely on a subset of the voter 

data that contain Social Security numbers. Those record effectively 

serve a the algorithm’s answer key. They ultimately found that 98 

percent of the record that could be match use Social Security 

number could also be match use any three of the four key 

identifiers—address, date of birth, gender, and name. 

“This combination be a good a a Social Security number,” Hersh says. 

That high accuracy rate be essential in court, say Charles Stewart III, a 

political scientist at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who have 

serve a an expert witness in a case against South Carolina's voter ID 

law. Most database-matching algorithm be use in low-risk scenarios, 

he explains, like advertising, where company want to target customer 

across a range of platforms. If they target the wrong customer, at worst, 

Voter ID Laws Really Do Discriminate, a New Study Shows https://www.wired.com/story/voter-id-law-algorithm/ 

3 sur 5 06-01-18 à 13:28 



they've lose a marginal amount of money. In court, it could mean lose 

the case altogether. "There be really no room for error," Stewart says, 

cite the risk of have to demonstrate an algorithm's chop before the 

bench. "If the judge doesn't get match properly, for instance, you 

might a well have not do anything." 

Deep Impact 

Once Hersh and Ansolabehere be confident they have properly 

match register voter to their ID records, they use a commercial 

tool call Catalist to predict each voter's race. That tool analyzes name 

to determine how likely a give name be to be associate with one race 

or another. It also account for the demographic of the Census block 

where a give voter lives. Using this tool, the researcher confirm 

what voting right advocate already know to be true—that black voter 

be more likely to lack adequate identification under voter ID laws. 

According to the study, 3.6 percent of register white voter have no 

match in any state or federal ID database. By contrast, 7.5 percent of 

black register voter be miss from those databases. 

The algorithm show a clear and disturb racial disparity on voting 

rights. But Hersh say that it also show that voter ID law affect a 

relatively small percentage of the population. Across all register 

voter in Texas, the researcher found 4.5 percent lack proper 

identification. For register voter who actually show up at the poll 

in 2012, it's 1.5 percent. 

"You're down to a small percentage of the population that doesn't have 

an ID," say Hersh. That's one reason why, despite Alabama's restrictive 

voter ID law, black turnout in the recent Senate election still exceed 

expectations. Still, while the percentage may sound small, that 4.5 

percent still represent 608,470 Texas citizen who could potentially be 

disenfranchised. 

Hersh say he agrees the public ought to be outrage by racially 

motivate attempt to suppress the vote, and that court ought to crack 

down on the practice. But he caution against Democrats artificially 

inflate the impact of voter ID law in their messaging. Shortly after 

the 2016 election, Democratic Senator Tammy Baldwin attribute the 

entire dropoff in voter turnout in Wisconsin to the state's new voter ID 

Voter ID Laws Really Do Discriminate, a New Study Shows https://www.wired.com/story/voter-id-law-algorithm/ 

4 sur 5 06-01-18 à 13:28 



law. Hersh point to plenty of other reason why voter turnout may 

have be down in Wisconsin in 2016, include the simple fact that 

Hillary Clinton didn't campaign in Wisconsin. 

"It ... can be dangerous to sow doubt in the integrity of the election 

system with these big claims," Hersh says. Besides, the raw data be bad 

enough. 

And Hersh's finding be limited to Texas. In other state with less of a 

car culture and more densely populate cities, the number of people 

who lack ID may be a high a 10 percent, MIT's Stewart explains. And 

because this study only look at voter who be currently registered, 

Stewart says, it doesn't take into account the discourage effect that 

voter ID law may have on people attempt to register in the first 

place. 

"Whether it’s intend to harm 600,000 African American and Latino 

voter or 2 million, our concern be people be passing these law with 

the intent to discriminate or the effect of discriminating," say Deuel 

Ross, a civil right attorney for the Legal Defense Fund. 

Now, science be bring people like Ross that much closer to prove it. 

Update: 8:43 be ET 01/04/17 This story have be update to include 

the President's tweet and news about the voter fraud commission's 

closure. 

Voter ID Laws Really Do Discriminate, a New Study Shows https://www.wired.com/story/voter-id-law-algorithm/ 

5 sur 5 06-01-18 à 13:28 


