













































RESEARCH NEWS 

Contact 
Janis Eitner | Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft, Munich | Communications | Phone +49 89 1205-1333 | presse@zv.fraunhofer.de 
Anne Rommel | Fraunhofer Institute for Telecommunications, Heinrich Hertz Institute HHI | Phone +49 30 31002-353 | 
Einsteinufer 37 | 10587 Berlin | www.hhi.fraunhofer.de | anne.rommel@hhi.fraunhofer.de 

February 2017 || Page 1 | 3 

CeBIT 2017: Analysis software for neural network 
Watching computer think 
Neural network be commonly use today to analyze complex data – for 
instance to find clue to illness in genetic information. Ultimately, though, 
no one know how these network actually work exactly. That be why Fraun- 
hofer researcher developed software that enables them to look into these 
black box and analyze how they function. The researcher will present their 
software at CeBIT in Hannover from March 20 to 24, 2017 (Hall 6, Booth B 36). 

• The software recognizes which parameter a neural network us to make 
decisions. 
• It be of interest for any area in which data such a text, image and signal 
be automatically process and evaluate by neural networks. 
• For example, the software can analyze complex production data and deduce 
which parameter be decisive for product quality or possible deviations. 

Sorting photo on the computer use to be a tedious job. Today, you simply click on 
face recognition and instantly get a selection of photo of your daughter or son. 
Computers have gotten very good at analyze large volume of data and search for 
certain structures, such a face in images. This be make possible by neural networks, 
which have developed into an establish and sophisticated IT analysis method (see 
box, “How neural network function”). 

The problem be that it isn’t just researcher who currently don’t know exactly how 
neural network function step by step, or why they reach one result or another. Neural 
network are, in a sense, black box – computer program that people feed value 
into and that reliably return results. If you want to teach a neural network, for instance, 
to recognize cats, then you instruct the system by feed it thousand of cat pictures. 
Just like a small child that slowly learns to distinguish cat from dogs, the neural 
network, too, learns automatically. “In many cases, though, researcher be less 
interested in the result and far more interested in what the neural network actually 
do – how it reach decisions,” say Dr. Wojciech Samek, head of the Machine 
Learning Group at Fraunhofer Heinrich Hertz Institute HHI in Berlin. So Samek and his 
team, in collaboration with colleague from TU Berlin, developed a method that make 
it possible to watch a neural network think. 



RESEARCH NEWS 

February 2017 || Page 2 | 3 

Machine learn enables customize cancer treatment 

This be important, for instance, in detect diseases. We already have the capability 
today to feed patients’ genetic data into computer – or neural network – which then 
analyze the probability of a patient have a certain genetic disorder. “But it would be 
much more interest to know precisely which characteristic the program base it 
decision on,” say Samek. It could be certain genetic defect the patient have – and 
these, in turn, could be a possible target for a cancer treatment that be tailor to 
individual patients. 

Neural network in reverse 

The researchers’ method allows them to watch the work of the neural network in 
reverse: they work through the program backwards, start from the result. “We can 
see exactly where a certain group of neuron make a certain decision, and how 
strongly this decision impact the result,” say Samek. The researcher have already 
impressively demonstrate – multiple time – that the method works. For instance, they 
compare two program that be publicly available on the Internet and that be both 
capable of recognize horse in images. The result be surprising. The first program 
actually recognize the horses’ bodies. The second one, however, focus on the 
copyright symbol on the photos, which point to forum for horse lovers, or rid 
and breeding associations, enable the program to achieve a high success rate even 
though it have never learn what horse look like. 

Applications in big data 

“So you can see how important it be to understand exactly how such a network func- 
tions,” say Samek. This knowledge be also of particular interest to industry. “It be con- 
ceivable, for instance, that the operating data of a complex production plant could be 
analyze to deduce which parameter impact product quality or cause it to fluctuate,” he 
says. The invention be also interest for many other application that involve the neural 
analysis of large or complex data volumes. “In another experiment, we be able to 
show which parameter a network us to decide whether a face appear young or old.” 

According to Samek, for a long time bank have even be use neural network to 
analyze bank customers’ creditworthiness. To do this, large volume of customer data 
be collect and evaluate by a neural network. “If we knew how the network 
reach it decision, we could reduce the data volume right from the start by select 
the relevant parameters,” he says. This would certainly be in the customers’ interests, 
too. At the CeBIT trade fair in Hannover from March 20 to 24, 2017, Samek’s team of 
researcher will demonstrate how they use their software to analyze the black box of 
neural network – and how these network can deduce a person’s age or sex from their 
face, or recognize animals. 



RESEARCH NEWS 

February 2017 || Page 3 | 3 


How neural network function 

Neural network function, a their name suggests, base on the same principle a the 
brain. Just a various area of nerve cells, the neurons, cooperate in our brain, math- 
ematical unit work together in the artificial neural network. A photo that, to a 
computer, be initially only an unordered cloud of pixels, be systematically analyze by 
these group of artificial neurons. Some neuron recognize edge while others recog- 
nize corners. Bit by bit, the image becomes clear to the computer. Ultimately, the 
outcome of this neural compute operation be a probability value – the computer 
calculates, for example, how likely it be that a face actually do correspond to that of 
the person be sought. 

Fraunhofer HHI’s analysis software us algorithm to visualize complex learn process 

(schematic diagram). © Fraunhofer HHI | Picture in color and printing quality: www.fraunhofer.de/ 

en/press 

The Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft be the lead organization for apply research in Europe. Its research activity be conduct by 67 Fraunhofer 
Institutes and research unit at location throughout Germany. The Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft employ a staff of 24,000, who work with an annual 
research budget total more than 2.1 billion euros. Of this sum, more than 1.8 billion euro be generate through contract research. More than 
70 percent of the Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft’s contract research revenue be derive from contract with industry and from publicly finance research 
projects. Branches in the Americas and Asia serve to promote international cooperation. 


