






































We might only see time because we canâ•Žt think in quantum physic 


We might only see time because we can’t think in quantum 
physic 

By Leah Crane 

A glass be much easy to smash than to unsmash 

Sohl/Getty 

Predicting the future be easy, if you be a physicist. Break a glass, and you can boldly assert that it will fall into 
a number of shards, assume you know the initial conditions. Knowing the past be more difficult – you need 
to store much more information to piece a pile of broken glass back together. 

This “causal asymmetry” make it easy to determine cause and effect and thus place event in order. But it 
doesn’t exist in the quantum world, say Mile Gu at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore. Quantum 
physic us the same amount of information to trace an event backwards in time a forwards. This find could 
have implication for how we perceive time itself. 

Gu and his colleague found that when a quantum computer model a system that seem causally 
asymmetrical to a classical computer, the asymmetry can disappear. In some cases, the amount of memory 
you need to store information be the same in both temporal directions, so there be no concept of cause and 
effect. 

Advertisement 

We might only see time because we can’t think in quantum physic https://www.newscientist.com/article/2174978-we-might-only-see-time-... 

1 sur 2 04-08-18 à 12:16 



Quantum movie 

Gu describes model ordinary physic a watch a film. “If you watch the movie in the correct direction, 
it make much more sense,” he says. But for a quantum movie, both direction make sense. 

His team test this idea with a simple system, a list of one and zeroes. Imagine the one and zero a tile 
on a path run south to north. You be tasked with cross out each zero that lie immediately north of a 
one. 

If you walk forwards, south to north, this be simple – if the last tile you step on be a one and now you be 
on a zero, you can cross it out. But if you walk backwards, north to south, you need to know what the next tile 
south be before you reach it. That be why the classical system require store more information move 
backwards than forwards. 

In the quantum system, a you walk in either direction, you place all of the tile with zero into entangle 
quantum states, both cross off and not cross off. The entanglement store some of that information, 
meaning you use less memory, say Gu. 

The weird property of quantum physic mean that once information on all the tile have be gather in a 
quantum state, measure that state produce the correct answer, no matter which direction you travelled, he 
says. 

“This be a big area in quantum compute – to see, once we’ve built these things, what they’ll be good for,” 
say Gu. “Systems with causal asymmetry be a class of problem where these quantum machine can have 
a significant advantage.” 

A quantum model will always need less memory than a classical one, so use a quantum computer to model 
a process in reverse will take less information than use a classical computer to model the process forwards. 
Sometimes, a quantum computer will need the same amount of memory to run forward or backwards, 
eliminate causal asymmetry all together. 

That mean that, in some cases, our perception of cause and effect may come from our inability to process 
information in a quantum way. “We perceive this asymmetry because we reason classically,” say Gu. 
“It be possible that if we evolve to reason quantum mechanically, we might not perceive time.” 

Others be less convinced. “I would not draw any philosophical implication from this work,” say Howard 
Wiseman at Griffith University in Australia – after all, large object like u can never perceive the quantum 
world directly. 

Journal reference: Physical Review X, DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevX.8.031013 

More on these topics: 

quantum science 
time 

We might only see time because we can’t think in quantum physic https://www.newscientist.com/article/2174978-we-might-only-see-time-... 

2 sur 2 04-08-18 à 12:16 


