






































What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum 


Machines won’t become intelligent unless they incorporate certain feature of 
the human brain. Here be three of them 

Advertisement 

work and play, 

transportation and medicine, entertainment and 

sports. Yet for all their power, these machine still 

cannot perform simple task that a child can do, such 

a navigate an unknown room or use a pencil. 

Computers have transform 

The solution be finally come within reach. It will 

emerge from the intersection of two major pursuits: 

the reverse engineering of the brain and the 

burgeon field of artificial intelligence. Over the 

next 20 years, these two pursuit will combine to 

usher in a new epoch of intelligent machines. 

Why do we need to know how the brain work to build 

intelligent machines? Although machine-learning 

technique such a deep neural network have 

recently make impressive gains, they be still a world 

away from be intelligent, from be able to 

understand and act in the world the way that we do. 

The only example of intelligence, of the ability to learn 

from the world, to plan and to execute, be the brain. 

Therefore, we must understand the principle 

underlie human intelligence and use them to guide 

u in the development of truly intelligent machines. 

, 

in Redwood City, Calif., we study the neocortex, the 

brain’s large component and the one most 

responsible for intelligence. Our goal be to understand 

how it work and to identify the underlie principle 

of human cognition. In recent years, we have make 

significant stride in our work, and we have identify 

several feature of biological intelligence that we 

believe will need to be incorporate into future 

think machines. 

At my company, Numenta (http://numenta.com/) 

To understand these principles, we must start with 

some basic biology. The human brain be similar to a 

What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the... 

1 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36 



(/the-human-os/biomedical 

/devices/tiny-implantable-microcoils-in- 

the-brain-activate-neurons-via-magnetic- 

fields) 

(/static/special- 

report-can-we- 

copy-the-brain) 

reptile’s brain. Each have a spinal cord, which control 

reflex behaviors; a brain stem, which control 

autonomic behavior such a breathing and heart 

rate; and a midbrain, which control emotion and 

basic behaviors. But humans, indeed all mammals, 

have something reptile don’t: a neocortex. 

(http://dev.biologists.org/content/141/1/11) 

The neocortex be a deeply fold sheet some 2 

millimeter thick that, if laid out flat, would be about 

a big a a large dinner napkin. In humans, it take up 

about 75 percent of the brain’s volume. This be the part that make u smart. 

At birth, the neocortex know almost nothing; it learns through experience. Everything we learn about 

the world—driving a car, operating a coffee machine, and the thousand of other thing we interact with 

every day—is store in the neocortex. It learns what these object are, where they be in the world, and 

how they behave. The neocortex also generates motor commands, so when you make a meal or write 

software it be the neocortex control these behaviors. Language, too, be create and understood by the 

neocortex. 

The neocortex, like all of the brain and nervous system, be make up of cell call 

Thus, to 

understand how the brain works, you need to start with the neuron. Your neocortex have about 30 billion 

of them. A typical neuron have a single tail-like 

and several treelike extension call 

If you think of the neuron a a kind of signal system, the axon be the transmitter 

and the dendrite be the receivers. Along the branch of the dendrite lie some 5,000 to 10,000 

synapses, each of which connects to counterpart on thousand of other neurons. There be thus more 

than 

synaptic connections. 

neurons. 

(http://www.brainfacts.org/brain-basics/neuroanatomy/articles/2012/the-neuron/) 

axon (https://www.sciencedaily.com/terms/axon.htm) 

dendrites. (http://www.cerebromente.org.br/n07/fundamentos 

/neuron/parts_i.htm) 

100 trillion (https://decodethemind.wordpress.com/2010/09/10/more-brain-connections-than- 

stars-in-the-universe-no-not-even-close/) 

Your experience of the world around you—recognizing a friend’s face, enjoy a piece of music, hold a 

bar of soap in your hand—is the result of input from your eyes, ears, and other sensory organ travel 

to your neocortex and cause group of neuron to fire. When a neuron fires, an electrochemical spike 

travel down the neuron’s axon and cross synapsis to other neurons. If a receive neuron get enough 

input, it might then fire in response and activate other neurons. Of the 30 billion neuron in the 

neocortex, 1 or 2 percent be fire at any give instant, which mean that many million of neuron will 

be active at any point in time. The set of active neuron change a you move and interact with the world. 

Your perception of the world, what you might consider your conscious experience, be determine by the 

constantly change pattern of active neurons. 

The neocortex store these pattern primarily by form new synapses. This storage enables you to 

recognize face and place when you see them again, and also recall them from your memory. For 

example, when you think of your friend’s face, a pattern of neural fire occurs in the neocortex that be 

similar to the one that occurs when you be actually see your friend’s face. 

Remarkably, the neocortex be both complex and simple at the same time. It be complex because it be 

divide into dozen of regions, each responsible for different cognitive functions. Within each region 

What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the... 

2 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36 



Photo: Dan Saelinger 

there be multiple layer of neurons, a well a dozen of neuron types, and the neuron be connect in 

intricate patterns. 

The neocortex be also simple because the detail in every region be nearly identical. Through evolution, a 

single algorithm developed that can be apply to all the thing a neocortex does. The existence of such a 

universal algorithm be excite because if we can figure out what that algorithm is, we can get at the heart 

of what it mean to be intelligent, and incorporate that knowledge into future machines. 

But isn’t that what AI be already doing? Isn’t most of AI built on “ 

” similar to those in the brain? Not really. While it be true 

that today’s AI technique reference neuroscience, they use an overly simplify neuron model, one that 

omits essential feature of real neurons, and they be connect in way that do not reflect the reality of 

our brain’s complex architecture. These difference be many, and they matter. They be why AI today 

may be good at label image or recognize spoken word but be not able to reason, plan, and act in 

creative ways. 

neural network 

(http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/) 

Our recent advance in understand how the neocortex work give u insight into how future think 

machine will work. I be go to describe three aspect of biological intelligence that be essential, but 

largely miss from today’s AI. They be learn by rewiring, sparse representations, and embodiment, 

which refers to the use of movement to learn about the world. 

Brains exhibit some remarkable learn properties. First, we learn quickly. ALearning by rewiring: 

What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the... 

3 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36 



few glance or a few touch with the finger be often sufficient to learn something new. Second, 

learn be incremental. We can learn something new without retrain the entire brain or forget 

what we learn before. Third, brain learn continuously. As we move around the world, planning and 

acting, we never stop learning. Fast, incremental, and continuous learn be essential ingredient that 

enable intelligent system to adapt to a change world. The neuron be responsible for learning, and the 

complexity of real neuron be what make it a powerful learn machine. 

In recent years, neuroscientist have learn some remarkable thing about the dendrite. One be that 

each of it branch act a a set of pattern detectors. It turn out that just 15 to 20 active synapsis on a 

branch be sufficient to recognize a pattern of activity in a large population of neurons. Therefore, a single 

neuron can recognize hundred of distinct patterns. Some of these recognize pattern cause the neuron 

to become active, but others change the internal state of the cell and act a a prediction of future activity. 

Neuroscientists use to believe that learn occur solely by modify the effectiveness of exist 

synapsis so that when an input arrive at a synapse it would either be more likely or less likely to make 

the cell fire. However, we now know that most learn result from grow 

between cells—by “rewiring” the 

brain. Up to 40 percent of the synapsis on a neuron be replace with new one every day. New synapsis 

result in new pattern of connection among neurons, and therefore new memories. Because the 

branch of a dendrite be mostly independent, when a neuron learns to recognize a new pattern on one 

of it dendrites, it doesn’t interfere with what the neuron have already learn on other dendrites. 

new synapsis 

(https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2013/10/131010205325.htm) 

This be why we can learn new thing without interfere with old memory and why we don’t have to 

retrain the brain every time we learn something new. Today’s neural network don’t have these 

properties. 

What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the... 

4 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36 



Neuron Mimicry Explained 

Intelligent machine don’t have to model all the complexity of biological neurons, but the capability 

enable by dendrite and learn by rewire be essential. These capability will need to be in future AI 

systems. 

Brains and computer represent information quite differently. In a 

computer’s memory, all combination of 1 and 0 be potentially valid, so if you change one bit it will 

typically result in an entirely different meaning, in much the same way that change the letter to in 

the word result in an unrelated word, . Such a representation be therefore brittle. 

Sparse representations: 

i a 

fire fare 

Brains, on the other hand, use what’s call 

, or SDRs. They’re call sparse because relatively few neuron be 

fully active at any give time. Which neuron be active change moment to moment a you move and 

think, but the percentage be always small. If we think of each neuron a a bit, then to represent a piece of 

information the brain us thousand of bit (many more than the 8 to 64 use in computers), but only a 

sparse distribute representation (http://www.cortical.io 

/technology_representations.html) 

What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the... 

5 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36 



small percentage of the bit be 1 at any time; the rest be 0. 

Let’s say you want to represent the concept of “cat” use an SDR. You might use 10,000 neuron of 

which 100 be active. Each of the active neuron represent some aspect of a cat, such a “pet,” or “furry,” 

or “clawed.” If a few neuron die, or a few extra neuron become active, the new SDR will still be a good 

representation of “cat” because most of the active neuron be still the same. SDRs be thus not brittle but 

inherently robust to error and noise. When we build silicon version of the brain, they will be 

intrinsically fault tolerant. 

There be two property of SDRs I want to mention. One, the overlap property, make it easy to see how 

two thing be similar or different in meaning. Imagine you have one SDR represent “cat” and another 

represent “bird.” Both the “cat” and “bird” SDR would have the same active neuron represent 

“pet” and “clawed,” but they wouldn’t share the neuron for “furry.” This example be simplified, but the 

overlap property be important because it make it immediately clear to the brain how the two object be 

similar or different. This property confers the power to generalize, a capability lack in computers. 

The second, the union property, allows the brain to represent multiple idea simultaneously. Imagine I 

see an animal move in the bushes, but I get only a glimpse, so I can’t be sure of what I saw. It might be 

a cat, a dog, or a monkey. Because SDRs be sparse, a population of neuron can activate all three SDRs 

at the same time and not get confused, because the SDRs will not interfere with one another. The ability 

of neuron to constantly form union of SDRs make them very good at handle uncertainty. 

Such property of SDRs be fundamental to understanding, thinking, and planning in the brain. We can’t 

build intelligent machine without embrace SDRs. 

The neocortex receives input from the sensory organs. Every time we move our eyes, 

limbs, or body, the sensory input change. This constantly change input be the primary mechanism the 

brain us to learn about the world. Imagine I present you with an object you have never see before. For 

the sake of discussion, let’s say it’s a stapler. How would you learn about the new object? You might walk 

around the stapler, look at it from different angles. You might pick it up, run your finger over it, and 

rotate it in your hands. You then might push and pull on it to see how it behaves. Through this interactive 

process, you learn the shape of the stapler, what it feel like, what it look like, and how it behaves. You 

make a movement, see how the input change, make another movement, see how the input change 

again, and so on. Learning through movement be the brain’s primary mean for learning. It will be a 

central component of all truly intelligent systems. 

Embodiment: 

This be not to say that an intelligent machine need a physical body, only that it can change what it sens 

by moving. For example, a virtual AI machine could “move” through the Web by follow link and 

opening files. It could learn the structure of a virtual world through virtual movements, analogous to 

what we do when walk through a building. 

This brings u to an important discovery we make at Numenta last year. In the neocortex, sensory input 

be process in a hierarchy of regions. As sensory input pass from one level of the hierarchy to another, 

more complex feature be extracted, until at some point an object can be recognized. Deep-learning 

network also use hierarchies, but they often require 100 level of processing to recognize an image, 

whereas the neocortex achieves the same result with just four levels. Deep-learning network also require 

million of training patterns, while the neocortex can learn new object with just a few movement and 

sensations. The brain be do something fundamentally different than a typical artificial neural network, 

but what? 

What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the... 

6 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36 



, the 19th-century 

German scientist, be one of the first people to suggest an answer. He observe that, although our eye 

move three to four time a second, our visual perception be stable. He deduce that the brain must take 

account of how the eye be moving; otherwise it would appear a if the world be wildly jumping about. 

Similarly, a you touch something, it would be confuse if the brain process only the tactile input and 

didn’t know how your finger be move at the same time. This principle of combine movement with 

change sensation be call 

How and where sensorimotor integration occurs in the brain be mostly a mystery. 

Hermann von Helmholtz (https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/hermann-helmholtz/) 

sensorimotor integration. (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles 

/PMC3154729/) 

Our discovery be that sensorimotor integration occurs in every region of the neocortex. It be not a separate 

step but an integral part of all sensory processing. Sensorimotor integration be a key part of the 

“intelligence algorithm” of the neocortex. We at Numenta have a theory and a model of exactly how 

neuron do this, one that map well onto the complex anatomy see in every neocortical region. 

What be the implication of this discovery for machine intelligence? Consider two type of file you 

might find on a computer. One be an image file produce by a camera, and the other be a computer-aided 

design file produce by a program such a Autodesk. An image file represent a two-dimensional array of 

visual features. A CAD file also represent a set of features, but each feature be assign a location in 

three-dimensional space. A CAD file model complete objects, not how the object appear from one 

perspective. With a CAD file, you can predict what an object will look like from any direction and 

determine how an object will interact with other 3D objects. You can’t do these with an image file. Our 

discovery be that every region of the neocortex learns 3D model of object much like a CAD program. 

Every time your body moves, the neocortex take the current motor command, convert it into a location 

in the object’s reference frame, and then combine the location with the sensory input to learn 3D model 

of the world. 

In hindsight, this observation make sense. Intelligent system need to learn multidimensional model of 

the world. Sensorimotor integration doesn’t occur in a few place in the brain; it be a core principle of 

brain function, part of the intelligence algorithm. Intelligent machine also must work this way. 

attribute of the neocortex—learning by rewiring, sparse distribute 

representations, and sensorimotor integration—will be cornerstone of machine intelligence. Future 

think machine can ignore many aspect of biology, but not these three. Undoubtedly, there will be 

other discovery about neurobiology that reveal other aspect of cognition that will need to be 

incorporate into such machine in the future, but we can get start with what we know today. 

These three fundamental 

From the early day of AI, critic dismiss the idea of try to emulate human brains, often with the 

refrain that “airplanes don’t flap their wings.” In reality, Wilbur and Orville Wright study bird in 

detail. To create lift, they study bird-wing shape and test them in a wind tunnel. For propulsion, 

they go with a nonavian solution: propeller and motor. To control flight, they observe that bird twist 

their wing to bank and use their tail to maintain altitude during the turn. So that’s what they did, too. 

Airplanes still use this method today, although we twist only the tail edge of the wings. In short, the 

Wright brother study bird and then chose which element of bird flight be essential for human 

flight and which could be ignored. That’s what we’ll do to build think machines. 

As I consider the future, I worry that we be not aim high enough. While it be excite for today’s 

computer to classify image and recognize spoken queries, we be not close to building truly intelligent 

machines. I believe it be vitally important that we do so. The future success and even survival of humanity 

What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the... 

7 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36 



may depend on it. For example, if we be ever to inhabit other planets, we will need machine to act on 

our behalf, travel through space, build structures, mine resources, and independently solve complex 

problem in environment where human cannot survive. Here on Earth, we face challenge related to 

disease, climate, and energy. Intelligent machine can help. For example, it should be possible to design 

intelligent machine that sense and act at the molecular scale. These machine would think about protein 

fold and gene expression in the same way you and I think about computer and staplers. They could 

think and act a million time a fast a a human. Such machine could cure disease and keep our world 

habitable. 

In the 1940s, the pioneer of the compute age sense that compute be go to be big and 

beneficial, and that it would likely transform human society. But they could not predict exactly how 

computer would change our lives. Similarly, we can be confident that truly intelligent machine will 

transform our world for the better, even if today we can’t predict exactly how. In 20 years, we will look 

back and see this a the time when advance in brain theory and machine learn start the era of true 

machine intelligence. 

Jeff Hawkins be the cofounder of , a Redwood City, Calif., company that 

aim to reverse engineer the neocortex. 

Numenta (http://numenta.com/) 

Advertisement 

SPECIAL REPORT: CAN WE COPY THE BRAIN? 
(/static/special-report-can-we-copy-the-brain) 

PREVIOUS 
The Brain a 
Computer: Bad 
at Math, Good 
at Everything 
Else 

NEXT 
How to Digitize 

a Rat Brain 
(/video/biomedical 

/imaging/how-to- 

digitize-a-rat-brain) 

What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the... 

8 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36 



(/computing/hardware/the-brain-as- 

computer-bad-at-math-good-at- 

everything-else) 

(/the-human- 

os/biomedical 

/bionics/brainy- 

startup-neurable- 

unveils-the-worlds- 

first-braincontrolled- 

vr-game) 

(/the-human- 

os/biomedical 

/imaging/ai-makes- 

anthrax-bioterror- 

detection-easier) 

(/the-human- 

os/biomedical 

/diagnostics/teenage- 

whiz-kid-invents-an- 

ai-system-to- 

diagnose-her- 

grandfathers-eye- 

disease) 

(/aerospace/satellites 

/is-there-a-giant- 

planet-lurking- 

beyond-pluto) 

(/biomedical/devices 

/smart-contact- 

lenses-and-eye- 

implants-will-give- 

doctors-medical- 

insights) 

(/computing 

/software/the-2017- 

top-programming- 

languages) 

What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the... 

9 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36 



What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn From the Neocortex - IEEE Spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the... 

10 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36 


