






































CQT Highlight â•ﬂ Why you might trust a quantum computer with secret â•ﬁ even over the internet 


Home 

About Us 

Our Mission 

For Visitors 

For Students 

Join Us 

People 

Staff & Students 

Director 

Alumni 

Research 

By Group and Topic 

Publications 

Theses 

Highlights 

Events 

Latest happening 

Colloquia 

Calendar 

Visitors 

Workshop & 

Conferences 

Outreach 

Overview 

For Industry 

For Public 

For Schools 

For Media 

Arts + Science 

Contact Us 

Search 

It may be possible to control a quantum computer over the internet without reveal what you be calculating, thanks to the many possible way that information can flow 

through a computation. That's the conclusion of researcher in Singapore and Australia who study the measurement-based model of quantum computing, report 11 July in 

the open-access journal Physical Review X. Image credit: Timothy Yeo / Centre for Quantum Technologies, NUS 

Why you might trust a quantum computer with secret – even over the internet 

12 July 2017 

Researchers in Singapore and Australia suggest you could operate a quantum computer in the cloud without reveal your data or the program you're run 

Here's the scenario: you have sensitive data and a problem that only a quantum computer 

can solve. You have no quantum device yourself. You could buy time on a quantum 

computer, but you don't want to give away your secrets. What can you do? 

Writing in Physical Review X on 11 July, researcher in Singapore and Australia propose a 

way you could use a quantum computer securely, even over the internet. The technique 

could hide both your data and program from the computer itself. Their work counter early 

hint that such a feat be impossible. 

The scenario be not far-fetched. Quantum computer promise new route to solve 

problem in cryptography, model and machine learning, excite government and 

industry. Such problem may involve confidential data or be commercially sensitive. 

Technology giant be already invest in building such computer – and make them 

available to users. For example, IBM announce on 17 May this year that it be make a 

quantum computer with 16 quantum bit accessible to the public for free on the cloud, a 

well a a 17-qubit prototype commercial processor. 

Seventeen qubits be not enough to outperform the world's current supercomputers, but a 

quantum computer gain qubits, they be expect to exceed the capability of any 

machine we have today. That should drive demand for access. 

"We're look at what's possible if you're someone just interact with a quantum 

computer across the internet from your laptop. We find that it's possible to hide some 

interest computations," say Joseph Fitzsimons, a Principal Investigator at the Centre 

for Quantum Technologies (CQT) at the National University of Singapore and Associate 

Professor at Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD), who lead the work. 

Quantum computer work by processing bit of information store in quantum states. 

Unlike the binary bit found in our regular (i.e., classical) computers, each a 0 or 1, qubits 

can be in superposition of 0 and 1. The qubits can also be entangled, which be believe to 

be crucial to a quantum computer's power. 

The scheme design by Joseph and his colleague brings secrecy to a form of quantum 

compute driven by measurements. 

In this scheme, the quantum computer be prepared by put all it qubits into a special 

type of entangle state. Then the computation be carry out by measure the qubits one 

by one. The user provide step-wise instruction for each measurement: the step encode 

both the input data and the program. 

Researchers have show previously that user who can make or measure qubits to convey 

instruction to the quantum computer could disguise their computation. The new paper 

extends that power to user who can only send classical bit – i.e. most of us, for now. 

This be surprising because some computer science theorem imply that encrypt quantum computation be impossible when only classical communication be available. 

The hope for security come from the quantum computer not know which step of the measurement sequence do what. The quantum computer can't tell which qubits be use for inputs, which for operation and which for outputs. 

"It's extremely exciting. You can use this unique feature of the measurement-based model of quantum compute – the way information flow through the state – a a crypto tool to hide information from the server," say team member Tommaso Demarie of CQT and 

SUTD. 

Although the owner of the quantum computer could try to reverse engineer the sequence of measurement performed, ambiguity about the role of each step lead to many possible interpretation of what calculation be done. The true calculation be hidden among the 

many, like a needle in a haystack. 

CQT Highlight — Why you might trust a quantum computer with secrets... http://www.quantumlah.org/highlight/170712_quantum_computing.php 

1 sur 2 16/07/2017 20:31 



HOME | ABOUT US | PEOPLE | RESEARCH | EVENTS | OUTREACH | CONTACT US | INTRANET 

The set of interpretation grows rapidly with the number of qubits. "The set of all possible computation be exponentially large – that's one of the thing we prove in the paper – and therefore the chance of guess the real computation be exponentially small," say 

Joseph. One question remains: could meaningful computation be so rare among all the possible one that the guess get easier? That's what the researcher need to check next. 

Nicolas Menicucci at the Centre for Quantum Computation and Communication Technology at RMIT University in Melbourne, Australia, and Atul Mantri at SUTD, be coauthor on the work. 

"Quantum computer become famous in the '90s with the discovery that they could break some classical cryptography scheme – but maybe quantum compute will instead be know for make the future of cloud compute secure," say Atul. 

Learn more 

Paper: Flow ambiguity: A path towards classically driven blind quantum computation" Physical Review X 7, 031004 (2017); arXiv:1608.04633 

People at CQT: Joseph Fitzsimons, Atul Mantri, Tommaso Demarie (all also at Singapore University of Technology and Design) 

People elsewhere: Nicolas C. Menicucci 

Related stories: CQT's Joe Fitzsimons name one of Asia's top young innovator (November 2015), Scheme check answer to quantum computation (October 2013), Quantum physic enables perfectly secure cloud computing: paper in Science (January 2012) 

CQT Highlight — Why you might trust a quantum computer with secrets... http://www.quantumlah.org/highlight/170712_quantum_computing.php 

2 sur 2 16/07/2017 20:31 


