






































Will the public accept the fatal mistake of self-driving cars? - The Washington Post 


How many people could self-driving car kill before we would no longer tolerate them?How many people could self-driving car kill before we would no longer tolerate them? 

This once-hypothetical question be take on great urgency, particularly among policymakers here inThis once-hypothetical question be take on great urgency, particularly among policymakers here in 

Washington. The promise of autonomous vehicle be that they will make our road safer and more efficient,Washington. The promise of autonomous vehicle be that they will make our road safer and more efficient, 

but no technology be without it shortcoming and unintended consequence — in this instance, potentiallybut no technology be without it shortcoming and unintended consequence — in this instance, potentially 

fatal consequences.fatal consequences. 

“What if we can build a car that’s 10 time a safe, which mean 3,500 people die on the road each year.“What if we can build a car that’s 10 time a safe, which mean 3,500 people die on the road each year. 

Would we accept that?” asks John Hanson, a spokesman for the Toyota Research Institute, which isWould we accept that?” asks John Hanson, a spokesman for the Toyota Research Institute, which be 

develop the automaker’s self-driving technology.developing the automaker’s self-driving technology. 

“A lot of people say, ‘If I could save one life, it would be worth it.’ But in a practical manner, though, we don’t“A lot of people say, ‘If I could save one life, it would be worth it.’ But in a practical manner, though, we don’t 

think that would be acceptable,” Hanson adds.think that would be acceptable,” Hanson adds. 

Members of Congress be begin to consider legislation meant to enable the broader adoption ofMembers of Congress be begin to consider legislation meant to enable the broader adoption of 

self-driving technology without compromise safety. At a House subcommittee hearing last week, forself-driving technology without compromise safety. At a House subcommittee hearing last week, for 

example, lawmaker and industry leader alike grapple with the question of whether machine need onlyexample, lawmaker and industry leader alike grapple with the question of whether machine need only 

Will the public accept the fatal mistake of self-driving cars? - The Washington Post https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/will-the-public-accept-the-fatal-mistakes-o... 

1 sur 7 23-02-17 09:26 



drive good than human to win our trust.drive good than human to win our trust. 

The Transportation Department, for it part, publish it first guideline for self-driving vehicle last year inThe Transportation Department, for it part, publish it first guideline for self-driving vehicle last year in 

an effort to keep pace with automaker that hope to unleash the car on the road in the next several years.an effort to keep pace with automaker that hope to unleash the car on the road in the next several years. 

Ford, for example, have set a goal of release an autonomous vehicle fleet by 2021.Ford, for example, have set a goal of release an autonomous vehicle fleet by 2021. 

More than 35,000 people be kill in car crash in the United States in 2015, accord to the NationalMore than 35,000 people be kill in car crash in the United States in 2015, accord to the National 

Highway Traffic Safety Administration. The agency estimate 94 percent of those crash be the result ofHighway Traffic Safety Administration. The agency estimate 94 percent of those crash be the result of 

human error and poor decision-making, include speed and impaired driving.human error and poor decision-making, include speed and impaired driving. 

Self-driving enthusiast say that the technology could make those death a misfortune of the past. ButSelf-driving enthusiast say that the technology could make those death a misfortune of the past. But 

human be not entirely rational when it come to fear-based decision-making. It’s the reason people arehumans be not entirely rational when it come to fear-based decision-making. It’s the reason people be 

afraid of shark attack or plane crashes, when the odds of either event be exceptionally low.afraid of shark attack or plane crashes, when the odds of either event be exceptionally low. 

Calestous Juma, a Harvard University professor and an expert in technology and sustainable development,Calestous Juma, a Harvard University professor and an expert in technology and sustainable development, 

draw a parallel between self-driving car and home refrigerators, which gain popularity in U.S. householdsdraws a parallel between self-driving car and home refrigerators, which gain popularity in U.S. household 

in the 1920s and 30s. Although scientist understood that cold storage could cut down on food-bornein the 1920s and 30s. Although scientist understood that cold storage could cut down on food-borne 

illnesses, report of refrigeration equipment catch fire or leak toxic gas make the public wary.illnesses, report of refrigeration equipment catch fire or leak toxic gas make the public wary. 

Americans eventually adopt the now-ubiquitous household appliance, thanks in large part to theAmericans eventually adopt the now-ubiquitous household appliance, thanks in large part to the 

Agriculture Department, which advocate for the health benefit of refrigeration and explain theAgriculture Department, which advocate for the health benefit of refrigeration and explain the 

technology’s safety, Juma writes in his book, “Innovation and Its Enemies: Why People Resist Newtechnology’s safety, Juma writes in his book, “Innovation and Its Enemies: Why People Resist New 

Technologies.”Technologies.” 

People be also more inclined to forgive mistake make by human than machines, Gill Pratt, chief executivePeople be also more inclined to forgive mistake make by human than machines, Gill Pratt, chief executive 

of the Toyota Research Institute, told lawmaker on Capitol Hill last week.of the Toyota Research Institute, told lawmaker on Capitol Hill last week. 

“The artificial intelligence system on which autonomous vehicle technology will depend be presently and“The artificial intelligence system on which autonomous vehicle technology will depend be presently and 

unavoidably imperfect,” Pratt told lawmaker at a House subcommittee hearing last week. “So, the question isunavoidably imperfect,” Pratt told lawmaker at a House subcommittee hearing last week. “So, the question be 

‘how safe be safe enough’ for this technology to be deployed.”‘how safe be safe enough’ for this technology to be deployed.” 

Will the public accept the fatal mistake of self-driving cars? - The Washington Post https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/will-the-public-accept-the-fatal-mistakes-o... 

2 sur 7 23-02-17 09:26 



As a society, we understand human limitation because we live with them daily, say Iyad Rahwan, anAs a society, we understand human limitation because we live with them daily, say Iyad Rahwan, an 

associate professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Media Lab who have study social dilemmasassociate professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Media Lab who have study social dilemma 

present by autonomous vehicles. While we may assign blame or seek retribution — by send a drunkpresented by autonomous vehicles. While we may assign blame or seek retribution — by send a drunk 

driver to prison, for example — the capacity for human failure be not hard to understand or empathize with.driver to prison, for example — the capacity for human failure be not hard to understand or empathize with. 

The same be not true for machines, he said.The same be not true for machines, he said. 

“We penalize them and distrust them more when they make mistakes,” Rahwan said. “It come down to us“We penalize them and distrust them more when they make mistakes,” Rahwan said. “It come down to u 

not have proper mental model of what machine can and cannot do.”not have proper mental model of what machine can and cannot do.” 

Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania have dubbed this “algorithm aversion.” In a 2014 study,Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania have dubbed this “algorithm aversion.” In a 2014 study, 

participant be ask to observe a computer and human make prediction about the future, such a how aparticipants be ask to observe a computer and human make prediction about the future, such a how a 

student would perform base on past test scores. Researchers found that “people more quickly losestudent would perform base on past test scores. Researchers found that “people more quickly lose 

confidence in algorithmic than human forecaster after see them make the same mistake.”confidence in algorithmic than human forecaster after see them make the same mistake.” 

The answer to question about safety may therefore come down to how much we trust self-driving cars,The answer to question about safety may therefore come down to how much we trust self-driving cars, 

regardless of how many life they can save, Rahwan said. For example, if autonomous vehicle save the livesregardless of how many life they can save, Rahwan said. For example, if autonomous vehicle save the life 

of thousand of motorist but cause fatality of cyclist and pedestrian to increase, the public’s trust in theof thousand of motorist but cause fatality of cyclist and pedestrian to increase, the public’s trust in the 

technology be likely to erode.technology be likely to erode. 

“If they’re not comfortable with the trade-off that car be making, then we risk people lose faith in the“If they’re not comfortable with the trade-off that car be making, then we risk people lose faith in the 

system and perhaps not adopt the technology,” Rahwan said.system and perhaps not adopt the technology,” Rahwan said. 

Will the public accept the fatal mistake of self-driving cars? - The Washington Post https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/will-the-public-accept-the-fatal-mistakes-o... 

3 sur 7 23-02-17 09:26 


