






































Will Using Artificial Intelligence To Make Loans Trade One Kind Of Bias For Another? : All Tech Considered : NPR 


Download 

Transcript 

Digital lender be pull in all kind of data, like purchases, SAT score and public records. 

Will Using Artificial Intelligence To Make Loans Trade One Kind Of Bi... https://www.npr.org/sections/alltechconsidered/2017/03/31/521946210/wi... 

1 sur 10 16-06-18 à 15:47 



TCmake_photo/iStockphoto 

The term of the next loan you get might depend less on your credit score and 

more on what a computer program think of your habits. 

Digital lending be expect to double in size over the next three years, reach 

nearly 10 percent of all loan in the U.S. and Europe. There be now some 

2,000 digital startups, many of which be use artificial intelligence to analyze 

the trove of data create every day. 

But government regulator be struggle to keep up with the pace of change. 

Marc Stein, who run Underwrite.AI, writes algorithm capable of teach 

themselves. This be call machine learning, a type of artificial intelligence. 

"Shop at Amazon, and they use a form of machine learning. That's how 

Amazon's recommender system works," he says. 

The program learns from each correlation it finds, whether it's determine 

someone's favorite book or if they be lie about their income on a loan 

application. And use that information, it can predict whether the applicant be 

a good risk. 

"If we look at the delta between what people say they make and what we 

could verify, that be highly predictive," Stein says. 

Digital lender be pull in all kind of data, include purchases, SAT score 

and public record like fishing licenses. 

As part of the loan application process, some lender have prospective 

borrower download an app that uploads an extraordinary amount of 

Will Using Artificial Intelligence To Make Loans Trade One Kind Of Bi... https://www.npr.org/sections/alltechconsidered/2017/03/31/521946210/wi... 

2 sur 10 16-06-18 à 15:47 



information like daily location patterns, the punctuation of text message or 

how many of their contact have last names. In the credit industry, this be call 

alternative data, and it's mostly use to make decision on short-term, high- 

interest loans. But that's likely to change soon. 

"In 10 years, there will hardly be a credit decision make that do not have 

some flavor of machine learn behind it," say Dave Girouard, the CEO of 

Upstart, an online lender. 

Armed with self-teaching algorithm and new data, Upstart be try to sell it 

technology to traditional banks. 

"FICO and income, which be sort of the sweet spot of what every consumer 

lender in the United States uses, actually themselves be quite bias against 

people," Girouard says. 

Government research have found that FICO score hurt young borrower and 

those from foreign county because people with low income be target for 

higher-interest loans. Girouard argues that new, smarter data can make 

lending more fair. 

"The variable we're introduce to this model actually be reduce the bias 

inherent in most lending systems," he says. "And that's just one way we're 

actually expand access to credit." 

If artificial intelligence can weed out good borrower from bad just by look 

at thing like Web browsing history, suddenly it doesn't matter if you live in a 

low-income neighborhood or your family just immigrated. But it do open the 

door to new, 21st century version of redlining. 

Will Using Artificial Intelligence To Make Loans Trade One Kind Of Bi... https://www.npr.org/sections/alltechconsidered/2017/03/31/521946210/wi... 

3 sur 10 16-06-18 à 15:47 



Jo Ann Barefoot, a consultant and former regulator, offer this example: 

"The question of whether the person pay for gas at the pump or go inside," 

she says. "The theory on that be because people who pay inside be more likely 

to be smoker and smoking supposedly be more highly correlate with lack of 

creditworthiness." 

But what if you're just buying M&Ms or prefer use cash? An algorithm 

doesn't know that. Left unchecked, computer could create all sort of 

unintended bias. 

Some company have correlate late-night Internet use with bad loan 

repayment. But do that mean night owl should pay a high interest rate? 

There's no evidence that this kind of unfairness be happening, but Barefoot say 

regulator be begin to pay attention. 

"And of course one of the tough issue therefore be that these new kind of 

model have not yet be test through an economic downturn," she says. 

Barefoot worry that in a recession, fail online loan could spread through 

the financial system. Ultimately though, she call digital lending "massively 

good." Regulators appear to agree and be just now ask questions. 

Charles Lane be a reporter with NPR member station WSHU. You can follow 

him @_charleslane. 

What Is Driving The 'Unbanking Of America'? 

Will Using Artificial Intelligence To Make Loans Trade One Kind Of Bi... https://www.npr.org/sections/alltechconsidered/2017/03/31/521946210/wi... 

4 sur 10 16-06-18 à 15:47 


