






































World archive data store in DNA of plant could see archive in seed 


World archive data store in DNA of 
plant could see archive in seed 

A living library you can water: Plan to 
store data in the DNA of plant could see 
all of the world's archive secure in a 
box of SEEDS 

DNA's four-letter code be be use to capture the '1's 
and '0's of binary 
Researchers have incorporate a message into the DNA 
of a tobacco plant 
The approach could lead to new secure long-term data 
storage solution 
A box of seed could store all the world's archive for 
thousand of year 

By Ryan O'Hare for MailOnline 

Published: 17:51 BST, 19 January 2016 | Updated: 17:58 BST, 19 
January 2016 

Imagine store your entire music collection in a house plant or the 
entire work of Shakespeare in an area of shrubbery. 

Scientists be develop a new technique for use seed and plant a 
data repository by encode information into their DNA. 

They have already incorporate a simple message into the DNA of a 
plant, but they now hope to expand the idea to store large amount of 
information. 

Scroll down for video 

Copy link to paste in your message 

The idea of plant a biological hard drive might sound far-fetched, but 
scientist be eye seed and plant a potential data repository of 
the future, by store data in their DNA. Stock image illustrates binary 
data store in a DNA double helix 

In the age of information, we be face a storage crisis a we produce 

World archive data store in DNA of plant could see archive in seed http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-3406604/A-living-librar... 

1 sur 62 18-05-18 à 19:23 



and record vast amount of data each day. 

All of this digital data be store in servers, such a Google's huge server 
farm in Finland and Iowa. 

But the data degrades over time, the more it be accessed, meaning it have 
to be copy to a new disc periodically, meaning more space and 
resources. 

Karin Ljubic Fister, a researcher at University Medical Centre Maribor, 
Slovenia, believe the solution to this may be to store information a 
binary code in the DNA of plants. 

Copy link to paste in your message 

According to the researchers, the study be the first demonstration of 
store data in the DNA of a multicellular organism 

She envisions a green future for data storage, in which entire library 
worth of information could be store in a single tree. It be a very literal 
take on the concept of the 'tree of knowledge'. 

As part of a proof of concept study, researcher in Slovenia transform 
binary data cod for a simple message into the DNA of a plant. 

STORING DATA IN DNA 

Copy link to paste in your message 

DNA be be explore a a storage medium 

Researchers in Slovenia conduct a proof of concept study, to store 
data in the DNA of a plant. 

They transfer the '1's and '0's of binary into the four base of DNA: 
A, G, T and C. 

A be 00; C be 10; G be 01; and T be 11. 

The stretch of synthetic DNA be assemble letter by letter, and then 
bacteria be use to transfer it to tobacco plants. 

Through this process, the synthetic DNA, contain the cod 
sequence, be incorporate into the plant's own DNA. 

World archive data store in DNA of plant could see archive in seed http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-3406604/A-living-librar... 

2 sur 62 18-05-18 à 19:23 



New plant be grown contain the modify DNA in every cell of the 
plant. 

They propose that immense amount of information can be store 
within the DNA of plant and seeds. 

DNA be extract from the new plant and sequenced. 

When translate back to binary it contain the original message. 

Karin Ljubic Fister, a researcher at University Medical Centre Maribor, 
Slovenia, and one of the researcher work on the project, have a very 
literal take on 'the tree of knowledge'. 

Speaking at the Falling Walls lab in Berlin in 2015, the researcher 
present their finding from their proof-of-concept study. 

She told the audience: 'One simple tree could provide all of the 
educational data anywhere in the world. And of course, all of the large 
data centre in the world could be potentially replace by this 
technology.' 

In a recent interview with New Scientist, Mrs Fister explain the 
group's green vision for future data storage: 'Imagine walk through a 
park that be actually a library, every plant, flower and shrub full of 
archive information. 

'You sit down on a bench, touch your handheld DNA reader to a leaf and 
listen to the Rolling Stones directly from it, or choose a novel or watch a 
documentary amid the greenery.' 

By switch the four-letter code of life into the '1's and '0's of binary, 
Fister proposes that immense amount of information can be store 
within the DNA of plant and seeds. 

Explaining the technical aspect of the approach, she said: 'A computer 
program be basically a sequence of 0 and 1s, so we transform this 
into the four DNA 'letters' – A, G, C and T – by turn 00 into A, 10 
into C, 01 into G and 11 into T.' 

Once they have assemble the stretch of synthetic DNA, assemble it 
letter by letter, they use bacteria to transfer it to tobacco plants. 

Through this process, the synthetic DNA, contain the cod 
sequence, be incorporate into the plant's own DNA. 

Copy link to paste in your message 

World archive data store in DNA of plant could see archive in seed http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-3406604/A-living-librar... 

3 sur 62 18-05-18 à 19:23 



Modified tobacco plant be grown contain the cod message, 
integrate within their own DNA, so every cell in the plant contain 
the information. Stock image of tobacco plant 

Mrs Fister and her husband Iztok encode a 'Hello World' computer 
programme into the DNA of the tobacco plant seed use a piece of 
circular DNA call a plasmid. 

Modified plant be grown contain the cod message, integrate 
within their own DNA, so every cell in the plant contain the 
information. 

To access the information, DNA be extract from a cut of the 
plant and sequence use exist DNA analysis methods. 

When the encode program be reconstruct from seedlings, the 
message 'Hello World' appear on the screen with 100 per cent 
accuracy, she say in a recent blog post on the work. 

Copy link to paste in your message 

To access information, DNA be extract from the plant and sequence 
use exist DNA analysis methods. When the sequence of DNA base 
be translate back into binary, it would show the original data. Stock 
image of DNA sequence analysis 

According to Fister, the study be the first demonstration of store 
data in the DNA of a multicellular organism. 

However, one of the drawback be that the system be currently 'read 
only', with change to information require a whole new plant. 

But in future, advance in gene edit technology could make fine 
edit possible, by pinpoint and substitute individual letters. 

The potential advantage be in the huge storage capability of DNA, 
after all, each cell in the human body contains the entire set of 
instruction for make a human package into bundle of DNA. 

'One single box of seed could store practically all the archive that be 
currently in the world,' she told the audience in Berlin. 

Speaking at the Falling Walls lab in Berlin in 2015, Karin Ljubic Fister, 
a researcher at University Medical Centre Maribor, present finding 
from a concept study. Her group transform binary data cod for a 
simple message into the DNA of a plant 

If these biological hard drive be store in a secure location, such a 

World archive data store in DNA of plant could see archive in seed http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-3406604/A-living-librar... 

4 sur 62 18-05-18 à 19:23 



the 'Doomsday' seed vault in the Norwegian Arctic, they could last for 
thousand of years. 

The benefit be clear, a DNA be incredibly durable and can store 
immense amount of information compare to hardware. 

Some comparison estimate that one gram of DNA could store the 
equivalent of 14,000 Blu-ray discs. 

However, DNA be not immune to degradation. If the DNA library be 
store near a source of ionize radiation, such a X-rays and far UV 
light, it could be degrade over time. 

In addition, the biological tool use by life to read and repair DNA can 
read the code incorrectly, or introduce error when repair or copying 
it. 

If historical record be store in plant DNA, error could creep into 
the code over time a the plant cell repair their DNA. 

Ultimately, this could mean plant end up unconsciously rewrite 
human history. 

DEVELOPING DNA DATA STORAGE 

Copy link to paste in your message 

Scientists have demonstrate the potential for DNA to be use a a 
storage medium for information 

In 2013, British scientist demonstrate the potential for DNA to be 
use a a storage medium for information. 

They be able to store all 154 of Shakespeare's sonnet on to strand of 
synthetic DNA. 

Scientists be then able to decode the information and reproduce the 
word of the Bard with complete accuracy. 

The same technique make it possible to store a 26 second excerpt from 
Martin Luther King's 'I Have A Dream' speech and a photo of the 
Cambridgeshire laboratory where the work take place. 

Researchers be also able to turn a copy of Watson and Crick's paper 
describe the nature of DNA into genetic code. 

This area of research be pave the way to store huge amount of data 
use the same code use by all living things. 

World archive data store in DNA of plant could see archive in seed http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-3406604/A-living-librar... 

5 sur 62 18-05-18 à 19:23 


