






































Worldâ•Žs Largest Computing Association Affirms Obligation of Computing Professionals to Use Skills for Benefit of Society 


World’s Largest Computing Association Affirms 
Obligation of Computing Professionals to Use Skills for 
Benefit of Society 

Updated ACM Code of Ethics Adds New Principle on Adopting 
Standards of Care a Computing Systems Become Integrated 
into Society’s Infrastructure 

NEW YORK, July 17, 2018 – After a two-year process that include extensive input from compute 
professional around the world, ACM, the Association for Computing Machinery, have update it Code of 
Ethics and Professional Conduct. The revise Code of Ethics address the significant advance in compute 
technology and the grow pervasiveness of compute in all aspect of society since it be last update in 
1992. ACM’s Code of Ethics be consider the standard for the compute profession, and have be adopt 
by compute professionals, organization and technology company around the world. ACM expect all of 
it nearly 100,000 member from 190 country to abide by the ACM Code of Ethics and to make a 
commitment to engage in ethical professional conduct. 

The ACM Code of Ethics be a collection of principle and guideline design to help compute professional 
make ethically responsible decision in professional practice. It translates broad ethical principle into 
concrete statement about professional conduct. This update of the ACM Code of Ethics express the 
experiences, values, and aspiration of compute professional around the world, and it capture the 
conscience of the profession. It affirms an obligation of compute professionals, both individually and 
collectively, to use their skill for the benefit of society. 

Reflecting the prevalence of compute technology in our life today, ACM’s update Code of Ethics add 
new responsibility for compute professional in leadership role to “recognize and take special care of 
system that become integrate into the infrastructure of society” (Principle 3.7). Computing system and 
society evolve in unexpected ways. The original intent of the system may become obscure a user adopt the 
system. The update Code of Ethics call on compute professional to pay close attention to these change 
in order to both recognize new ethical responsibility and to ensure that appropriate care be take to protect 
those impact by their systems. 

“The best professional organization make ethical conduct the foundation of their service to the community, 
and the most tangible expression of that commitment be a code of ethics,” say ACM President Cherri M. 
Pancake. “So much have change since ACM release it last Code of Ethics in 1992. Because compute be 
now inextricably link into almost every aspect of society, the action of compute professional have more 
impact than ever before. It be imperative that everyone in our field act responsibly.” 

“The Code represent the aspiration and the conscience of the profession,” explain Donald Gotterbarn, 
Co-Chair of ACM’s Committee on Professional Ethics (COPE) and Professor Emeritus at East Tennessee State 
University. “The Code have not be design a an algorithm for solve ethical problems; rather it serf a 
a basis for ethical decision making. We’ve outline overarch principles, explanations, and guideline to 
steer decision make base on the understand that the public good be always the primary consideration.” 

The impetus for update the ACM Code of Ethics stem from the emergence of new technology and the 
impact of compute on so many aspect of daily life. For example, in 1992 when ACM previously update it 
Code of Ethics, online shopping, mobile phone and social medium platform do not exist, and the World Wide 
Web be in it infancy. Today, we rely on these and other system every day, and the ubiquitous nature of 
compute place new responsibility on the professional who build and maintain these system and 
technologies. 

COPE lead the project to update the ACM Code of Ethics via a transparent, two-year process, seek input 
and direction from compute professional around the world. Drafts of the propose change be 
publish in Communications of the ACM and post on ACM’s ethics.acm.org website, and throughout the 
process, ACM member and compute professional more broadly be invite to comment, debate, and 
suggest edits to the document. 

Founded in 1947, ACM adopt it first Code of Conduct in 1972 (which be precede by “Guidelines for 
Professional Conduct in Information Processing” in 1966). Twenty year later, after the development of the 
PC and other important innovations, ACM significantly revise the early document a a Code of Ethics and 
Professional Conduct. The ACM Code of Ethics have have broad application, and over the year it have be use 
to instruct student enter the profession, a a decision support tool for compute practitioners, a a 
standard for the public to judge the professionalism of practitioners, a a basis for the code of ethic of other 
international societies, and a an aid to address legal and ethical issues. 

Concurrent with the release of the update Code of Ethics, ACM be launch the Integrity Project—a series of 

World’s Largest Computing Association Affirms Obligation of Computi... https://www.acm.org/media-center/2018/july/acm-updates-code-of-ethics 

1 sur 2 18-07-18 à 18:44 



resource design to aid ethical decision making. The Integrity Project include case study demonstrate 
how the principle can be apply to specific ethical challenges, and an Ask an Ethicist advice column to help 
compute professional navigate the sometimes challenge choice that can arise in the course of their 
work. 

About ACM 

ACM, the Association for Computing Machinery, be the world's large educational and scientific compute 
society, unite educators, researcher and professional to inspire dialogue, share resource and address the 
field's challenges. ACM strengthens the compute profession's collective voice through strong leadership, 
promotion of the high standards, and recognition of technical excellence. ACM support the professional 
growth of it member by provide opportunity for life-long learning, career development, and 
professional networking. 

World’s Largest Computing Association Affirms Obligation of Computi... https://www.acm.org/media-center/2018/july/acm-updates-code-of-ethics 

2 sur 2 18-07-18 à 18:44 


