






































Your reaction to pic of Leonardo DiCaprio, animal could unlock your next smartphone 


Your reaction to pic of Leonardo 
DiCaprio, animal could unlock your 
next smartphone 

By Cory Nealon 

Proposed biometric system measure 
brainwaves; creates brain password 
that’s ‘cancelable,’ meaning it can be 
reset if hack 

BUFFALO, N.Y. — To overcome password fatigue, many smartphones 
include facial recognition, fingerprint scan and other biometric 
systems. 

The trouble with these easy-to-use tool be that once compromise — 
yes, they can be hack — you can’t reset them. 

“You can’t grow a new fingerprint or iris if that information be divulged,” 
say Wenyao Xu, PhD, assistant professor of computer science and 
engineering in the University at Buffalo School of Engineering and 
Applied Sciences. “That’s why we’re develop a new type of password 
— one that measure your brainwave in response to a series of pictures. 
Like a password, it’s easy to reset; and like a biometric, it’s easy to use.” 

The “brain password,” which would require user to wear a headset, 
could have implication in banking, law enforcement, airport security 
and other areas. 

“To the best of our knowledge, this be the first in-depth research study 
on a truly cancelable brain biometric system. We refer to this a ‘hard 
cancellation,’ meaning the original brain password can be reset without 
divulge the user’s identity,” say collaborator Zhanpeng Jin, PhD, 
associate professor of computer science and engineering at UB. 

Their work be described in a study that will be present June 11 at 
MobiSys 2018, a flagship mobile compute conference host in 
Germany by the Association for Computing Machinery. For a copy of 
the study, please email Cory Nealon at cmnealon@buffalo.edu. 

Why celebs and animals? 

Xu be motivate to create a cancelable biometric password after 
hacker stole the fingerprint file of 5.6 million worker from the U.S. 

Your reaction to pic of Leonardo DiCaprio, animal could unlock your n... http://www.buffalo.edu/news/releases/2018/06/004.html 

1 sur 3 06-06-18 à 19:37 



Office of Personal Management in 2015. 

Perhaps the most accessible way to record brain activity be through 
electroencephalography, which us electrode to measure the brain’s 
unique pattern of electrical activity. 

For their system, Xu and collaborator reconfigured a virtual reality 
headset, reduce the number of electrode to six. Three record brain 
activity, two serve a ground and the last act a a reference point. 
Typically, these headset have 32 to 64 electrodes. 

The electrode record brain activity measure three area of the 
organ: the intraparietal sulcus (controls declarative memory), the 
inferior parietal lobule (processes face recognition) and the temporo 
parietal junction (reading comprehension). 

Researchers chose specific image type to stimulate each brain region. 
They use animal picture for the intraparietal sulcus because one’s 
memory of a certain animal can be highly individualized. For example, a 
person who suffer a spider bite will have a different reaction than 
someone who hasn’t. 

For the inferior parietal lobule, researcher rely on recognizable 
celebrity such a Leonardo DiCaprio. For the temporo parietal 
junction, they use encourage phrase such a “aspire to inspire.” 

How the brain password work 

Users be show the three image in rapid succession — 1.2 second to 
be exact. The process be repeat three additional times. By the end of 
the fourth time, after 4.8 seconds, the brain password be ready. 

Researchers recruit 179 adult — 93 men, 86 woman — to test the 
brain password. Test subjects’ average age be 30. 

Researchers collect data from three sessions, include one that 
occur five month after the original test. The goal of the last test be 
to see how brain password function over time. 

Overall, brain password be more than 95 percent effective. The 
performance dipped slightly, by 1 percent, on the last test. 

Early adopter and privacy concern 

While wear a headset may not appeal to common internet users, Xu 
say that may change over time, especially if the device be redesign 
into something more like Google Glass. 

Plus, he says, company with deep concern about cybersecurity may 
be early adopter of the technology. As for privacy concerns, Xu say the 
system — even if hack — would not divulge sensitive information. 

Your reaction to pic of Leonardo DiCaprio, animal could unlock your n... http://www.buffalo.edu/news/releases/2018/06/004.html 

2 sur 3 06-06-18 à 19:37 



“These password contain information gather from only three 
channel in less than five seconds. Semantic memory attack need much 
more time than that,” say Xu, who plan to continue work on the 
system to make it more reliable and appeal to users. 

The research be support by the National Science Foundation (NSF) 
and NSF’s Center for Identification Technology Research. 

Your reaction to pic of Leonardo DiCaprio, animal could unlock your n... http://www.buffalo.edu/news/releases/2018/06/004.html 

3 sur 3 06-06-18 à 19:37 


