


































































Data science and analytics: a new era


Int J Data Sci Anal (2016) 1:1–2
DOI 10.1007/s41060-016-0006-1

EDITORIAL

Data science and analytics: a new era

Longbing Cao1

Published online: 30 March 2016
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016

The twenty-first century has ushered in a new age of data
science and analytics.

“Data science” as a scientific term was initially proposed
about 15 years ago, and has since increasingly attracted
attention and debate within statistics, analytics, computing,
social science, and other scientific domains and disciplines.
Although arguments have emerged from different communi-
ties such as, “How and why is data science different from
statistics?” and “Why do we need data science when for
decadeswe have had information science?”, it is undoubtedly
a fact that data science is driving a new era of data-driven
thinking, research, practice and education which goes far
beyond the breadth and depth of previous efforts.

In this data-intensive universe, data is a critical asset, and
data science is the interdisciplinary core that drives new
research, education and economy in many diverse areas.
Although different definitions and interpretations exist, data
science, as a scientific field, develops relevant method-
ologies, theories, technologies and applications for data,
ranging from data capture, creation, representation, stor-
age, search, sharing, privacy, security, modeling, analysis,
learning, presentation and visualization, to integration across
heterogeneous, interdependent complex resources for real-
time decision-making, collaboration, value creation, and
decision-support. The field encompasses the larger areas of
statistics, data analytics, machine learning, big data man-
agement, and other disciplines, including complex systems,
communications, social science, decision science, and man-
agement science.

B Longbing Cao
LongBing.Cao@uts.edu.au

1 Faculty of Engineering and IT, University of Technology,
Sydney, Australia

Data analytics and science has emerged as an impor-
tant paradigm for driving the new economy and domains
such as the Internet of Things, social and mobile networks,
and cloud computing, and reforming classic disciplines such
as telecommunications, biology, health and social science,
as well as upgrading core business and economic activ-
ity. Data-driven scientific discovery, innovation and practice
have become essential for gleaning understanding from large
data sets and converting data into actionable intelligence,
whether it is data available to enterprises and governments,
or on the Web.

In recent years, various initiatives have been created by
government, business and professional organizations to pro-
mote the development of big data, data science and analytics,
such as the provision of funding support from national sci-
ence foundations for big data research, the IEEE Task Force
on Data Science and Advanced Analytics, the IEEE Con-
ference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics, and new
courses on data science and analytics.

The Journal of Data Science and Analytics (JDSA) was
launched to specifically strengthen scientific innovation and
practical development in this new era of data and analytics.
JDSA aims to be a prestigious publishing venue in the data
science and analytics field for the exchange of new theoreti-
cal and experimental designs, solid findings and insights, best
practices and applications to real-life situations, and reviews
of new opportunities and frameworks for data science and
analytics. JDSA is the ideal venue for synergizing important
innovations, major impacts, and significant contributions in
data science and advanced analytics from diverse domains
and disciplines for the advancement of interpretation, man-
agement, and usage of data intelligence.

As the first scientific journal dedicated to data science and
analytics science, JDSA will publish original, fundamental
and applied research outcomes in data and analytics theories,

123

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1007/s41060-016-0006-1&domain=pdf


2 Int J Data Sci Anal (2016) 1:1–2

technologies and applications, and will promote new scien-
tific and technological approaches to strategic value creation
in data-rich applications. Topics of relevance will include
all aspects of the scientific foundations, techniques, and
applications of data and analytics, especially new statistical
and mathematical theories and techniques, data characteris-
tics and complexity understanding, as well as theories on,
and means to achieve, the synthesis and meta-synthesis of
ubiquitous intelligence, including data intelligence, domain

intelligence, business intelligence, organizational intelli-
gence, social intelligence, behaviour intelligence, human
intelligence, and network intelligence. JDSA particularly
welcomes comprehensive surveys and reviews of all aspects
of data science and analytics, together with position papers
on the trends and controversies within data science and ana-
lytics science.

In the evolution of data science and analytics, JDSA will
be a core contributor and enabler.

123


	Data science and analytics: a new era



