







































Electrical and Computer Engineering at Carnegie Mellon University -


Datta leads NSF project on accountable decision systems

News

Events

Seminars

Year of Women

Diploma Ceremony

External Press

Newsletter

Social Media Directory

August 14, 2017

Increasingly, decisions and actions affecting people's lives are determined by automated
systems processing personal data. Excitement about these systems has been accompanied
by serious concerns about their opacity and threats they pose to privacy, fairness, and other
values. Examples abound in real-world systems: Target’s use of predicted pregnancy status
for marketing; Google’s use of health-related search queries for targeted advertising; race
being associated with automated predictions of recidivism; gender affecting displayed job-
related ads; race affecting displayed search ads; Boston’s Street Bump app focusing pothole
repair on affluent neighborhoods; Amazon’s same day delivery being unavailable in black
neighborhoods; and Facebook showing either “white” or “black” movie trailers based upon
“ethnic affiliation.”

Recognizing these concerns, CyLab’s Anupam Datta, associate professor of electrical and
computer engineering at Carnegie Mellon's Silicon Valley campus, will lead a $3 million
National Science Foundation project on accountable decision systems that respect privacy
and fairness expectations. The project seeks to make real-world automated decision-making
systems accountable for privacy and fairness by enabling them to detect and explain
violations of these values. The project will explore applications in online advertising,
healthcare, and criminal justice, in collaboration with domain experts.

The project team includes Matthew Fredrikson, assistant professor of computer science, and
Ole Mengshoel, principal systems scientist in electrical and computer engineering. The
project also marks a collaboration between CMU, Cornell Tech, and the International
Computer Science Institute; additional contributors are Helen Nissenbaum, professor of
information science at Cornell, Thomas Ristenpart, associate professor of computer science
at Cornell, and Michael C. Tschantz, senior researcher at the International Computer Science
Institute in Berkeley.

Related People:

Anupam Datta

Directory News & Events Carnegie Mellon University

Electrical and Computer Engineering at Carnegie Mellon University - http://ece.cmu.edu/news/story/2017/08/datta-leads-nsf-project-on-accountable-decision-systems...

1 sur 3 22/08/2017 14:19



“A key innovation of the project is to automatically account for why an automated system with
artificial intelligence components exhibits behavior that is problematic for privacy or fairness,”
says Datta. “These explanations then inform fixes to the system to avoid future violations.”

“The hard part is creating such explanations for systems that employ statistical machine
learning,“ adds Mengshoel. “But doing so is critical, since these methods are increasingly
used to power automated decision systems.” 

But in order to address privacy and fairness in decision systems, the team must first provide
formal definitional frameworks of what privacy and fairness truly entail. These definitions must
be enforceable and context-dependent, dealing with both protected information itself—like
race, gender, or health information—as well as proxies for that information, so that the full
scope of risks is covered.

“Committing to philosophical rigor, the project will integrate socially meaningful conceptions of
privacy, fairness, and accountability into its scientific efforts,” comments Nissenbaum,
“thereby ensuring its relevance to fundamental societal challenges.”

"Although science cannot decide moral questions, given a standard from ethics, science can
shed light on how to enforce it, its consequences, and how it compares to other standards, ”
says Tschantz.

Another fundamental challenge the team faces is in enabling accountability while
simultaneously protecting the system owners’ intellectual property, and privacy of the
system’s users.

“Since accountability mechanisms require some level of access to the system, they can,
unless carefully designed, leak the intellectual property of data processors and compromise
the confidentiality of the training data subjects, as demonstrated in the prior work of many on
the team,” says Fredrikson.

“Unfortunately, we don’t yet understand what machine learning systems are leaking about
privacy-sensitive training data sets. This project will be a great opportunity to investigate the
extent to which having access to prediction functions or their parameters reveals sensitive
information, and, in turn, how to improve machine learning to be more privacy friendly.”

Datta has assembled a truly interdisciplinary team of researchers for the project. Combining
the skills of experts in philosophy, ethics, machine learning, security, and privacy, Datta hopes
to successfully enable accountability in automated decision systems—an achievement that
would add a layer of humanity to artificially intelligent systems.

Learn more about Datta's research:

Electrical and Computer Engineering at Carnegie Mellon University - http://ece.cmu.edu/news/story/2017/08/datta-leads-nsf-project-on-accountable-decision-systems...

2 sur 3 22/08/2017 14:19

lphilippe
Zone de texte 
I'm not totally convinced that's possible :)

lphilippe
Zone de texte 
Intersting point:how reverse engineering applied to decision of ML can reveal private feature of specific row in the learning data?It's a good and new question!!!



Information
Apply now
Admissions FAQ
Information for
California programs
Map & directions
Facts & rankings
Careers
Contact

Quick links
Undergraduate portal
Graduate portal
Faculty & staff portal
Alumni
Directory
Courses

Stay connected
CMU Electrical & Computer Engineering
5000 Forbes Ave
Hamerschlag Hall
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890

2016 © CMU Electrical & Computer Engineering

Electrical and Computer Engineering at Carnegie Mellon University - http://ece.cmu.edu/news/story/2017/08/datta-leads-nsf-project-on-accountable-decision-systems...

3 sur 3 22/08/2017 14:19




