






































Deep Root Analytics sued after data breach - Business Insider


Sean Gallup/Getty Images

GOP data firm that exposed millions of
Americans' personal information is facing its
first class-action lawsuit

NATASHA BERTRAND
JUN. 22, 2017, 10:51 AM

A data-analytics firm hired by the
Republican National Committee
last year to gather political
information about US
voters accidentally leaked the
sensitive personal details of
roughly 198 million citizens earlier
this month. And it's now facing its
first class-action lawsuit.

Deep Root Analytics, a data firm
contracted by the RNC, stored
details of about 61% of the US
population on an Amazon cloud
server without password protection
for roughly two weeks before it was
discovered by security researcher
Chris Vickery on June 12. 

The class-action lawsuit, filed by James and Linda McAleer of Florida and all others similarly situated, alleges
Deep Root failed to "secure and safeguard the public's personally identifiable information such as names,
addresses, email addresses, telephone numbers, dates of birth, reddit.com browsing history, and voter ID
number, which Deep Root collected from many sources, including the Republican National Committee."

The data exposed by Deep Root included 1.1 terabytes "of entirely unsecured personal information" compiled by
Deep Root and at least two other Republican contractors, TargetPoint Consulting, Inc., and Data Trust, according
to an analysis from the cybersecurity firm UpGuard.

"In total, the personal information of potentially near all of America's 200 million registered voters was exposed,
including names, dates of birth, home addresses, phone numbers, and voter registration details, as well as data
described as 'modeled' voter ethnicities and religions," UpGuard said.

The lawsuit says that President Donald Trump "is on record denouncing these sorts of breaches as 'gross
negligence.'"

It says that "as a direct and proximite cause of Deep Root's conduct," those exposed in the data breach may
be vulnerable to identity theft and "a loss of privacy," and argue that the "actual damages" exceed $5 million.

The exposed information did not include highly sensitive information like Social Security numbers, and much of
it was publicly available voter-registration data provided by state government officials, a company spokesman
told Business Insider on Tuesday.

"Since this event has come to our attention, we have updated the access settings and put protocols in place to
prevent further access," Deep Root said in a statement. "We take full responsibility for this situation."

Deep Root didn't immediately respond to a request for comment Wednesday.

But the exposed database combined people's personal information and political inclinations — including
proprietary information gathered via predictive modeling tools — to create a detailed profile of nearly 200
million Americans that would be a "gold mine" for anyone looking to target and manipulate voters, said Archie
Agarwal, the founder of the cybersecurity firm ThreatModeler.

"This is the mother lode of all leaks," Agarwal said Monday. "Governments are made or broken on this. I don't
even have the words to describe it."

Joe Loomis, the founder and chief technology officer at the cybersecurity firm CyberSponse, predicted that a
series of lawsuits against Deep Root over the accidental leak would prove damaging.

"Even if it was human error and not intentional, one IT person is probably going to put this company out of
business," he said.

Read the full complaint below:

McAleer v. Deep Root by natasha bertrand on Scribd

Deep Root Analytics sued after data breach - Business Insider http://www.businessinsider.com/deep-root-analytics-sued-after-data-brea...

1 sur 2 16/07/2017 18:52



Deep Root Analytics sued after data breach - Business Insider http://www.businessinsider.com/deep-root-analytics-sued-after-data-brea...

2 sur 2 16/07/2017 18:52


