






































Editing brain activity with holography


Editing brain activity with holography

What if we could edit the sensations we feel; paste in our brain pictures that we never saw, cut out
unwanted pain or insert non-existent scents into memory?

UC Berkeley neuroscientists are building the equipment to do just that, using holographic
projection into the brain to activate or suppress dozens and ultimately thousands of neurons at
once, hundreds of times each second, copying real patterns of brain activity to fool the brain into
thinking it has felt, seen or sensed something.

Video showing neuron activity in three layers of a small chunk of the somatosensory cortex of a
mouse’s brain. Activated neurons fluoresce green. Those neurons that are activated by holographic
laser light are indicated by a purple arrow. Projected via a microscope through a window into the
brain, the holographic system can activate neurons to simulate real brain activity and insert false
sensations. (UC Berkeley video by Stephen McNally and Roxanne Makasdjian using Alan Mardinly
footage)

The goal is to read neural activity constantly and decide, based on the activity, which sets of
neurons to activate to simulate the pattern and rhythm of an actual brain response, so as to
replace lost sensations after peripheral nerve damage, for example, or control a prosthetic limb.

“This has great potential for neural prostheses, since it has the precision needed for the brain to
interpret the pattern of activation. If you can read and write the language of the brain, you can
speak to it in its own language and it can interpret the message much better,” said Alan Mardinly,
a postdoctoral fellow in the UC Berkeley lab of Hillel Adesnik, an assistant professor of molecular
and cell biology. “This is one of the first steps in a long road to develop a technology that could be a
virtual brain implant with additional senses or enhanced senses.”

Mardinly is one of three first authors of a paper appearing online April 30 in advance of
publication in the journal Nature Neuroscience that describes the holographic brain modulator,
which can activate up to 50 neurons at once in a three-dimensional chunk of brain containing
several thousand neurons, and repeat that up to 300 times a second with different sets of 50
neurons.

“The ability to talk to the brain has the incredible potential to help compensate for neurological
damage caused by degenerative diseases or injury,” said Ehud Isacoff, a UC Berkeley professor of
molecular and cell biology and director of the Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, who was not
involved in the research project. “By encoding perceptions into the human cortex, you could allow
the blind to see or the paralyzed to feel touch.”

Holographic projection

Each of the 2,000 to 3,000 neurons in the chunk of brain was outfitted with a protein that, when
hit by a flash of light, turns the cell on to create a brief spike of activity. One of the key
breakthroughs was finding a way to target each cell individually without hitting all at once.

Editing brain activity with holography http://news.berkeley.edu/2018/04/30/editing-brain-activity-with-holography/

1 sur 3 04-05-18 à 08:30



A sample hologram with 50 randomly distributed neuron targets spanning a region 500 microns
square and 250 microns deep.

To focus the light onto just the cell body — a target smaller than the width of a human hair — of
nearly all cells in a chunk of brain, they turned to computer generated holography, a method of
bending and focusing light to form a three-dimensional spatial pattern. The effect is as if a 3D
image were floating in space.

In this case, the holographic image was projected into a thin layer of brain tissue at the surface of
the cortex, about a tenth of a millimeter thick, though a clear window into the brain.

“The major advance is the ability to control neurons precisely in space and time,” said postdoc
Nicolas Pégard, another first author who works both in Adesnik’s lab and the lab of co-author
Laura Waller, an associate professor of electrical engineering and computer sciences. “In other
words, to shoot the very specific sets of neurons you want to activate and do it at the characteristic
scale and the speed at which they normally work.”

The researchers have already tested the prototype in the touch, vision and motor areas of the
brains of mice as they walk on a treadmill with their heads immobilized. While they have not noted
any behavior changes in the mice when their brain is stimulated, Mardinly said that their brain
activity — which is measured in real-time with two-photon imaging of calcium levels in the
neurons — shows patterns similar to a response to a sensory stimulus. They’re now training mice
so they can detect behavior changes after stimulation.

Prosthetics and brain implants

The area of the brain covered — now a slice one-half millimeter square and one-tenth of a
millimeter thick — can be scaled up to read from and write to more neurons in the brain’s outer
layer, or cortex, Pégard said. And the laser holography setup could eventually be miniaturized to
fit in a backpack a person could haul around.

Mardinly, Pégard and the other first author, postdoc Ian Oldenburg, constructed the holographic
brain modulator by making technological advances in a number of areas. Mardinly and
Oldenburg, together with Savitha Sridharan, a research associate in the lab, developed better
optogenetic switches to insert into cells to turn them on and off. The switches — light-activated ion
channels on the cell surface that open briefly when triggered — turn on strongly and then quickly
shut off, all in about 3 milliseconds, so they’re ready to be re-stimulated up to 50 or more times
per second, consistent with normal firing rates in the cortex.

Editing brain activity with holography http://news.berkeley.edu/2018/04/30/editing-brain-activity-with-holography/

2 sur 3 04-05-18 à 08:30



Pégard developed the holographic projection system using a liquid crystal screen that acts like a
holographic negative to sculpt the light from 40W lasers into the desired 3D pattern. The lasers
are pulsed in 300 femtosecond-long bursts every microsecond. He, Mardinly, Oldenburg and their
colleagues published a paper last year describing the device, which they call 3D-SHOT, for three-
dimensional scanless holographic optogenetics with temporal focusing.

“This is the culmination of technologies that researchers have been working on for a while, but
have been impossible to put together,” Mardinly said. “We solved numerous technical problems at
the same time to bring it all together and finally realize the potential of this technology.”

As they improve their technology, they plan to start capturing real patterns of activity in the cortex
in order to learn how to reproduce sensations and perceptions to play back through their
holographic system.

Other UC Berkeley co-authors are graduate student Evan Lyall, undergraduate Kirill Chesnov and
Stephen Brohawn, an assistant professor of molecular and cell biology. The work was supported by
The New York Stem Cell Foundation, Arnold and Mabel Beckman Foundation, National Institute
of Neurological Diseases and Stroke, McKnight Foundation, Simon’s Foundation Collaboration for
the Global Brain, David and Lucille Packard Foundation and Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency.

RELATED INFORMATION

Precise multimodal optical control of neural ensemble activity (Nature Neuroscience)
Three-dimensional scanless holographic optogenetics with temporal focusing (3D-
SHOT) (2017 Nature Communications)
Hillel Adesnik’s lab website
Laura Waller’s lab website

Editing brain activity with holography http://news.berkeley.edu/2018/04/30/editing-brain-activity-with-holography/

3 sur 3 04-05-18 à 08:30


