






































Empowering robots for ethical behavior: Researchers have developed a concept called Empowerment to help robots and humans to work and live side-by-side safely and effectively -- ScienceDaily


Follow all of ScienceDaily's

latest research news and

top science headlines!

Your source for the latest research news Breaking News: In Total Solar Eclipse, Moon Is Front and Center

Mobile Follow Subscribe

Science News from research organizations

Date:

Source:

Summary:

Share:

Empowering robots for ethical behavior
Researchers have developed a concept called Empowerment to help robots
and humans to work and live side-by-side safely and effectively

July 18, 2017

Frontiers

Scientists have developed a concept called Empowerment to help robots to protect and

serve humans, while keeping themselves safe. Rather than trying to make a machine

understand complex ethical questions, the concept is based on robots always seeking

to keep their options open, and doing the same for the humans around them.

FULL STORY

Scientists at the University of Hertfordshire in the

UK have developed a concept called Empowerment

to help robots to protect and serve humans, while

RELATED TOPICS

Mind & Brain

Brain-Computer Interfaces

Most Popular this week

SPACE & TIME

Planet Nine Hypothesis Supported
by New Evidence

Smallest-Ever Star Discovered by
Astronomers

NASA's Juno Spacecraft Spots
Jupiter's Great Red Spot

One of the Brightest Galaxies Ever
Discovered

MATTER & ENERGY

Scientists Design Solar Cell That Captures
Nearly All Energy of Solar Spectrum

Print Email Share

Empowering robots for ethical behavior: Researchers have developed a concept called Empow... https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/07/170718103528.htm

1 sur 5 21/07/2017 19:07



keeping themselves safe.

Robots are becoming more common in our homes and workplaces

and this looks set to continue. Many robots will have to interact

with humans in unpredictable situations. For example, self-driving

cars need to keep their occupants safe, while protecting the car

from damage. Robots caring for the elderly will need to adapt to

complex situations and respond to their owners' needs.

Recently, thinkers such as Stephen Hawking have warned about

the potential dangers of artificial intelligence, and this has sparked

public discussion. "Public opinion seems to swing between enthu-

siasm for progress and downplaying any risks, to outright fear,"

says Daniel Polani, a scientist involved in the research, which was

recently published in Frontiers in Robotics and AI.

However, the concept of "intelligent" machines running amok and

turning on their human creators is not new. In 1942, science fiction

writer Isaac Asimov proposed his three laws of robotics, which

govern how robots should interact with humans. Put simply, these

laws state that a robot should not harm a human, or allow a human

to be harmed. The laws also aim to ensure that robots obey orders

from humans, and protect their own existence, as long as this

doesn't cause harm to a human.

The laws are well-intentioned, but they are open to misinterpreta-

tion, especially as robots don't understand nuanced and ambigu-

ous human language. In fact, Asimov's stories are full of examples

where robots misinterpreted the spirit of the laws, with tragic con-

sequences.

One problem is that the concept of "harm" is complex, context-

specific and is difficult to explain clearly to a robot. If a robot

doesn't understand "harm," how can they avoid causing it? "We re-

alized that we could use different perspectives to create 'good' ro-

bot behavior, broadly in keeping with Asimov's laws," says

Christoph Salge, another scientist involved in the study.

The concept the team developed is called Empowerment. Rather

Language Acquisition

Social Psychology

Matter & Energy

Robotics Research

Engineering

Vehicles

Computers & Math

Robotics

Artificial Intelligence

Neural Interfaces

Science & Society

Disaster Plan

Bioethics

Sports

Strange & Offbeat

Testing a Soft Artificial Heart

Air Pollution: Diesel Is Now Better
Than Gas, Emitting Fewer
Carbonaceous Particulates

More Than 8. 3 Billion Tons of
Plastics Made: Most Has Now Been
Discarded

COMPUTERS & MATH

No More Queueing at the Ladies' Room

New Transistor Concept Developed

Folding Robots: No Battery, No
Wire, No Problem

Evidence for the Majorana Fermion,
a Particle That's Its Own
Antiparticle

SPACE & TIME

Holographic Imaging Could Be
Used to Detect Signs of Life in
Space

Smallest Particles and the Vastness
of the Universe Connected

Empowering robots for ethical behavior: Researchers have developed a concept called Empow... https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/07/170718103528.htm

2 sur 5 21/07/2017 19:07



than trying to make a machine understand complex ethical ques-

tions, it is based on robots always seeking to keep their options

open. "Empowerment means being in a state where you have the

greatest potential influence on the world you can perceive," ex-

plains Salge. "So, for a simple robot, this might be getting safely

back to its power station, and not getting stuck, which would limit

its options for movement. For a more futuristic, human-like robot

this would not just include movement, but could incorporate a vari-

ety of parameters, resulting in more human-like drives."

The team mathematically coded the Empowerment concept, so

that it can be adopted by a robot. While the researchers originally

developed the Empowerment concept in 2005, in a recent key de-

velopment, they expanded the concept so that the robot also

seeks to maintain a human's Empowerment. "We wanted the robot

to see the world through the eyes of the human with which it inter-

acts," explains Polani. "Keeping the human safe consists of the ro-

bot acting to increase the human's own Empowerment."

"In a dangerous situation, the robot would try to keep the human

alive and free from injury," says Salge. "We don't want to be op-

pressively protected by robots to minimize any chance of harm, we

want to live in a world where robots maintain our Empowerment."

This altruistic Empowerment concept could power robots that ad-

here to the spirit of Asimov's three laws, from self-driving cars, to

robot butlers. "Ultimately, I think that Empowerment might form an

important part of the overall ethical behaviour of robots," says

Salge.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Frontiers

. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Space Sound Waves Around Earth:
Electrons Whistle While They
Work?

Unusual Galaxy in Distant Universe

MATTER & ENERGY

New Type of Soft, Growing Robot
Created

Evidence for the Majorana Fermion,
a Particle That's Its Own
Antiparticle

Here's a Tip: Indented Cement
Shows Unique Properties

Toward 20-Story Earthquake-Safe
Buildings Made From Wood

COMPUTERS & MATH

Folding Robots: No Battery, No
Wire, No Problem

Manipulating Electron Spins
Without Loss of Information

No More Queueing at the Ladies' Room

Mobile Control With Facial
Gestures

Empowering robots for ethical behavior: Researchers have developed a concept called Empow... https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/07/170718103528.htm

3 sur 5 21/07/2017 19:07



Cite This Page:

Frontiers. "Empowering robots for ethical behavior: Researchers

have developed a concept called Empowerment to help robots and

humans to work and live side-by-side safely and effectively." Sci-

enceDaily. ScienceDaily, 18 July 2017. <www.sciencedaily.com/re-

leases/2017/07/170718103528.htm>.

Christoph Salge, Daniel Polani. Empowerment As Replace-

ment for the Three Laws of Robotics. Frontiers in Robotics

and AI, 2017; 4 DOI: 10.3389/frobt.2017.00025

1. 

MLA APA Chicago

RELATED STORIES

For They Know Not What They Do: Study on the Robotization of
Office, Service Professions

Nov. 2, 2016 — Robots, common in manufacturing jobs, increas-

ingly spread to office professions. Humanoid or human-like robots

already perform tasks in hotels, in stores, and in restaurants. They

cook, serve, or ... read more

Soft-Bodied Robots: Actuators Inspired by Muscle

June 1, 2016 — To make robots more cooperative and have them

perform tasks in close proximity to humans, they must be softer

and safer. A new actuator generates movements similar to those

of skeletal muscles using ... read more

Carrying a Table Together With a Semi-Cooperative
Robot

June 19, 2015 — From a robot's perspective, humans might be

considered a nuisance: when robots and humans have to work to-

RELATED TERMS

Humanoid robot

Industrial robot

Robotic surgery

Nanorobotics

Robot

Altruism

Bioethics

Narcissism

Empowering robots for ethical behavior: Researchers have developed a concept called Empow... https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/07/170718103528.htm

4 sur 5 21/07/2017 19:07



About This Site  |  Editorial Staff  |  Awards & Reviews  |  Contribute  |  Advertise  |  Privacy Policy  |  Terms of Use

Copyright 2017 ScienceDaily or by third parties, where indicated. All rights controlled by their respective owners.

Content on this website is for information only. It is not intended to provide medical or other professional advice.

Views expressed here do not necessarily reflect those of ScienceDaily, its staff, its contributors, or its partners.

gether, it often leads to problems. Researchers want to teach ro-

bots how to interact with ... read more

Collisions With Robots, Without Risk of Injury

July 8, 2014 — Teamwork between humans and robots will be the

motto of the future. But robots may not injure humans at all. When

does contact cause an injury, though? Researchers are exploring

this for the first ... read more

Free Subscriptions

Get the latest science news with

ScienceDaily's free email

newsletters, updated daily and

weekly. Or view hourly updated

newsfeeds in your RSS reader:

Email Newsletters

RSS Feeds

Follow Us

Keep up to date with the latest

news from ScienceDaily via social

networks:

Facebook

Twitter

Google+

LinkedIn

Mobile Apps

Get the latest news from

ScienceDaily via our free mobile

apps, available for download on

the following platforms:

iPhone/iPad

Android

Have Feedback?

Tell us what you think of

ScienceDaily -- we welcome both

positive and negative comments.

Have any problems using the site?

Questions?

Leave Feedback

Contact Us

Empowering robots for ethical behavior: Researchers have developed a concept called Empow... https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/07/170718103528.htm

5 sur 5 21/07/2017 19:07


