






































Inverse-Design Approach Leads to Metadevices | News


Inverse-Design Approach Leads to
Metadevices | News

Jan 22, 2018 // Stephan Benzkofer

Imagine wafer-thin eyeglasses or a smartphone camera so small it is

invisible to the naked eye.

Imagine an aerodynamic sensor that can conform to the exact slope and

angle of a jet airplane wing.

Imagine a material that can coat a tank to make it seem to disappear.

These visions of future technologies emerge from a technical paper

titled “Inverse-designed broadband all-dielectric electromagnetic

metadevices” published online today in Scientific Reports.

Koray Aydin

The Northwestern Engineering team used inverse design principles and

a basic 3D printer purchased from Amazon — technologies not

commonly used in their field — to create highly efficient, non-resonant,

broadband metadevices at millimeter-wave frequencies that could prove

revolutionary for consumer products, defense, and telecommunications,

including next-generation 5G wireless networks.

“I feel like we’re really on the verge of something big,” said Koray Aydin,

assistant professor of electrical engineering and computer science at the

McCormick School of Engineering, who is leading the research efforts in

Inverse-Design Approach Leads to Metadevices | News http://www.mccormick.northwestern.edu/news/articles/2018/01/inverse-d...

1 sur 4 29-01-18 à 22:52



inverse-designed metadevices. “There’s a lot that needs to be done in

the research part, but we’re going in the right direction.”

As opposed to forward design, inverse design starts with a function and

asks what structure is needed to achieve the desired result. Using

computer modeling, optimization software and complex algorithms, the

team set out to build metadevices that could bend or focus millimeter

waves but that avoided problems with conventional approaches, such

low efficiency, narrow bandwidth and the bulkiness of the devices. 

Prem Kumar

“What we’ve achieved here is a new way of creating electromagnetic

devices that achieve certain functions that conventionally seemed

impossible to do,” said Prem Kumar, professor of electrical engineering

and computer science in McCormick and of physics and astronomy in

the Weinberg College of Arts and Sciences. Kumar likened the process

to machine learning and said it could produce unexpected outcomes, for

example the functionality over a broad bandwidth.

Francois Callewaert, a McCormick School of Engineering graduate

student who works with Aydin, developed the inverse design algorithm

and performed the numerical simulations. Vesselin Velev, a physics and

astronomy graduate student who works with Kumar, helped with the

detailed millimeter-wave measurements. 

Inverse-Design Approach Leads to Metadevices | News http://www.mccormick.northwestern.edu/news/articles/2018/01/inverse-d...

2 sur 4 29-01-18 à 22:52



Alan Sahakian

Aydin described the eye-opening moment as the algorithm spit out the

design for a complex geometric shape.

“These were not known shapes, not intuitive shapes,” Aydin said. 

And that presented its own problem.

“How on Earth are we going to make this?” Aydin recalled thinking.

Conventional manufacturing methods would be difficult and expensive.

The answer was additive, or 3D, printing.

“This is the heart of the study,” Aydin said. “We’re the first to combine

these two to make working devices.” 

Kumar agreed. “The important thing to me is the multidisciplinary

nature of it,” he said. “We can design a lens in a way that it doesn’t look

like a lens.”

Another great strength of their process, Aydin said, was that it was

imminently scalable from the microwave to the visible frequency range

because of the flexibility of 3D printing.

“It is an exciting result,” said Alan V. Sahakian, the John A. Dever Chair

and Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. “Where

in the past somebody might have done a long analysis trying to

approximate the behavior, here we essentially input the behavior we

wanted into a computer and the computer optimizes a structure that

has that behavior and then it comes out the other end of this three-

dimensional printer. 

“It is truly a breakthrough in the way you can solve problems in a

Inverse-Design Approach Leads to Metadevices | News http://www.mccormick.northwestern.edu/news/articles/2018/01/inverse-d...

3 sur 4 29-01-18 à 22:52



seamless and convenient way.”

Inverse-Design Approach Leads to Metadevices | News http://www.mccormick.northwestern.edu/news/articles/2018/01/inverse-d...

4 sur 4 29-01-18 à 22:52


