






































Itâ•Žs True: False News Spreads Faster and Wider. And Humans Are to Blame.


It’s True: False News Spreads Faster
and Wider. And Humans Are to
Blame.

Steve Lohr

Researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology examined true and

false news stories posted on Twitter from the social network’s founding in

2006 through 2017. Mark Makela for The New York Times

What if the scourge of false news on the internet is not the result of

Russian operatives or partisan zealots or computer-controlled bots?

What if the main problem is us?

People are the principal culprits, according to a new study examining

the flow of stories on Twitter. And people, the study’s authors also say,

prefer false news.

As a result, false news travels faster, farther and deeper through the

social network than true news.

The researchers, from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, found

that those patterns applied to every subject they studied, not only

politics and urban legends, but also business, science and technology.

It’s True: False News Spreads Faster and Wider. And Humans Are to Blame. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/08/technology/twitter-fake-news-rese...

1 sur 7 09-03-18 à 20:18



False claims were 70 percent more likely than the truth to be shared on

Twitter. True stories were rarely retweeted by more than 1,000 people,

but the top 1 percent of false stories were routinely shared by 1,000 to

100,000 people. And it took true stories about six times as long as false

ones to reach 1,500 people.

Many false stories posted in 2014’s third quarter involved a patent

lawsuit between Apple and Samsung.

Many false stories at end of 2016 involved the November 2015 terror

attacks in Paris.

tweets containing false claims

Many false stories at end of 2016 involved the November 2015

terrorist attacks in Paris.

It’s True: False News Spreads Faster and Wider. And Humans Are to Blame. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/08/technology/twitter-fake-news-rese...

2 sur 7 09-03-18 à 20:18



Many false stories posted in 2014’s third quarter involved a patent

lawsuit between Apple and Samsung.

Software robots can accelerate the spread of false stories. But the M.I.T.

researchers, using software to identify and weed out bots, found that

with or without the bots, the results were essentially the same.

“It’s sort of disheartening at first to realize how much we humans are

responsible,” said Sinan Aral, a professor at the M.I.T. Sloan School of

Management and an author of the study. “It’s not really the robots that

are to blame.”

Here are other findings from the research.

Covering the history of Twitter

The research, published on Thursday in Science magazine, examined

true and false news stories posted on Twitter from the social network’s

founding in 2006 through 2017. The study’s authors tracked 126,000

stories tweeted by roughly three million people more than 4.5 million

times. “News” and “stories” were defined broadly — as claims of fact —

regardless of the source. And the study explicitly avoided the term “fake

news,” which, the authors write, has become “irredeemably polarized in

our current political and media climate.”

The stories were classified as true or false, using information from six

It’s True: False News Spreads Faster and Wider. And Humans Are to Blame. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/08/technology/twitter-fake-news-rese...

3 sur 7 09-03-18 à 20:18



independent fact-checking organizations including Snopes, PolitiFact

and FactCheck.org. To ensure that their analysis held up in general —

not just on claims that drew the attention of fact-checking groups — the

researchers enlisted students to annotate as true or false more than

13,000 other stories that circulated on Twitter. Again, a tilt toward

falsehood was clear.

The way information flows online — and, occasionally, spreads rapidly

like a virus — has been studied for decades. There have also been

smaller studies examining how true and false news and rumors

propagate across social networks. But experts in network analysis said

the M.I.T. study was larger in scale and well designed.

“The comprehensiveness is important here, spanning the entire history

of Twitter,” said Jon Kleinberg, a computer scientist at Cornell

University. “And this study shines a spotlight on the open question of

the success of false information online.”

tweets containing false claims

It’s True: False News Spreads Faster and Wider. And Humans Are to Blame. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/08/technology/twitter-fake-news-rese...

4 sur 7 09-03-18 à 20:18



tweets containing false claims

Novelty wins retweets

The M.I.T. researchers pointed to factors that contribute to the appeal

of false news. Applying standard text-analysis tools, they found that

false claims were significantly more novel than true ones — maybe not a

surprise, since falsehoods are made up.

The study’s authors also explored the emotions evoked by false and true

stories. The goal, said Soroush Vosoughi, a postdoctoral researcher at

the M.I.T. Media Lab and the lead author, was to find clues about what

is “in the nature of humans that makes them like to share false news.”

The study analyzed the sentiment expressed by users in replies to

claims posted on Twitter. As a measurement tool, the researchers used a

system created by Canada’s National Research Council that associates

English words with eight emotions. False claims elicited replies

expressing greater surprise and disgust. True news inspired more

anticipation, sadness and joy, depending on the nature of the stories.

Two stories: one true, one false

It’s True: False News Spreads Faster and Wider. And Humans Are to Blame. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/08/technology/twitter-fake-news-rese...

5 sur 7 09-03-18 à 20:18



The researchers provided an example of two business stories, and how

much more time it took the true one to reach 200 retweets. The

example also shows the judgment calls made by fact-checking

organizations.

• In 2014, the fashion chain Zara introduced children’s pajamas with

horizontal stripes and a gold star. The company said the design was

inspired by what a cowboy sheriff would wear. But Twitter users posted

messages saying the pajamas resembled Nazi concentration camp

uniforms. Snopes: True. Time to reach 200 retweets: 7.3 hours.

• In 2016, a website republished a portion of a satirical article about

how the Chick-fil-A restaurant chain had decided to begin a “We don’t

like blacks either” marketing campaign to stir up controversy and boost

sales. It came after the company’s president did say he opposed gay

marriage. Snopes: False. Time to 200 retweets: 4.2 hours.

What can be done?

The M.I.T. researchers said that understanding how false news spreads

is a first step toward curbing it. They concluded that human behavior

plays a large role in explaining the phenomenon, and mention possible

interventions, like better labeling, to alter behavior.

For all the concern about false news, there is little certainty about its

influence on people’s beliefs and actions. A recent study of the browsing

histories of thousands of American adults in the months before the 2016

election found that false news accounted for only a small portion of the

total news people consumed. “We have to be very careful about making

the inference that fake news has a big impact,” said Duncan Watts, a

principal researcher at Microsoft Research.

Another author of the M.I.T. study, Deb Roy, former chief media

scientist at Twitter, is engaged in a project to improve the health of the

information ecosystem. In fall 2016, Mr. Roy, an associate professor at

the M.I.T. Media Lab, became a founder and the chairman of Cortico, a

nonprofit that is developing tools to measure public conversations

online to gauge attributes like shared attention, variety of opinion and

receptivity. The idea is that improving the ability to measure such

attributes would lead to better decision-making that would counteract

It’s True: False News Spreads Faster and Wider. And Humans Are to Blame. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/08/technology/twitter-fake-news-rese...

6 sur 7 09-03-18 à 20:18



misinformation.

Mr. Roy acknowledged the challenge in trying to not only alter

individual behavior but also in enlisting the support of big internet

platforms like Facebook, Google, YouTube and Twitter, and media

companies.

“Polarization,” he said, “has turned out to be a great business model.”

It’s True: False News Spreads Faster and Wider. And Humans Are to Blame. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/08/technology/twitter-fake-news-rese...

7 sur 7 09-03-18 à 20:18


