
















































Machine learning for quantum physics


INSIGHTS   |   PERSPECTIVES

580    10 FEBRUARY 2017 • VOL 355 ISSUE 6325 sciencemag.org  SCIENCE

G
R

A
P

H
IC

: 
N

. 
C

A
R

Y
/
S
C
IE
N
C
E

By Michael R. Hush

M
achine learning has been used to 

beat a human competitor in a game 

of Go (1), a game that has long been 

viewed as the most challenging of 

board games for artificial intelli-

gence. Research is now under way 

to investigate whether machine learning can 

be used to solve long outstanding problems 

in quantum science. On page 602 of this 

issue, Carleo and Troyer (2) use machine 

learning on one of quantum science’s great-

est challenges: the simulation of quantum 

many-body systems. Carleo and Troyer used 

an artificial neural network to represent the 

wave function of a quantum many-body sys-

tem and to make the neural network “learn” 

what the ground state (or dynamics) of the 

system is. Their approach is found to per-

form better than the current state-of-the-art 

numerical simulation methods. 

Early machine-learning demonstrations 

were on specific pattern-recognition prob-

lems. They have since shown great capabil-

ity in performing multifaceted tasks, such 

as playing video games (3) or board games 

(1). This capacity to take control of complex 

systems and achieve difficult goals, in some 

cases better than human competitors, has 

recently been used to tackle difficult prob-

lems in quantum science. In experimental 

quantum science, machine learning has been 

used to design new experiments (4), perform 

automatic optimization (5), and improve 

feedback control (6). All of these applications 

have solved problems that have only recently 

faced the field. 

Due to vast number of complex numbers 

required to save a complete wave function, 

the simulation of many-body systems has 

been an immense challenge in quantum sci-

ence. For example, consider a many-body 

system composed of N qubits, the simplest 

quantum bodies. We must save a complex 

number for every configuration of this sys-

tem. Each qubit can be in a state of 0 or 1, 

so that means we need to save 2N complex 

numbers. Even a small number of qubits 

requires an extreme amount of memory. For 

example, 26 qubits require around a giga-

byte, 46 qubits require a petabyte, and 300 

qubits would require more bytes than the 

number of atoms in the universe. Richard 

Feynman recognized this problem, which led 

to his suggestion that quantum computers 

may have an advantage over conventional 

computers (7) [although we now know that 

the reason behind the quantum speedup is 

more nuanced (8)].

To circumvent this memory requirement 

issue, a variety of approximate techniques 

have been developed to solve quantum many-

body problems. These involve inventing some 

compact approximate representation for the 

wave function. For example,  matrix prod-

uct states are the current state-of-the-art 

technique for finding ground states of one-

dimensional many-body systems (9). A set 

of matrices is used to save the approximate 

state-of-the-wave function; subsets of these 

matrices can be multiplied together to get   

the complex number corresponding to a par-

ticular system configuration. Many different 

representations of the wave function exist, 

each having advantages in particular physi-

cal settings. Discovering new representations 

for each physical problem has previously re-

quired human ingenuity and effort.

Carleo and Troyer suggest using machine 

learning to automatically discover a compact 

representation for the wave function appro-

priate for each physical problem. The wave 

function can be thought of as a function that 

takes a system configuration and returns a 

complex number. They assume that this func-

tion can be well approximated with a neural 

network, made of a set of weights and a single 

layer of hidden biases (see the figure). Given 

the Hamiltonian for a particular physical sys-

tem, they let the neural network learn a com-

pact representation for the wave function of 

the system’s ground state (or dynamics). The 

learning algorithm they used is adapted from 

variational Monte Carlo and minimizes the 

so-called local energy of the system.

Carleo and Troyer found that the neural 

network is able to discover ground states of 

quantum many-body systems with a smaller 

memory footprint than those of competing 

techniques, such as matrix product states. 

Furthermore, the accuracy of the neural net 

estimate can be systematically improved by 

increasing the number of hidden biases and 

weights. On the problems they tested, they 

found the machine-learning algorithm was 

able to outperform all of the current state-of-

the-art numerical techniques.

Carleo and Troyer have currently tested 

their approach on a few problems that have 

known solutions. We will not know for cer-

tain that machine learning has solved the 

challenge of simulating many-body quantum 

systems until more physical systems have 

been tested. Nevertheless, there is great po-

tential to expand on their work. Carleo and 

Troyer only considered a single-layer neural 

net. Deep neural nets, which have multiple 

layers, have been shown to have the greatest 

capacity for learning and expression and are 

yet to be investigated. The work presents a 

new pathway for physicists to benefit from 

the rapid developments in the machine-

learning community and will hopefully lead 

to new physical discoveries.  j

REFERENCES

 1. D. Silver et al., Nature 529, 484 (2016).
 2. G. Carleo, M. Troyer, Science 355, 602 (2017).
 3. V. Mnih et al., Nature 518, 529 (2015).
 4. M. Krenn, Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 090405 (2016).
 5. P. B. Wigley et al., Sci. Rep. 6, 25890 (2016).
 6. S. Mavadia, V. Frey, J. Sastrawan, S. Dona, M. J. Biercuk, 

Nat. Comm. 8, 14106 (2017).
 7. R. P. Feynman, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 21, 467 (1982).
 8. S. Aaronson, Quantum Computing Since Democritus 

(Cambridge Univ. Press, ed. 1, 2013).
 9. U. Schollwck, Ann. Phys. 326, 96 (2011).

10.1126/science.aam6564

PHYSICS

Machine learning for 
quantum physics
An artificial neural network can discover the ground 
state of a quantum many-body system

School of Engineering and Information Technology, University 
of New South Wales, Canberra ACT 2600, Australia. 
Email: m.hush@unsw.edu.au 

C0,1,0,0

Wi,j

Hidden

OutputInput

0

1 

0

0

h1

h2

h3

h4

h5

h6

ψ

C

Working out a solution
An artificial neural network approximates the wave 

function of a system composed of 4 qubits. The 

neural network takes a configuration of the system 

as an input that is multiplied by a matrix of weights, 

W
i,j

, added to a set of hidden biases, h
j
,

 
and passed 

through a nonlinear activation function to produce a 

complex number, C, as an output. The neural network 

learns what the ground state (or dynamics) of the 

system is. Increasing the number of hidden biases 

can improve the accuracy.

DA_0210Perspectives.indd   580 2/8/17   11:10 AM

Published by AAAS

on June 15, 2017
 

http://science.sciencem
ag.org/

D
ow

nloaded from
 

http://science.sciencemag.org/


Machine learning for quantum physics
Michael R. Hush

DOI: 10.1126/science.aam6564
 (6325), 580.355Science 

ARTICLE TOOLS http://science.sciencemag.org/content/355/6325/580

PERMISSIONS http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions

Terms of ServiceUse of this article is subject to the 

 is a registered trademark of AAAS.Science
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 

(print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement ofScience 

on June 15, 2017
 

http://science.sciencem
ag.org/

D
ow

nloaded from
 

http://science.sciencemag.org/content/355/6325/580
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
http://www.sciencemag.org/about/terms-service
http://science.sciencemag.org/

