









































sponsor by 

Co 
py 

rig 
ht 

© 
2 

01 
5 

H 
ar 

va 
rd 

B 
u 

in 
e 

s 
Sc 

ho 
ol 

P 
ub 

li 
hi 

ng 
. 

A H A rva R D B U S I N E S S R E V I E W A N A LY T I C S E RV I C E S R E P O RT 

data blending: 
A power method 
for faster, easier 
decis 



sponsor perspect 

we’r in the middl of a 
signific shift in the way 
organ blend and analyz 
data, affect not onli the way 
decis be made, but also 
how busi operate. data 
analyst in the line of business, 
who formerli have no choic but 

to reli on highli skilled, highli paid data scientist for 
data access, can now take advantag of self-servic 
technolog to achiev analyt independence. these 
technolog enabl practic anyone—regardless of 
their technic proficiency—to be a data analyst and 
make data-driven busi decisions. 

data blend be the drive forc behind thi movement, 
free up peopl throughout the organ to 
experi with data. rather than put busi data, 
such a valuabl insight about custom behavior, into 
the hand of a few, compani can place thi data into 
the hand of the many—those, for instance, who will use 
thi insight to bring about a good custom experience. 

alteryx sponsor the studi “data blending: A power 
method for faster, easier decisions” by harvard busi 
review analyt services, to support the empower 
of these analysts. harvard busi review analyt 
servic conduct a comprehens survey of 
busi profession across multipl industri and 
departments, and the result be clear. data fuel the 
critic busi decis that an organ need 
to make and have the abil to blend all of the variou 
sourc of data togeth to discov insight can, and 
should, happen anywher in the organization. 

At alteryx, we be lead the enabl of self-servic 
for data analyst through an intuit workflow for data 
blend and advanc analyt that allow them to 
gain deeper busi insight in hours, not the week 
of tradit approaches. analyst around the world 
at compani of all size be use alteryx to easili 
blend internal, third-party, and cloud-bas data, and 
then analyz it use spatial and predict drag-and- 
drop tools. thi be all do in a singl workflow, with no 
program required. 

some corpor technolog manag might see thi 
analytics-for-everyon trend a a threat to govern 
and security, much like the way the bring-your-own- 
devic (byod) movement be viewed. but that would be 
a mistake, a it actual repres a huge opportun 
for all. IT depart will continu their critic role of 
ensur that certain highli privat data be inde secure, 
but by learn from mistak rather than shut down 
the data pipeline, they empow their organ to 
make better, more inform busi decisions. 

We be excit by the result of thi study, a it valid 
our goal to make data blend and analyt access 
to everyone. By overcom the struggl of legaci 
technolog like spreadsheet that be not built to 
handl today’ data requirements, organ can 
build a more stable, data-driven cultur and creat an 
environ where busi analyst revolution the 
way they use data to make decisions. 

rick schultz 
senior vice president, market 
alteryx, inc. 



data B L E N D I N G : A P O W E R F U L M E T H O D F O R FA S T E R , E A S I E R D E C I S I O N S 1 

data blending: 
A power method for 
faster, easier decis 
data analytics, the scienc of examin an organization’ raw data with the purpos of glean 
valuabl busi inform from it, be becom a critic tool for today’ busi managers. 

new research from harvard busi review analyt servic show tremend bottom-lin 
potenti from use the late gener of power data analyt tools. our global survey of 502 
busi leader and executives, academics, and IT manag in more than 15 industri sector show 
that a vast major of execut find data analyt import for their decis making. figur 1 

thi import be due to the grow pressur that manag face to find new way of squeez 
more revenu and profit from exist operations. for example, market analyst firm idc tell cli- 
ent they should be abl to doubl the product of their busi analyst by provid them 
with the right tool and decision-mak culture. “there’ a genuin movement toward decis 
make base on data rather than heurist today,” say bob parker, a group vice presid at idc. 

that’ certainli the case at home-improv retail the home depot. “we’r not build 
new store at nearli the rate we use to,” say charl coleman, a senior analyst at the company. 
“so to grow the company, we’v come to reli on data analyt instead.” 

the troubl is, to make smart and fast busi decis from data, busi manag must over- 
come multipl challeng while use multipl analyt tools. among the big challeng be the 
grow number of data sourc analyst must gain access to. for another, mani of the analyt 
tool on which analyst reli be incap of processing, or struggl to process. mani of the data 
sources. these tools, includ microsoft’ excel application, have analyst manual pore over 
spreadsheet and creat complex formula from scratch each time out. all that mean busi 
analyst reli heavili on their organizations’ data scientist and IT professionals. and that, in turn, 
can mean pull a support ticket and wait in line. 

A new solut offer help. known a “data blending,” it’ essenti a data analyt meth- 
odolog and tool set combined. data blend give busi analyst self-servic solut 
to cleanse, enrich, and join togeth the data they require. thi can all be deliv in an auto- 
mat process. even better, the data can be take from ani number of dispar areas, both 
intern and externally. data blend solut also offer newfound speed and ease-of-us 
through graphic drag-and-drop interfac that allow the user to see how data be transform 
through everi step in the process and give the user the abil to drill down on details. all thi 
empow manag to make inform and intellig busi decis quickli and without 
the need to lean on a data scientist or IT professional. 



2 H A rva R D B U S I N E S S R E V I E W A N A LY T I C S E RV I C E S 

rise data sourc 
the extent of the data sourc challeng be remarkable. for typic organizations, the number of 
data sourc can rang from a minimum of five to, in mani cases, more than 15. worse, nearli 
eight out of 10 survey respond predict thi number will increas within the next two years, 
with almost a third predict a substanti increase. figur 2 

the data sourc challeng be myriad. data today can be found in both intern and extern 
sources. intern sourc includ everyth from spreadsheet to data warehous and data 
mart contain inform from enterpris erp and crm applications. mani organ 
also acquir data from third parties, includ market servic providers, trade associations, and 
governments. As for extern data sources, these can includ cloud-bas enterpris applic 
such a salesforce.com and marketo, social media, and even data gener from mobil devices. 

some organ go even further. At department-stor chain belk inc., busi analyst use 
geograph information—along with custom feedback data from onlin surveys, social media, 
call centers, and emails—to get a full custom view. “analyz that view help u determin the 
customer’ ‘path to purchase,’ ” say anu brookins, belk’ VP of custom insight and analytics. 

older tool can’t cope 
with all thi data come in from all these sources, old-school solut be no longer sufficient. 
that’ becaus these tool be design for a far simpler data environment, one that fea- 
ture few data types, with most data either raw or highli structured. they certainli weren’t 
design to handl unstructur data, such a social medium and videos, or data from the cloud 
and mobil devices. 

extrem import (rate 10) 

somewhat import (rate 6–9) 

neither import nor unimport (rate 4–5) 

not import (rate 1–3) 

31 

57 

8 

figur 1 

data analyt matter 
percentag rate how import data analyt be to their organization’ decis 
and/or processes. 
On a scale of 1 to 10 where 1 = not at all import and 10 = extrem import 

4 



data B L E N D I N G : A P O W E R F U L M E T H O D F O R FA S T E R , E A S I E R D E C I S I O N S 3 

after microsoft’ excel spreadsheet application, the most preval tool use for analysi includ 
analyt tool develop in-house, third-parti tools, and even some cloud-bas ones. figur 3 

while excel be the prefer spreadsheet applic for basic calcul and manipul 
numer data, it design date back well befor the current age of big data. today, access larg 
number of data sources, and cleansing, processing, and blend both intern and extern data 
from multipl sources, be de facto requirements. excel wasn’t design to do that. As a result, 
whenev data be join from multipl sources, excel requir tediou and labori formula and 
manual tweak that leav the result spreadsheet highli suscept to errors. “excel and in-hous 
develop tool tend to hit the point of diminish return fairli quickly,” say parker of idc. 

littl surprise, then, that onli 7 percent of respond rate their current data-analysi tool a 
veri or extrem effective. “the dirti littl secret of big data,” say tom davenport, a professor 
of IT and manag at babson colleg and the author or co-author of 17 book on those topics, 
“i that most data analyst spend the vast major of their time clean and integr data— 
not actual analyz it.” 

In hi other role a a senior advisor to deloitt analytics, davenport see mani data analyst today 
manual pore over excel spreadsheet all day, then gener the most basic cut-and-past 
report to the depart that need busi insight. “some compani with a global reach can 
have hundr of data analysts,” he says, “which equat to a huge wast of time.” 

figur 2 

mani data sourc now—and more come 
percentag say how mani differ data sourc their organ current access 
for most of it oper decis making. 

percentag rate how they expect the number of data sourc to chang over the 
next two years. 

33% 
13% 
18% 
9% 
27% 

5 TO 9 

10 TO 14 

15 OR more 

don’t know 

fewer than 5 

IN 
CR 

EA 
SE 

S 
UB 

ST 
AN 

TI 
AL 

LY 

IN 
CR 

EA 
SE 

S 
O 

M 
EW 

H 
AT 

N 
O 

C 
H 

AN 
G 

E 

D 
EC 

RE 
AS 

E 
SO 

M 
EW 

H 
AT 

D 
EC 

RE 
AS 

E 
SU 

BS 
TA 

N 
TI 

AL 
LY 

D 
O 

N 
’T 

K 
N 

O 
W 

current 

48 

10 

29 

7 51 

50 

40 

30 

20 

10 

0 



4 H A rva R D B U S I N E S S R E V I E W A N A LY T I C S E RV I C E S 

further, a these busi analyst struggl with multipl data type and sources, and the old- 
school tools, they often have no choic but to lean on in-hous data professionals. these IT 
profession can help analyst both gain access to the data they need and squeez more out of 
their excel tools, but they often have to leverag much more sophist tool for combin 
data into a use form for analysis. 

more than 60 percent of respond say their busi manag be at least somewhat depend 
on their IT managers, data scientists, data managers, and other dedic analyt professionals. 
but few than 2 percent say they’r extrem satisfi with those IT professionals’ efforts. and 
a much larg group—nearli 40 percent—say they’r onli moder satisfied. 

what’ more, depend on data pro be risky; a a group, they’r becom scarce. the mckinsey 
global institut predict that the unit state could face a shortag of nearli 200,000 skill 
data pro by 2018. add parker of idc: “these kind of data profession can be hard to find, 
quantify, and keep.” 

spreadsheet 

analyt tool develop in-hous 

third-parti analyt tool 

consum databas 

low-level sql queri 

cloud-bas analyt tool 

don’t know/oth 

92 

52 

37 

30 

3 

49 

figur 3 

spreadsheet still domin 
percentag that say their organ us the follow tool for data analysis. 
select all that apply. 

43 



data B L E N D I N G : A P O W E R F U L M E T H O D F O R FA S T E R , E A S I E R D E C I S I O N S 5 

A new solution: data blend 
add it all together, and busi analyst be ask for good tool to help them provid the kind 
of inform manag and execut need to make good decisions. such a solut need to 
be “self service”—that is, one where the analyst no longer need to reli on central data staff 
for help. roughli a quarter of respond rank key featur of these tool a extrem import- 
ant, includ the speed at which they can analyz data; the volum of data that can be processed; 
the ease-of-us of the tools, such a have an intuit graphic user interface; and the abil 
to drag and drop specif data prepar and data-join tool to creat workflow that can be 
use repeatedli without tediou manual work. figur 4 

the good news be that the new methodolog know a data blend be make such solut 
possible. already, busi analyst across sever industri be work with data blend 
tool that includ power data prepar capabilities. these includ data extraction, cleans- 
ing, blending, and enrichment—al right on the desktop. and with no need for costli help from 
IT professionals. 

data blend be the process of combin data from multipl sourc to creat an action 
analyt data set either for busi decis make or for drive a specif busi process. 
data blend be need when an organization’ data-manag process and infrastructur 
be insuffici for bring togeth specif dataset requir by busi groups. for exam- 
ple, data blend can readili bring togeth dispar data like custom inform from a 
cloud sale autom system such a salesforce.com, clickstream web data store in an open- 
sourc big data file system, and list of data from excel. data blend differ from data integra- 
tion and data warehous in that it primari use be not to creat a singl unifi version of the 
truth that’ store in data, but rather to build an analyt dataset that help busi analyst 
answer specif busi questions. 

speed to analyz data 

eas of use 

abil to creat reusabl workflow 

abil to process larg volum of data 

29 

25 

25 

figur 4 

speed, ease, volume, reus 
percentag of manag who describ the featur of tool use to analyz data for 
busi decis a extrem important. 

22 



6 H A rva R D B U S I N E S S R E V I E W A N A LY T I C S E RV I C E S 

bank of america merril lynch, one of the larg u.s. invest banks, have deploy a data blend- 
ing solut to provid self-servic analyt tool for it hundr of busi analysts. these 
analyst can now gener more in-depth and predict client-profit analyses. they’v also 
gain true workflow automation, move far beyond manual processes. and they’v improv 
their regulatori reporting. all these gain have also reduc the firm’ cost markedly. 

data blend have also found a home at the home depot. the compani origin sought to 
improv busi analysi of it stock-keep units, or skus. that’ the number retail assign 
to a product to identifi it price, product option, and manufacturer. At ani give moment, 
the home depot us approxim 160,000 sku in it more than 2,000 stores. until recently, 
analyz that inform involv manual retriev data from excel spreadsheets. but now, 
thank to it data blend solution, the home depot analyst can combin that mountain of data 
in an autom fashion. they can also do the work in just a fraction of the time it formerli took: 
a mere 30 to 60 minutes, down dramat from the previou two weeks. 

for the home depot, thi great speed be critical. the compani can now more effect price 
it merchandis accord to factor that includ competit and market elasticity. senior analyst 
coleman say that have not onli save thousand of hour of work, but also improv the com- 
pany’ bottom line by a much a 4 percent. “a we speed our rate of analysis,” he says, “we can 
give ourselv time to work through other analyt project and further develop data strategies.” 

retail belk now us data blend in everi corpor group serv it 300 stores. it mer- 
chandis group can now gener deep, predict report that precis identifi custom 
demograph and what custom be like to buy. belk’ market group, meanwhile, us 
data blend to determin which ad campaign have be most—and least—effective. and the 
real estat group us data blend to gener report in record time to anticip the financi 
impact when a store be remodeled. “across the organization, we’r now ask more and more 
sophist questions,” say belk VP brookins. “thi help u understand how we can provid 
more valu to our custom and increas the loyalti and retent of our customers—which 
ultim lead to compani growth.” 

data blend differ from data integr and 
data warehous in that it primari use be not to 
creat a singl unifi version of the truth that’ 
store in data, but rather to build an analyt 
dataset that help busi analyst answer 
specif busi questions. 



data B L E N D I N G : A P O W E R F U L M E T H O D F O R FA S T E R , E A S I E R D E C I S I O N S 7 

it’ not just financi servic and retail that be use data blending. cardin health inc., which 
provid medic product to more than three quarter of all u.s. hospitals, be another. look 
to empow it sale and market analysts, cardin health deploy a data blend tool. the 
solution’ built-in autom have dramat speed up it work. befor data blending, cardin 
gener 100 custom report after a month of manual compil information. now, with data 
blending, that have jump to more than 2,000 reports, each pack with charts, graphs, and pre- 
dictiv busi insights. and cardin can gener them all in under an hour. 

how far might data blend and it associ tool go in the future? advisori firm ovum 
predict that self-servic tool will soon “enabl a whole new univers of users.” one big area 
could be genom healthcare, where clinician deploy such tool to analyz the gener data 
from a person’ dna to detect, diagnose, and treat variou form of cancer. 

anoth area ripe for data blend be the internet of things. thi catchal categori compris 
the vast array of machines, sensors, and wearabl devic gener ream of information, and 
it’ one of the main sourc of big data. As mani a 25 billion “things” will be connect by 2020, 
predict gartner. make that connect even smarter will be what data futurist davenport call 
the “analyt of things.” that’ where these data blend solut would help make sens of 
the mountain of data these connect sensor amass. 

fortunately, compani don’t have to wait for the benefit of data blending. they’r here and 
now. “when I walk through our stores,” say coleman of the home depot, “I see the impact data 
blend have made. I can see product chang right on the shelf. and that’ realli exciting.” 

methodolog and particip profil 
harvard busi review analyt servic survey a total of 502 individuals. about one-quart 
(26 percent) be from organ with over 10,000 employees, anoth 26 percent be from 
organ with from 1,000 to 10,000 employees, and 40 percent be from organ with 
few than 500 employees. respondents’ own oper unit be primarili in north america (45 
percent), follow by asia/pacif (20 percent), europ (19 percent), latin america (9 percent), 
and the middl east/africa (6 percent). particip repres a wide rang of industri and 
function areas, with 17 percent say they work in general/execut management, 13 percent in 
sales/busi development, and 9 percent in marketing/communications. 



hbr.org/hbr-analytic-servic 




