











































acm US public polici council 
1701 pennsylvania ave nw, suit 300 
washington, DC 20006 


page 1 of 2 




+1-202-355-1291 x13040 
acmpo@acm.org 

usacm.acm.org 




associ for comput machineri 
US public polici council (usacm) 


usacm.acm.org 

facebook.com/usacm 
twitter.com/usacm 



januari 12, 2017 

statement on algorithm transpar and account 

comput algorithm be wide employ throughout our economi and societi to make decis that 
have far-reach impacts, includ their applic for education, access to credit, healthcare, and 
employment.1 the ubiqu of algorithm in our everyday life be an import reason to focu on 
address challeng associ with the design and technic aspect of algorithm and prevent 
bia from the onset. 

An algorithm be a self-contain step-by-step set of oper that comput and other 'smart' devic 
carri out to perform calculation, data processing, and autom reason tasks. increasingly, 
algorithm implement institut decision-mak base on analytics, which involv the discovery, 
interpretation, and commun of meaning pattern in data. especi valuabl in area rich with 
record information, analyt reli on the simultan applic of statistics, comput 
programming, and oper research to quantifi performance. 

there be also grow evid that some algorithm and analyt can be opaque, make it imposs 
to determin when their output may be bia or erroneous. 

comput model can be distort a a result of bia contain in their input data and/or their 
algorithms. decis make by predict algorithm can be opaqu becaus of mani factors, includ 
technic (the algorithm may not lend itself to easi explanation), econom (the cost of provid 
transpar may be excessive, includ the compromis of trade secrets), and social (reveal input 
may violat privaci expectations). even well-engin comput system can result in unexplain 
outcom or errors, either becaus they contain bug or becaus the condit of their use changes, 
invalid assumpt on which the origin analyt be based. 

the use of algorithm for autom decision-mak about individu can result in harm 
discrimination. policymak should hold institut use analyt to the same standard a 
institut where human have tradit make decis and develop should plan and architect 
analyt system to adher to those standard when algorithm be use to make autom decis 
or a input to decis make by people. 

thi set of principles, consist with the acm code of ethics, be intend to support the benefit of 
algorithm decision-mak while address these concerns. these principl should be address 
dure everi phase of system develop and deploy to the extent necessari to minim 
potenti harm while realiz the benefit of algorithm decision-making. 




1 
feder trade commission. “big data: A tool for inclus or exclusion? understand the issues.” januari 2016. 

https://www.ftc.gov/reports/big-data-tool-inclusion-or-exclusion-understanding-issues-ftc-report. 

mailto:acmpo@hq.acm.org 
http://usacm.acm.org/ 
http://usacm.acm.org/ 
http://facebook.com/usacm 
http://twitter.com/usacm 
http://usacm.acm.org/ 
https://www.ftc.gov/reports/big-data-tool-inclusion-or-exclusion-understanding-issues-ftc-report 









page 2 of 2 



principl for algorithm transpar and account 

1. awareness: owners, designers, builders, users, and other stakehold of analyt system should be 
awar of the possibl bia involv in their design, implementation, and use and the potenti harm 
that bia can caus to individu and society. 

2. access and redress: regul should encourag the adopt of mechan that enabl 
question and redress for individu and group that be advers affect by algorithm 
inform decisions. 

3. accountability: institut should be held respons for decis make by the algorithm that they 
use, even if it be not feasibl to explain in detail how the algorithm produc their results. 

4. explanation: system and institut that use algorithm decision-mak be encourag to 
produc explan regard both the procedur follow by the algorithm and the specif 
decis that be made. thi be particularli import in public polici contexts. 

5. data provenance: A descript of the way in which the train data be collect should be 
maintain by the builder of the algorithms, accompani by an explor of the potenti bia 
induc by the human or algorithm data-gath process. public scrutini of the data provid 
maximum opportun for corrections. however, concern over privacy, protect trade secrets, or 
revel of analyt that might allow malici actor to game the system can justifi restrict access 
to qualifi and author individuals. 

6. auditability: models, algorithms, data, and decis should be record so that they can be audit 
in case where harm be suspected. 

7. valid and testing: institut should use rigor method to valid their model and 
document those method and results. In particular, they should routin perform test to ass and 
determin whether the model gener discriminatori harm. institut be encourag to make the 
result of such test public. 


http://usacm.acm.org/ 

