


















































acm code of ethic and profession conduct 

preambl 

comput professionals' action chang the world. To act responsibly, they should reflect upon 

the wider impact of their work, consist support the public good. the acm code of 

ethic and profession conduct ("the code") express the conscienc of the profession. 

the code be design to inspir and guid the ethic conduct of all comput professionals, 

includ current and aspir practitioners, instructors, students, influencers, and anyon who 

us comput technolog in an impact way. additionally, the code serf a a basi for 

remedi when violat occur. the code includ principl formul a statement of 

responsibility, base on the understand that the public good be alway the primari 

consideration. each principl be supplement by guidelines, which provid explan to 

assist comput profession in understand and appli the principle. 

section 1 outlin fundament ethic principl that form the basi for the remaind of the 

code. section 2 address additional, more specif consider of profession 

responsibility. section 3 guid individu who have a leadership role, whether in the workplac 

or in a volunt profession capacity. commit to ethic conduct be requir of everi acm 

member, and principl involv complianc with the code be give in section 4. 

the code a a whole be concern with how fundament ethic principl appli to a comput 

professional' conduct. the code be not an algorithm for solv ethic problems; rather it 

serf a a basi for ethic decision-making. when think through a particular issue, a 

comput profession may find that multipl principl should be take into account, and that 

differ principl will have differ relev to the issue. question relat to these kind of 

issu can best be answer by thought consider of the fundament ethic principles, 

understand that the public good be the paramount consideration. the entir comput 

profess benefit when the ethic decision-mak process be account to and transpar 

to all stakeholders. open discuss about ethic issu promot thi account and 

transparency. 

1. gener ethic principles. 

A comput profession should... 







1.1 contribut to societi and to human well-being, acknowledg that 
all peopl be stakehold in computing. 

thi principle, which concern the qualiti of life of all people, affirm an oblig of comput 

professionals, both individu and collectively, to use their skill for the benefit of society, it 

members, and the environ surround them. thi oblig includ promot 

fundament human right and protect each individual' right to autonomy. An essenti aim 

of comput profession be to minim neg consequ of computing, includ 

threat to health, safety, person security, and privacy. when the interest of multipl group 

conflict, the need of those less advantag should be give increas attent and priority. 

comput profession should consid whether the result of their effort will respect 

diversity, will be use in social respons ways, will meet social needs, and will be broadli 

accessible. they be encourag to activ contribut to societi by engag in pro bono or 

volunt work that benefit the public good. 

In addit to a safe social environment, human well-b requir a safe natur environment. 

therefore, comput profession should promot environment sustain both local 

and globally. 

1.2 avoid harm. 

In thi document, "harm" mean neg consequences, especi when those consequ 

be signific and unjust. exampl of harm includ unjustifi physic or mental injury, 

unjustifi destruct or disclosur of information, and unjustifi damag to property, 

reputation, and the environment. thi list be not exhaustive. 

well-intend actions, includ those that accomplish assign duties, may lead to harm. 

when that harm be unintended, those respons be oblig to undo or mitig the harm a 

much a possible. avoid harm begin with care consider of potenti impact on all 

those affect by decisions. when harm be an intent part of the system, those respons 

be oblig to ensur that the harm be ethic justified. In either case, ensur that all harm be 

minimized. 

To minim the possibl of indirectli or unintent harm others, comput 

profession should follow gener accept best practic unless there be a compel 

ethic reason to do otherwise. additionally, the consequ of data aggreg and 

emerg properti of system should be care analyzed. those involv with pervas or 

infrastructur system should also consid principl 3.7. 

A comput profession have an addit oblig to report ani sign of system risk that 

might result in harm. If leader do not act to curtail or mitig such risks, it may be necessari to 

"blow the whistle" to reduc potenti harm. however, caprici or misguid report of risk 

can itself be harmful. befor report risks, a comput profession should care ass 

relev aspect of the situation. 







1.3 Be honest and trustworthy. 

honesti be an essenti compon of trustworthiness. A comput profession should be 

transpar and provid full disclosur of all pertin system capabilities, limitations, and 

potenti problem to the appropri parties. make deliber fals or mislead claims, 

fabric or falsifi data, offer or accept bribes, and other dishonest conduct be 

violat of the code. 

comput profession should be honest about their qualifications, and about ani limit 

in their compet to complet a task. comput profession should be forthright about ani 

circumst that might lead to either real or perceiv conflict of interest or otherwis tend to 

undermin the independ of their judgment. furthermore, commit should be honored. 

comput profession should not misrepres an organization' polici or procedures, and 

should not speak on behalf of an organ unless author to do so. 

1.4 Be fair and take action not to discriminate. 

the valu of equality, tolerance, respect for others, and justic govern thi principle. fair 

requir that even care decis process provid some avenu for redress of grievances. 

comput profession should foster fair particip of all people, includ those of 

underrepres groups. prejudici discrimin on the basi of age, color, disability, 

ethnicity, famili status, gender identity, labor union membership, militari status, nationality, 

race, religion or belief, sex, sexual orientation, or ani other inappropri factor be an explicit 

violat of the code. harassment, includ sexual harassment, bullying, and other abus of 

power and authority, be a form of discrimin that, amongst other harms, limit fair access to 

the virtual and physic space where such harass take place. 

the use of inform and technolog may caus new, or enhanc existing, inequities. 

technolog and practic should be a inclus and access a possibl and comput 

profession should take action to avoid creat system or technolog that disenfranchis 

or oppress people. failur to design for inclus and access may constitut unfair 

discrimination. 

1.5 respect the work requir to produc new ideas, inventions, creativ 
works, and comput artifacts. 

develop new ideas, inventions, creativ works, and comput artifact creat valu for 

society, and those who expend thi effort should expect to gain valu from their work. 

comput profession should therefor credit the creator of ideas, inventions, work, and 

artifacts, and respect copyrights, patents, trade secrets, licens agreements, and other method 

of protect authors' works. 







both custom and the law recogn that some except to a creator' control of a work be 

necessari for the public good. comput profession should not unduli oppos reason 

us of their intellectu works. effort to help other by contribut time and energi to project 

that help societi illustr a posit aspect of thi principle. such effort includ free and open 

sourc softwar and work put into the public domain. comput profession should not claim 

privat ownership of work that they or other have share a public resources. 

1.6 respect privacy. 

the respons of respect privaci appli to comput profession in a particularli 

profound way. technolog enabl the collection, monitoring, and exchang of person 

inform quickly, inexpensively, and often without the knowledg of the peopl affected. 

therefore, a comput profession should becom convers in the variou definit and 

form of privaci and should understand the right and respons associ with the 

collect and use of person information. 

comput profession should onli use person inform for legitim end and without 

violat the right of individu and groups. thi requir take precaut to prevent re- 

identif of anonym data or unauthor data collection, ensur the accuraci of data, 

understand the proven of the data, and protect it from unauthor access and 

accident disclosure. comput profession should establish transpar polici and 

procedur that allow individu to understand what data be be collect and how it be be 

used, to give inform consent for automat data collection, and to review, obtain, correct 

inaccuraci in, and delet their person data. 

onli the minimum amount of person inform necessari should be collect in a system. 

the retent and dispos period for that inform should be clearli defined, enforced, and 

commun to data subjects. person inform gather for a specif purpos should not 

be use for other purpos without the person' consent. merg data collect can 

compromis privaci featur present in the origin collections. therefore, comput 

profession should take special care for privaci when merg data collections. 

1.7 honor confidentiality. 

comput profession be often entrust with confidenti inform such a trade secrets, 

client data, nonpubl busi strategies, financi information, research data, pre-publ 

scholarli articles, and patent applications. comput profession should protect 

confidenti except in case where it be evid of the violat of law, of organiz 

regulations, or of the code. In these cases, the natur or content of that inform should not 

be disclos except to appropri authorities. A comput profession should consid 

thought whether such disclosur be consist with the code. 







2. profession responsibilities. 

A comput profession should... 

2.1 strive to achiev high qualiti in both the process and product of 
profession work. 

comput profession should insist on and support high qualiti work from themselv and 

from colleagues. the digniti of employers, employees, colleagues, clients, users, and anyon 

els affect either directli or indirectli by the work should be respect throughout the 

process. comput profession should respect the right of those involv to transpar 

commun about the project. profession should be cogniz of ani seriou neg 

consequ affect ani stakehold that may result from poor qualiti work and should 

resist induc to neglect thi responsibility. 

2.2 maintain high standard of profession competence, conduct, and 
ethic practice. 

high qualiti comput depend on individu and team who take person and group 

respons for acquir and maintain profession competence. profession compet 

start with technic knowledg and with awar of the social context in which their work 

may be deployed. profession compet also requir skill in communication, in reflect 

analysis, and in recogn and navig ethic challenges. upgrad skill should be an 

ongo process and might includ independ study, attend confer or seminars, and 

other inform or formal education. profession organ and employ should encourag 

and facilit these activities. 

2.3 know and respect exist rule pertain to profession work. 

"rules" here includ local, regional, national, and intern law and regulations, a well a 

ani polici and procedur of the organ to which the profession belongs. comput 

profession must abid by these rule unless there be a compel ethic justif to do 

otherwise. rule that be judg uneth should be challenged. A rule may be uneth when 

it have an inadequ moral basi or caus recogniz harm. A comput profession should 

consid challeng the rule through exist channel befor violat the rule. A comput 

profession who decid to violat a rule becaus it be unethical, or for ani other reason, must 

consid potenti consequ and accept respons for that action. 

2.4 accept and provid appropri profession review. 

high qualiti profession work in comput depend on profession review at all stages. 

whenev appropriate, comput profession should seek and util peer and stakehold 







review. comput profession should also provid constructive, critic review of others' 

work. 

2.5 give comprehens and thorough evalu of comput system 
and their impacts, includ analysi of possibl risks. 

comput profession be in a posit of trust, and therefor have a special respons to 

provid objective, credibl evalu and testimoni to employers, employees, clients, users, 

and the public. comput profession should strive to be perceptive, thorough, and object 

when evaluating, recommending, and present system descript and alternatives. 

extraordinari care should be take to identifi and mitig potenti risk in machin learn 

systems. A system for which futur risk cannot be reliabl predict requir frequent 

reassess of risk a the system evolv in use, or it should not be deployed. ani issu that 

might result in major risk must be report to appropri parties. 

2.6 perform work onli in area of competence. 

A comput profession be respons for evalu potenti work assignments. thi 

includ evalu the work' feasibl and advisability, and make a judgment about whether 

the work assign be within the professional' area of competence. If at ani time befor or 

dure the work assign the profession identifi a lack of a necessari expertise, they 

must disclos thi to the employ or client. the client or employ may decid to pursu the 

assign with the profession after addit time to acquir the necessari competencies, to 

pursu the assign with someon els who have the requir expertise, or to forgo the 

assignment. A comput professional' ethic judgment should be the final guid in decid 

whether to work on the assignment. 

2.7 foster public awar and understand of computing, relat 
technologies, and their consequences. 

As appropri to the context and one' abilities, comput profession should share 

technic knowledg with the public, foster awar of computing, and encourag 

understand of computing. these commun with the public should be clear, respectful, 

and welcoming. import issu includ the impact of comput systems, their limitations, 

their vulnerabilities, and the opportun that they present. additionally, a comput 

profession should respect address inaccur or mislead inform relat to 

computing. 

2.8 access comput and commun resourc onli when 
author or when compel by the public good. 

individu and organ have the right to restrict access to their system and data so long 

a the restrict be consist with other principl in the code. consequently, comput 







profession should not access another' comput system, software, or data without a 

reason belief that such an action would be author or a compel belief that it be 

consist with the public good. A system be publicli access be not suffici ground on 

it own to impli authorization. under except circumst a comput profession may 

use unauthor access to disrupt or inhibit the function of malici systems; extraordinari 

precaut must be take in these instanc to avoid harm to others. 

2.9 design and implement system that be robustli and usabl secure. 

breach of comput secur caus harm. robust secur should be a primari consider 

when design and implement systems. comput profession should perform due 

dilig to ensur the system function a intended, and take appropri action to secur 

resourc against accident and intent misuse, modification, and denial of service. As 

threat can aris and chang after a system be deployed, comput profession should 

integr mitig techniqu and policies, such a monitoring, patching, and vulner 

reporting. comput profession should also take step to ensur parti affect by data 

breach be notifi in a time and clear manner, provid appropri guidanc and 

remediation. 

To ensur the system achiev it intend purpose, secur featur should be design to be 

a intuit and easi to use a possible. comput profession should discourag secur 

precaut that be too confusing, be situat inappropriate, or otherwis inhibit legitim 

use. 

In case where misus or harm be predict or unavoidable, the best option may be to not 

implement the system. 

3. profession leadership principles. 

leadership may either be a formal design or aris inform from influenc over others. In 

thi section, "leader" mean ani member of an organ or group who have influence, 

educ responsibilities, or manageri responsibilities. while these principl appli to all 

comput professionals, leader bear a heighten respons to uphold and promot them, 

both within and through their organizations. 

A comput professional, especi one act a a leader, should... 

3.1 ensur that the public good be the central concern dure all 
profession comput work. 

people—includ users, customers, colleagues, and other affect directli or indirectly— 

should alway be the central concern in computing. the public good should alway be an 

explicit consider when evalu task associ with research, requir analysis, 







design, implementation, testing, validation, deployment, maintenance, retirement, and disposal. 

comput profession should keep thi focu no matter which methodolog or techniqu 

they use in their practice. 

3.2 articulate, encourag accept of, and evalu fulfil of 
social respons by member of the organ or group. 

technic organ and group affect broader society, and their leader should accept the 

associ responsibilities. organizations—through procedur and attitud orient toward 

quality, transparency, and the welfar of society—reduc harm to the public and rais 

awar of the influenc of technolog in our lives. therefore, leader should encourag full 

particip of comput profession in meet relev social respons and 

discourag tendenc to do otherwise. 

3.3 manag personnel and resourc to enhanc the qualiti of work 
life. 

leader should ensur that they enhance, not degrade, the qualiti of work life. leader 

should consid the person and profession development, access requirements, 

physic safety, psycholog well-being, and human digniti of all workers. appropri human- 

comput ergonom standard should be use in the workplace. 

3.4 articulate, apply, and support polici and process that reflect the 
principl of the code. 

leader should pursu clearli defin organiz polici that be consist with the code 

and effect commun them to relev stakeholders. In addition, leader should 

encourag and reward complianc with those policies, and take appropri action when 

polici be violated. design or implement process that deliber or neglig 

violate, or tend to enabl the violat of, the code' principl be ethic unacceptable. 

3.5 creat opportun for member of the organ or group to 
grow a professionals. 

educ opportun be essenti for all organ and group members. leader should 

ensur that opportun be avail to comput profession to help them improv their 

knowledg and skill in professionalism, in the practic of ethics, and in their technic 

specialties. these opportun should includ experi that familiar comput 

profession with the consequ and limit of particular type of systems. comput 

profession should be fulli awar of the danger of oversimplifi approaches, the 

improb of anticip everi possibl oper condition, the inevit of softwar 

errors, the interact of system and their contexts, and other issu relat to the complex 

of their profession—and thu be confid in take on respons for the work that they do. 







3.6 use care when modifi or retir systems. 

interfac changes, the remov of features, and even softwar updat have an impact on the 

product of user and the qualiti of their work. leader should take care when chang or 

discontinu support for system featur on which peopl still depend. leader should 

thoroughli investig viabl altern to remov support for a legaci system. If these 

altern be unaccept riski or impractical, the develop should assist stakeholders' 

grace migrat from the system to an alternative. user should be notifi of the risk of 

continu use of the unsupport system long befor support ends. comput profession 

should assist system user in monitor the oper viabil of their comput systems, 

and help them understand that time replac of inappropri or outdat featur or 

entir system may be needed. 

3.7 recogn and take special care of system that becom integr 
into the infrastructur of society. 

even the simplest comput system have the potenti to impact all aspect of societi when 

integr with everyday activ such a commerce, travel, government, healthcare, and 

education. when organ and group develop system that becom an import part of 

the infrastructur of society, their leader have an add respons to be good steward of 

these systems. part of that stewardship requir establish polici for fair system access, 

includ for those who may have be excluded. that stewardship also requir that 

comput profession monitor the level of integr of their system into the infrastructur of 

society. As the level of adopt changes, the ethic respons of the organ or 

group be like to chang a well. continu monitor of how societi be use a system will 

allow the organ or group to remain consist with their ethic oblig outlin in the 

code. when appropri standard of care do not exist, comput profession have a duti to 

ensur they be developed. 

4. complianc with the code. 

A comput profession should... 

4.1 uphold, promote, and respect the principl of the code. 

the futur of comput depend on both technic and ethic excellence. comput 

profession should adher to the principl of the code and contribut to improv them. 

comput profession who recogn breach of the code should take action to resolv 

the ethic issu they recognize, including, when reasonable, express their concern to the 

person or person thought to be violat the code. 







4.2 treat violat of the code a inconsist with membership in the 
acm. 

each acm member should encourag and support adher by all comput profession 

regardless of acm membership. acm member who recogn a breach of the code should 

consid report the violat to the acm, which may result in remedi action a specifi in 

the acm' code of ethic and profession conduct enforc policy. 


the code and guidelin be develop by the acm code 2018 task force: execut committe don gotterbarn 

(chair), Bo brinkman, catherin flick, michael S kirkpatrick, keith miller, kate varansky, and marti J wolf. 

members: eve anderson, ron anderson, ami bruckman, karla carter, michael davis, penni duquenoy, jeremi 

epstein, kai kimppa, lorrain kisselburgh, shrawan kumar, andrew mcgettrick, natasa milic-frayling, denis 

oram, simon rogerson, david shama, janic sipior, eugen spafford, and le waguespack. the task forc be 

organ by the acm committe on profession ethics. signific contribut to the code be also make by 

the broader intern acm membership. thi code and it guidelin be adopt by the acm council on june 

22nd, 2018. 

thi code may be publish without permiss a long a it be not chang in ani way and it carri the copyright 

notice. copyright (c) 2018 by the associ for comput machinery. 


