






































act@home: An emot intellig cognit assist to help peopl with alzheimerâ•ž diseas | cheriton school of comput scienc 


A common earli symptom of alzheimer’ diseas be difficulti rememb recent events, but a the diseas progress it affect an 
increasingli larg sphere of a person’ life. 

“peopl think of alzheimer’ a a condit that impair short-term memory. It does, but a the diseas progress it also caus problem 
with more distant memories, reason and behaviour, and impair a person’ abil to complet activ of daili live independently,” 
say professor jess hoey, comput scientist who have combin research interest in artifici intellig with mathemat model of 
human interaction. 

“peopl with alzheimer’ diseas may start to wash their hands, then forget what they’r doing, whi 
they’r do it, lose motivation, forget what they’v do so far and repeat steps, or just stop partway 
through,” hoey said. “their care partner — often the person they live with — usual step in to help, but 
the amount of assist requir can becom overwhelming. we’v develop an assist technolog to 
help old adult with alzheimer’ diseas complet activ of daili live more independ by give 
autom prompt base on the observ situation.” 

known a act@home, the system hoey and hi student have develop go further than just provid 
cue and prompts. the team have develop a prototyp emot intellig assist that interpret 
the dynam of human interact and then respond accordingly. 

“we realiz after year of design artifici intellig system that we can solv the technic 
problem of an autom prompt system — use sensor to detect in the home what a person with 
alzheimer’ be doing, process the inform and respond with a verbal or visual cue,” he 
explained. “but convinc a person with alzheimer’ diseas to do someth be much more difficult, and 

that depend on the person’ interpret of the situat — what they think be go on, what they perceiv be happening, what cue 
they’r get — and, importantly, who they think they are.” 

As it name implies, act@hom be an autom assist technolog that combin artifici intellig with mathemat model of 
affect control theori or act, a sociolog framework that propos peopl conduct themselv in a way a to gener feel that be 
appropri to the situat or context, hoey explained. 

“say, that i’m an elderli man with alzheimer’ disease. My interact with other be base on my feel of who I be and who I think 
other are. I will interact differ with a friend than I will with my spous or a doctor. human adjust their interact base on who the 
other person be or, more precisely, who the other person feel like. We all engag in thi littl theatric performance,” he explained. 

the interest discoveri be that thi perform be not lose complet in peopl with alzheimer’ disease. and that’ where hoey’ 
autom assist come in. 

alzheimer’ diseas heavili disrupt a person’ comprehens of the way the world work — for example, whether to take pill A or pill B 
befor bedtime, or to dri one’ hand after they’v be washed. but a person with alzheimer’ still rememb what it feel like to interact 
with others, he explained. 

“that’ where the rubber hit the road — it’ not just when but how you prompt a person. act@hom work by build a model of what’ 
go on in the mind of someon with alzheimer’ diseas when they be prompt to do something,” he explained. 

hoey and hi collabor have be conduct qualit interview of peopl with alzheimer’ and their caregiv to good 
understand what it mean to be a person with the diseas and how they interact with others. 

“our goal be to take the find from these interview to develop an inexpens home-bas emot intellig cognit assist 
that help peopl with alzheimer’ diseas while lighten the burden on their caregivers.” 

act@home: An emot intellig cognit assist to help peop... https://cs.uwaterloo.ca/news/acthome-emotionally-intelligent-cognitive-a... 

1 sur 1 13/07/2017 17:23 


