









































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122417725865 

american sociolog review 
1 –32 
© american sociolog 
associ 2017 
doi: 10.1177/0003122417725865 
journals.sagepub.com/home/asr 

In the past decade, two major structur devel- 
opment intersected: the prolifer of sur- 
veillanc in everyday life and the rise of “big 
data.” emblemat of the expans of sur- 
veillanc (lyon 2003; marx 2016; rule 2007) 
be the rapid growth of the crimin justic 
system sinc 1972 (carson 2015; garland 
2001; wakefield and uggen 2010; western 
2006). At the same time, facilit by the 
mass digit of information, there have 
be a rise in the comput analysi of 
massiv and divers datasets, know a “big 
data.” big data analyt have be take up 
in a wide rang of fields, includ finance, 
health, social science, sports, marketing, 
security, and crimin justice. the use of big 
data in polic surveil activ be the 

subject of contenti debat in policy, media, 
legal, regulatory, and academ circles. how- 
ever, discours on the topic be larg specula- 
tive, focu on the possibilities, good and 
bad, of new form of data-bas surveillance. 
the technolog capac for surveil 
far outpac empir research on the new 
data landscape. consequently, we actual 
know veri littl about how big data be use in 

725865 asrxxx10.1177/0003122417725865american sociolog reviewbrayn 
2017 

ath univers of texa at austin 

correspond author: 
sarah brayne, assist professor, depart of 
sociology, the univers of texa at austin, 305 
E. 23rd st., a1700, austin, TX 78712-1086 
email: sbrayne@utexas.edu 

big data surveillance: the 
case of polic 

sarah braynea 

abstract 
thi articl examin the intersect of two structur developments: the growth of 
surveil and the rise of “big data.” draw on observ and interview conduct 
within the lo angel polic department, I offer an empir account of how the adopt 
of big data analyt does—and do not—transform polic surveil practices. I argu 
that the adopt of big data analyt facilit amplif of prior surveil practic 
and fundament transform in surveil activities. first, discretionari assess 
of risk be supplement and quantifi use risk scores. second, data be use for 
predictive, rather than reactiv or explanatory, purposes. third, the prolifer of automat 
alert system make it possibl to systemat surveil an unprecedentedli larg number 
of people. fourth, the threshold for inclus in law enforc databas be lower, now 
includ individu who have not have direct polic contact. fifth, previous separ data 
system be merged, facilit the spread of surveil into a wide rang of institutions. 
base on these findings, I develop a theoret model of big data surveil that can be 
appli to institut domain beyond the crimin justic system. finally, I highlight the 
social consequ of big data surveil for law and social inequality. 

keyword 
police, big data, inequality, crime, law 

https://journals.sagepub.com/home/asr 


2 american sociolog review 00(0) 

surveil activ and to what conse- 
quence. 

thi articl provid a case studi of a larg 
urban polic department—th lo angel 
polic depart (lapd)—to investig 
the relationship between big data analyt and 
surveillance. In particular, it ask whether and 
how the adopt of big data analyt trans- 
form polic surveil practices. moreover, 
it investig implic of new surveil 
practic not onli for policing, but also for law, 
social inequality, and research on big data sur- 
veillanc in other institutions. On the one hand, 
big data analyt may be a ration force, 
with potenti to reduc bias, increas effi- 
ciency, and improv predict accuracy. On 
the other hand, use of predict analyt have 
the potenti to technolog reifi bia and 
deepen exist pattern of inequality. 

To shed light on the social dimens of 
surveil in the age of big data, I draw on 
origin interview and observ data col- 
lect dure fieldwork over the cours of two 
and a half year with the lapd. As an agenc 
at the forefront of data analytics, the depart- 
ment serf a a strateg site for understand- 
ing the interplay between technology, law, and 
social relations. I provid one of the first on- 
the-ground account of how the grow suit 
of big data system and predict analyt 
be use for surveil within an organiza- 
tion, unpack how in some cases, the adop- 
tion of big data analyt be associ with 
mere amplif in prior practices, but that 
in others, it be associ with fundament 
transform in surveil activities. I 
argu there be five key way in which the 
adopt of big data analyt be associ 
with shift in practic to vari degrees: (1) 
discretionari assess of risk be supple- 
ment and quantifi use risk scores; (2) 
data be increasingli use for predictive, 
rather than reactiv or explanatory, purposes; 
(3) the prolifer of autom alert make 
it possibl to systemat surveil an unprec- 
edentedli larg number of people; (4) dataset 
now includ inform on individu who 
have not have ani direct polic contact; and (5) 
previous separ data system be merg 

into relat system and includ data origi- 
nalli collect in other, non-criminal-justic 
institutions. these shift make possibl by big 
data have implic for inequality, law, and 
organiz practic in a rang of institu- 
tional domains. 

the intensif of 
surveil 
surveil be ubiquit in modern societi 
(gidden 1990; lyon 1994, 2003, 2006, 2015; 
marx 1974, 2002, 2016; rule 1974). the 
practic of surveil involv the collec- 
tion, recording, and classif of informa- 
tion about people, processes, and institut 
(foucault 1977; haggerti and ericson 2000; 
lyon 2003; marx 2016). A wide rang of 
scholar highlight the grow pervas 
of surveillance, refer to the emerg of 
“mass surveillance” (rule 1974) and “surveil- 
lanc societies” (lyon 1994). although it have 
receiv more attent in recent decades, 
surveil a a practic be not new. process 
of surveil can be trace back to at least 
the sixteenth century, dure the appear of 
the nation-st (marx 2016), through the 
transatlant slave trade (brown 2015), 
bureaucratization, rationalization, and modern 
manag in the nineteenth and twentieth 
centuri (braverman 1974; rule 1974; weber 
1978), and a an axiomat accompani to 
risk manag practic in the twentieth 
centuri (ericson and haggerti 1997). the 
attack on septemb 11th, 2001, further 
stimul and legitim the expans of 
surveillance. wide view a a case of infor- 
mation share failur in the intellig com- 
munity, 9/11 encourag an align of 
actor with vest interest in enhanc sur- 
veillanc oper (ball and webster 2007; 
lyon 2015), spur an infus of tax dollar 
for develop of new surveil sensor 
and data mine program to produc strateg 
intellig (gandi 2002), and acceler 
the converg of previous separ sur- 
veillanc system into a “surveil assem- 
blage” (deleuz and guattari 1987; haggerti 
and ericson 2000). 



brayn 3 

surveil scholar have document a 
quantit increas in surveillance, argu 
that surveil be one of the major institu- 
tional dimens of modern societi (ball 
and webster 2007; gidden 1990; lyon 1994, 
2003; marx 1988, 2016). although surveil- 
lanc be grow in all area of society, it 
penetr be unevenli distribut (fisk 
1998). some individuals, groups, areas, and 
institut be surveil more than others, 
and differ popul be surveil for 
differ purpos (lyon 2003). On the one 
hand, there be a deepen of surveil of 
“at-risk” groups, such a parole and indi- 
vidual on public assist (gilliom 2001; 
gustafson 2011; soss, fording, and schram 
2011), who can increasingli be track across 
institut boundaries. On the other hand, 
emerg “dragnet” surveil practices— 
mean those that collect data on everyone, 
rather than mere individu under suspi- 
cion—result in increas monitor of 
group “previous exempt from routin sur- 
veillance” (haggerti and ericson 2000:606; 
see also angwin 2014; lyon 2015). surveil- 
lanc be therefor now both wider and deeper: 
it includ a broader swath of peopl and can 
follow ani singl individu across a great 
rang of institut settings. 

surveil be increasingli technologi- 
calli mediated, and emerg technolog 
make it possibl at an unpreced scale 
(ericson and haggerti 1997; lyon 1994; 
marx 2016). with the develop of com- 
puting, mass surveil emerg alongsid 
mass commun (rule 1974). the mass 
digit of inform enabl much of 
what marx term the “new surveillance”: the 
“scrutini of individuals, groups, and context 
use technic mean to extract or creat 
information” (marx 2016:20). although the 
goal of tradit and new surveil be 
similar, the mean be different. wherea tra- 
dition surveil be inductive, involv 
the “close observation, especi of a sus- 
pect person” (oxford american dictionari 
of current english 1999), and reli on the 
unaid senses, new surveil be more 
like to be appli categorically, deductive, 

remote, low visibl or invisible, involun- 
tary, automated, preemptive, and emb 
into routin activ (marx 2002, 2016). In 
fact, new form of systemat surveil 
have becom quotidian to the point that it be 
now an unavoid featur of everyday life 
(ball and webster 2007; lyon 2003; marx 
2016). consid the extent to which surveil- 
lanc be a requisit of particip in today’ 
world (ball and webster 2007): to use a bank, 
send an e-mail, obtain medic care, make a 
phone call, travel on a highway, or conduct an 
internet search, individu leav digit 
trace that be record and save (see also 
foucault 1977; haggerti and ericson 2000; 
lyon 2003). 

technolog mediat surveil have 
becom routin organiz practic in a 
wide rang of public and privat domains. It 
be a tool of gener govern (lyon 2003), 
a basic prerog of individu in all sort 
of privat and public institutions, and a tool to 
accomplish “goal that meet particular inter- 
ests” (ericson and haggerti 2006:22). sur- 
veillanc scholar have accordingli extend 
the core concern of surveil from polic- 
ing and militari context to other institutions, 
includ finance, commerce, labor, health, 
education, insurance, immigration, and activ- 
ism (lyon 2003; marx 2016; rule 2007). 
accord to david lyon (2015:68–69), sur- 
veillanc in each of these institutions, “cannot 
be understood without a sens of how the 
quest for ‘big data’ approach be becom 
increasingli central.” 

rise of big data 
big data be an emerg modal of surveil- 
lance. A wide rang of organizations—from 
financ to healthcar to law enforcement— 
have adopt big data analyt a a mean to 
increas efficiency, improv prediction, and 
reduc bia (christin 2016). despit it take- 
up, big data remain an ambigu term 
whose precis definit can vari across 
field and institut contexts. draw on 
previou definit (e.g., laney 2001; lazer 
and radford 2017; mayer-schönberg and 



4 american sociolog review 00(0) 

cukier 2013), the work definit of big 
data use in thi research be that it be a data 
environ character by four features: it 
be vast, fast, disparate, and digital. first, big 
data analyt involv the analysi of larg 
amount of information, often measur in 
petabyt and involv ten of million of 
observations. second, big data typic 
involv high frequenc observ and fast 
data processing. third, big data be disparate— 
it come from a wide rang of institut 
sensor and involv the merg of previ- 
ousli separ data sources. fourth, big data 
be digital. the mass digit of record 
facilit the merg and share of record 
across institutions, make storag and pro- 
cess easier, and make data more effici 
to analyz and search remotely. these four 
characterist be not limit to ani one 
institut context, and they enabl the use 
of advanc analytics—such a predict 
algorithm or network analysis—and complex 
data display—such a topical-, temporal-, or 
geo-analysis. for purpos of sociolog 
research on the topic, thi definit shift the 
focu from featur of the data itself to the 
social process that give rise to big data col- 
lection and analysi (i.e., the data environ- 
ment). for example, instead of focu on 
the “variety” of big data (one of the “3 vs” in 
laney’ [2001] definition), the focu here be 
on the dispar institut data sourc big 
data be gather from. 

there be numer theori for whi such a 
wide rang of institut adopt big data sur- 
veillanc a an organiz practice, most of 
which fit into one of two theoret perspec- 
tives: the technical/r perspect and the 
institut perspective. both perspect be 
premis on the notion that organ be 
self-interest (scott 1987), but actor within 
organ may adopt big data analyt in 
respons to differ pressures. accord to 
the technic perspective, big data be a mean 
by which organiz actor improv effi- 
cienci through improv prediction, fill 
analyt gaps, and more effect alloc 
scarc resources. By contrast, the institut 

perspect (dimaggio and powel 1983; 
meyer and rowan 1977) question the assump- 
tion that organiz structur stem from 
ration process or technic imper 
(scott 2004). instead, it highlight the role of 
culture, suggest organ oper in 
technic ambigu field in which they 
adopt big data analyt not becaus of empiri- 
cal evid that it actual improv effi- 
ciency, but in respons to wider belief of what 
organ should be do with big data 
(willis, mastrofski, and weisburd 2007; see 
also kling 1991 on computerization). In other 
words, use big data may confer legitimacy. If 
other institut be marshal big data and 
algorithm predict for decision-making— 
rather than reli on human discretion—ther 
may be institut pressur to conform. 

big data make possibl new form of clas- 
sific and predict use machin learn- 
ing algorithms. applic of big data 
analyt rang from spam and fraud detect 
to credit scoring, insur pricing, employ- 
ment decisions, and predict policing. 
although much of the appeal of algorithm 
lie in their replac of human decision- 
make with autom decisions, thi studi 
highlight the way in which human remain 
integr to the analyt process. 

In the big data environment, individu 
contribut to a grow trove of data a they go 
about their daili life (ball and webster 2007; 
garland 2001). everi time peopl make a pur- 
chase use a credit card, drive through a toll- 
booth, or click on an advertis online, 
they leav a digit trace (rule 2007). the 
adopt of digit inform and communi- 
cation technolog transform previous 
paper file and face-to-fac data collect 
(marx 1998), make it possibl for record 
“initi introduc with limit intentions” to 
be “developed, refin and expand to deal 
with new problem and situations” (inn 
2001:8). function creep—th tendenc of data 
initi collect for one purpos to be use 
for anoth often unintend or unanticip 
purpos (inn 2001)—i a fundament com- 
ponent of the big data surveil landscape. 



brayn 5 

big data surveillance: 
the case of polic 

thi articl provid a case studi of policing, 
one of the mani organiz context in 
which the use of big data surveil have 
grown. more generally, crimin justic sur- 
veillanc have increas dramat in the 
unit state in the past four decades. It have 
expand at all levels, includ incarcer 
(travis, western, and redburn 2014), parol 
and probat (bonczar and herberman 2014), 
and polic (carson 2015). for example, the 
violent crime control and law enforc 
act of 1994 provid fund to hire 100,000 
new polic officers, and the homeland secu- 
riti act of 2002 commit over 17 billion 
dollar for state and local govern to fund 
local law enforc agenc (roush 2012). 
more recently, feder fund have be tar- 
get at improv and expand law 
enforcement’ use of technology. for exam- 
ple, the smart polic initiative—a consor- 
tium of the bureau of justic assistance, local 
polic departments, and researchers—pro- 
vide feder fund to more than 30 local law 
enforc agenc (includ the lapd) 
to support new data-driven practices. 

the use of data for decision-mak in 
crimin justic be not new. In 1928, ernest 
burgess of the chicago school design an 
actuari model that predict the probabl 
of parolees’ reoffend (harcourt 2006). In 
the courts, quantif be emb into 
legal practic in the 1970 and 1980 through 
sentenc guidelin (espeland and vannebo 
2007). In the past three decades, the crimin 
justic system experienc a shift toward 
“actuari justice” (feeley and simon 1992), 
in which actor use criterion deriv from risk 
manag (lyon 2003) to estim proba- 
biliti of crimin risk (ericson and haggerti 
1997). that said, although actuari method 
have exist in correct and the court for 
almost a centuri (feeley and simon 1992; 
harcourt 2006; lyon 2003), data-driven 
decision-mak have becom systemat 
incorpor into law enforc practic 
onli in recent decades. 

In the 1970s, the domin polic patrol 
model be reactiv (reiss 1971), involv 
random patrols, rapid respons to 911 calls, 
and reactiv investig (sherman 2013). 
however, practition and research 
becom increasingli awar that these strate- 
gy have littl effect on crime, catalyz a 
shift from reactiv to more proactive, evidence- 
base form of policing, such a hot spot 
polic (braga and weisburd 2010; sher- 
man, gartin, and buerger 1989). In 1994, 
compstat—a manag model link 
crime and enforc statistics—wa estab- 
lish in new york citi (weisburd et al. 
2003). compstat quickli spread to other cit- 
ies, includ lo angel in 2002, a a 
manageri model for identifi crime pat- 
terns, quantifi and incentiv polic 
activity, and direct polic resources. the 
attack on 9/11 spur the develop of 
“intelligence-l policing” (ratcliff 2008). 
view local law enforc agenc a 
actor on the front line of the domest war 
against terror (waxman 2009), feder agen- 
cie provid consider fund to local 
law enforc agenc to collect, analyze, 
share, and deploy a wide rang of new data. 
In 2008, william bratton, then-chief of the 
lapd (and former commission of the new 
york citi polic department) begin work 
with feder agenc to ass the viabil of 
a more predict approach to policing. 
today, predict analyt be use for a 
wide rang of law enforcement–rel activ- 
ities, includ algorithm predict when 
and where futur crime be most like to 
occur (perri et al. 2013), network model 
predict individu most like to be 
involv in gun violenc (papachristos, 
hureau, and braga 2013), and risk model 
identifi law enforc offic most 
like to engag in at-risk behavior (u.s. 
depart of justic 2001 [2015]). 

what explain the prolifer of big- 
data-driven decision-mak in organ 
generally, and law enforc specifically? 
much like in other institut domains, it 
have the potenti to improv both effici 
and accountability. It may improv the 



6 american sociolog review 00(0) 

predict and preemption of behavior by 
help law enforc deploy resourc 
more efficiently, ultim help prevent 
and intercept crimes, thu reduc crime 
rates. data-driven polic also hold poten- 
tial a an account mechan and 
respons to critic organ be fac- 
ing over discriminatori practices. for exam- 
ple, in respons to polic violence, nationwid 
movement such a black live matter have 
brought racial tension to the forefront of 
demand for polic reform. data-driven polic- 
ing be be offer a a partial antidot to 
racial discriminatori practic in polic 
depart across the countri (e.g., see 
white hous polic data initi 2015). 

however, although part of the appeal of 
big data lie in it promis of less discretion- 
ari and more object decision-mak (see 
porter’ [1995] work on mechan objectiv- 
ity; see also espeland and vannebo 2007; 
hack 1990), new analyt platform and 
techniqu be deploy in preexist organ- 
izat context (barley 1986, 1996; kling 
1991) and embodi the purpos of their crea- 
tor (boyd and crawford 2012; gitelman 
2013; kitchin 2014). therefore, it remain an 
open empir question to what extent the 
adopt of advanc analyt will reduc 
organiz ineffici and inequalities, 
or serv to entrench power dynam within 
organizations. the present studi shed light 
on these question and help u understand 
the chang relationship between quantifica- 
tion, prediction, and inequality. 

limit To exist 
literatur 
there be five key limit to the exist 
literatur relat to big data surveillance. first, 
most work on actuari be write befor 
big data analyt take hold. second, although 
there be strong theoret work in surveil 
studies, how big data surveil play out on 
the ground remain larg an open empir 
question. third, the major of sociolog 
research on crimin justic surveil 

focu on the experi and outcom of 
individu under surveillance, rather than the 
surveil agent themselves. therefore, 
offer an organiz perspect may 
gener new insight about thi mediat 
level of analysis. fifth, although there be a 
strong bodi of work demonstr that mark- 
ing someon in the crimin justic system be 
consequenti for life outcom and pattern 
of inequ (becker 1963; brayn 2014; 
kohler-hausmann 2013; pager 2007; rio 
2011), we know rel littl about whether 
and how the mark process have chang in 
the age of big data. consequently, there be a 
dearth of theoret inform empir 
research on the relationship between surveil- 
lance, big data, and the social consequ of 
the intersect of the two forces. 

mani of these gap in the polic context 
can be attribut to practic constraints—it be 
difficult for research to secur the degre 
of access to polic depart necessari to 
obtain in-depth qualit data on day-to-day 
polic practices. although classic polic eth- 
nographi exist (e.g., bittner 1967; man 
and van maanen 1978; wilson 1968), there 
have be onli a hand of in-depth studi 
within polic depart sinc data analyt 
becom an integr part of polic oper 
(for earli exceptions, see ericson and hag- 
gerti 1997; man 2011; mosko 2008; 
skogan 2006; willi et al. 2007). although 
these studi offer import insight into the 
use of compstat and crime mapping, they 
predat algorithm policing. consequently, 
we still know littl about how big data polic- 
ing be exercis in practice. 

thi articl have three aims. first, it draw 
on unique, origin data to analyz how a law 
enforc organ conduct big data 
surveillance. second, it forward an origin 
theoret framework for understand the 
changes—and continuities—in surveil 
practic associ with the adopt of big 
data analyt that can be appli to other 
institut domains. finally, it highlight 
implic of big data surveil for law 
and social inequality. 



brayn 7 

fieldwork 

over the cours of two and a half years, I 
conduct a qualit case studi of the lo 
angel polic depart (lapd). the 
lapd be the third-largest local law enforce- 
ment agenc in the unit states, employ 
9,947 sworn offic and 2,947 civilian staff 
(lo angel polic depart 2017). the 
depart cover an area of almost 500 
squar mile and a popul of almost four 
million people. It consist of four bureaus— 
central, south, valley, and west—which be 
divid into a total of 21 geograph areas. 
there be also two special bureaus, 
detect and special operations. 

I conduct interview and observ 
with 75 individuals, and conduct between 
one and five follow-up interview with a sub- 
sampl of 31 individu to follow how cer- 
tain technolog be dissemin and 
inform be share throughout the 
department. interviewe includ sworn 
offic of variou rank and civilian employ- 
ee work in patrol, investigation, and crime 
analysis. I be abl to gain analyt leverag 
by exploit differ adopt tempor 
within and between divis dure my field- 
work. not all divis adopt big data sur- 
veillanc at the same time. rather, there be 
consider variat in whether and when 
differ big data technolog be adopt 
in the area and special divisions.1 for 
example, I be abl to conduct interview and 
observ in divis that be not use 
predict polic and other big data surveil- 
lant technolog at the begin of my field- 
work, but be by the end. thi variat 
enabl me to observ actual chang in 
practice, but also to talk to respond in 
patrol, investigation, and analysi role about 
how they interpret their work chang in 
light of big data analytics. I also interview 
individu in special divisions—includ- 
ing robbery-homicide, inform technol- 
ogy, record and identification, fugit 
warrants, juvenile, risk management, and 
air support—and at the real-tim crime 
analysi center (see figur 1). 

additionally, I conduct observ on 
ride-along in patrol car and a helicopt to 
studi how offic deploy data in the field. I 
also shadow analyst a they work with 
data, observ them respond to queri 
from detect and supervisor and proac- 
tive analyz data for patrol, investiga- 
tions, and crime analysis. 

To supplement my research within the 
lapd, I interview individu within the 
l.a. counti sheriff’ depart (lasd), a 
it be an integr part of the broader ecosystem 
of public servic in the region. In addition, I 
conduct interview at the joint region 
intellig center (jric), the “fusion center” 
in southern california. fusion center be 
multiagency, multidisciplinari surveil 
organ by state or local agenc that 
receiv consider feder fund from 
the depart of homeland secur and the 
depart of justic (monahan and palmer 
2009). jric be one of 78 feder fund 
fusion center establish across the countri 
in the wake of 9/11. individu at jric con- 
duct data collection, aggregation, and surveil- 
lanc in conjunct with other fusion center 
and agencies, including, but not limit to, the 
depart of homeland secur (dhs), the 
feder bureau of investig (fbi), the 
central intellig agenc (cia), and immi- 
gration and custom enforc (ice). I 
also conduct observ at surveil 
industri confer and interview indi- 
vidual work at technolog compani that 
design analyt platform use by the lapd, 
includ palantir and predpol, and individu- 
al work in feder agenc in washing- 
ton, dc, to understand how data on crimin 
and noncrimin activ be share across 
agencies. I supplement my fieldwork with 
archiv research of law enforc and mil- 
itari train manual and surveil indus- 
tri literature. triangul across variou 
sourc of data provid the analyt leverag 
necessari to good understand how law 
enforc us big data in theory, how they 
use it in practice, and how they interpret and 
make mean out of it chang role in daili 
operations. 



8 american sociolog review 00(0) 

site select 

I select the lapd a a strateg site for 
studi big data surveil becaus it be an 
agenc at the forefront of data analytics. the 
lapd invest heavili in it data collection, 
analysis, and deploy capacities, and offer 
intern train session on how law 
enforc can good har big data. there- 
fore, practic within the depart may 
forecast broader trend that may shape other 
law enforc agenc in the come years. 

In addit to be one of the larg law 
enforc agenc in north america, there 
be additional, contextu reason whi the 
lapd be on the lead edg of data analyt- 
ics. the first factor relat to extern pres- 
sure for transpar and accountability. the 
lapd be involv in a number of high- 
profil scandal in the 1990s, includ the 
rampart scandal2 and the now infam 
rodney king beating, which lead to investiga- 
tion expos an expans web of corrup- 
tion, train deficiencies, and civil right 
violat within the department. In response, 
the depart of justic enter into a 

consent decree3 with the lapd from 2001 to 
2009 that mandated, among other things, the 
creation and oversight of a new data-driven 
employe risk manag system, team 
ii. the legaci of the decre extend beyond 
employe risk management; it lead to more 
inform share and data-driven decision- 
make within the organ in general. 

the second factor be the influenc of state 
legisl decis concern offend 
management. In the wake of brown v. plata4 
and the associ order to dramat 
reduc the prison population, the california 
legislatur pass AB 109, a bill that shift 
the respons of supervis releas 
non-violent, non-serious, non-sex offend 
from state to local law enforc and 
counti probat officers. It also outsourc 
complianc check to local law enforc 
agencies, includ the lapd and lasd. As 
a result, local law enforc agenc be 
respons for approxim 500 addit 
individu releas into l.a. counti each 
month. therefore, they need a mean by 
which to effici stratifi the post-releas 

figur 1. situat room at the real-tim crime analysi center (racr) 
source: author’ photo. 



brayn 9 

commun supervis popul accord 
to risk, necessit risk model and inter- 
agenc data integr effort across the 
region. 

A third relev factor to the lapd’ use of 
big data be the avail and adopt of new 
data integr technologies. In 2011, the 
lapd begin use a platform design by 
palantir technologies. palantir be found in 
2004 and have quickli grown into one of the 
premier platform for compil and analyz- 
ing massiv and dispar data by law enforce- 
ment and intellig agencies. origin 
intend for use in nation defense, palantir 
be initi partial fund by in-q-tel, the 
cia’ ventur capit firm. palantir now have 
govern and commerci customers, 
includ the cia, fbi, ice, lapd, nypd, 
nsa, dhs, and j.p. morgan. jric (the south- 
ern california fusion center) start use 
palantir in 2009, with the lapd follow 
shortli after. the use of palantir have expand 
rapidli through the department, with regular 
train session and more divis sign 
on each year. It have also spread throughout the 
great l.a. region: in 2014, palantir won 
the request for propos to implement the 
statewid AB 109 administr program, 
which involv data integr and monitor- 
ing of the post-releas commun supervis 
population. 

chang associ with 
adopt of big data 
analyt 

To what extent do the adopt of big data 
analyt chang polic surveillance? base 
on my fieldwork, I argu that in some cases, 
the adopt of big data analyt be associ 
with mere amplif in prior surveil 
practices, but in others, it be associ with 
fundament transform in surveil 
activ and daili operations. I empir 
demonstr five key way in which the adop- 
tion of big data analyt be associ with 
shift in surveil practic to vari 
degrees. first, law enforc supplement 

officers’ discretionari assess of risk 
with quantifi risk scores. second, there be an 
increas in the use of data analyt for predic- 
tive—rath than reactiv or explanatory— 
purposes. third, there be a prolifer in 
alert-bas systems, which facilit the pas- 
sive, systemat surveil of a larg num- 
ber of individu than be possibl with 
tradit query-bas systems. fourth, the 
threshold for inclus in law enforc 
databas be lower, now includ individu 
who have not have direct polic contact. 
finally, previous separ data system be 
merg into relat systems, make it pos- 
sibl for the polic to use data origin col- 
lect in other, non–crimin justic contexts. 

I offer an origin conceptu framework 
for understand the continu and chang 
associ with the adopt of big data ana- 
lytic within the polic organization. figur 2 
depict thi framework and illustr the 
migrat of tradit polic practic 
toward big data surveillance. each line repre- 
sent a continuum of surveil practices, 
from tradit to big data surveillance. the 
five shift in practic do not repres discret 
either/or categories, but rather be good 
understood a continu gradat of vary- 
ing degre between the extrem valu of 
tradit and big data surveillance. the 
length of the black line repres the degre 
of transform in surveil practic 
associ with the use of big data. for exam- 
ple, the first two shifts—from discretionari to 
quantifi risk assessment, and explanatori 
to predict analytics—ar not particularli 
transformative; rather, they repres quanti- 
fie recapitul of tradit surveil 
practices. By contrast, the last two shifts—th 
inclus of data on individu with no direct 
polic contact, and from institut typic 
not associ with crime control—repres 
fundament transform in surveil 
activities. the shift from query-bas system 
to autom alert be a moder shift, repre- 
senting, in part, an elabor of exist 
practices, and in part, a new surveil 
strategy. I will analyz each of these shift in 
the follow sections. 



10 american sociolog review 00(0) 

the shift from tradit to big data sur- 
veillanc be associ with a migrat of 
law enforc oper toward intelli- 
genc activities. the basic distinct between 
law enforc and intellig be a fol- 
lows: law enforc typic becom 
involv onc a crimin incid have 
occurred. legally, the polic cannot under- 
take a search and gather person inform 
until there be probabl cause. intelligence, by 
contrast, be fundament predictive. intelli- 
genc activ involv gather data; iden- 
tifi suspici patterns, locations, activity, 
and individuals; and preemptiv interven- 
ing base on the intellig acquired. befor 
discuss the findings, one caveat be worth 
noting: the migrat of law enforc 
toward intellig be in it nascenc befor 
the use of big data, in part due to suprem 
court decis dismantl certain crimin 
protections. technically, the fourth amend- 
ment make unreason search and sei- 
zure illeg in the absenc of probabl cause. 
however, in practice, decis such a terri 
v. ohio and whren v. unit state make it 
easi for law enforc to circumv the 
barrier of probabl cause, ultim contrib- 
ute to the prolifer of pretext stops. In 
other words, the suprem court’ disman- 
tling of probabl caus catalyz the migra- 
tion of law enforc toward intelligence, 

and the adopt of big data analyt facili- 
tat and acceler thi shift. 

the quantif of individu risk 

the first shift in polic practic be the quantifi- 
cation of civilian accord to risk. quantifi 
knowledg be supplement officers’ experi- 
ential knowledg through the implement 
of a new point system: oper laser (lo 
angeles’ strateg extract and restor 
program). the program begin in 2011 and be 
fund through the smart polic initiative, a 
nation initi encourag local polic 
depart and research to use evidence- 
based, data-driven tactics. the strategi 
includ place-bas and offender-bas 
models. the offender-bas strategi be 
implement in a low-income, histor 
high-crim divis in south bureau. It be pre- 
mise on the idea that a small percentag of 
high-impact player be disproportion 
respons for most violent crime. therefore, 
identifi and focu polic resourc on 
the “hottest” individu should be an effici 
mean of reduc crime.5 

the strategi begin by plot crime in 
the division. the crime intellig detail 
(cid), which be compos of three sworn 
offic and a civilian crime analyst, identi- 
fie a problem crime, which in thi divis be 

figur 2. migrat of tradit polic practic toward big data surveil 



brayn 11 

often arm robbery. next, the cid shift 
their unit of analysi from crime to individu- 
als. they gather intellig daili from 
patrols, the parol complianc unit, field 
interview (fi) card (polic contact cards), 
traffic citations, releas from custodi forms, 
crime and arrest reports, and crimin histo- 
rie to gener a list of “chronic offenders,” 
who be each assign a point valu and give 
a numer rank accord to that value. 
individu be assign five point for a vio- 
lent crimin history, five point for know 
gang affiliation, five point for prior arrest 
with a handgun, and five point if they be on 
parol or probation. one offic explained: 

We say ok, we need to decid who’ the 
bad of the bad . . . we need someth to 
pull them apart. So thi be the import 
one, and thi be realli what give the impor- 
tanc of fi-e someon [fill out a field 
interview card] on a daili basi instead of 
just saying, okay, I saw that guy hang 
out, i’m gonna give him two week and i’ll 
go FI him again. it’ one point for everi 
polic contact.6 

As illustr in figur 3, FI card includ 
person inform such a name, address, 
physic characteristics, vehicl information, 
gang affiliations, and crimin history. On the 
back of the card, there be space for offic to 
includ inform on person with the sub- 
ject and addit intelligence. 

fi be key intellig tool for law 
enforc and be one of the first data 
sourc integr into palantir. when enter 
into the system, everi FI be tag with the 
time, date, and geo-coordinates. offic be 
train to pull out an FI card and “get a 
shake” a soon a they interact with someon 
in the field. one supervisor describ how he 
us it “to tag all the person inform I 
can get . . . these thing come into play late 
on in way you could never even imagine.” 
similarly, a softwar engin explain how 
littl piec of data that might seem unsuspi- 
ciou at the time of collect can eventu 
be pull togeth to creat use intelli- 
gence: “it’ a law enforc system where 

that citat can, the sum of all inform 
can build out what be needed.” In addit to 
input the content of the cards, a captain 
explain there be an incent to simpli “get 
them in the system” a entiti that futur data 
point can be link to. 

becaus point valu be larg base on 
polic contact, an import question emerges: 
what be ground for polic contact? mere 
be identifi a a chronic offend do 
not constitut reason suspicion or proba- 
ble cause. however, use in conjunct with 
palantir, fi repres a prolifer of data 
from police–civilian interact that law 
enforc do not need a warrant to col- 
lect. when I ask an offic to provid 
exampl of whi he stop peopl with high 
point values, he replied: 

yesterday thi individu might have get 
stop becaus he jaywalked. today he 
mighta get stop becaus he didn’t use 
hi turn signal or whatev the case might 
be. So that’ two point . . . you could con- 
duct an investig or if someth seem 
out of place you have your consensu 
stops.7 So a pedestrian stop, thi individual’ 
walking, “hey, can I talk to you for a 
moment?” “yeah what’ up?” you know, 
and then you just start fill out your card 
a he answer question or whatever. and 
what it be tell u be who be out on the 
street, you know, who’ out there not neces- 
sarili mayb commit a crime but who’ 
activ on the streets. you put the activ of 
. . . be in a street with mayb their violent 
background and one and one might creat 
the next crime that’ gonna occur. 

the point system be path dependent; it gener- 
ate a feedback loop by which fi be both 
caus and consequ of high point val- 
ues. An individu have a high point valu 
be predict of futur polic contact, and that 
polic contact further increas the individu- 
al’ point value. 

the cid also creat work-ups, refer to 
a “chronic violent crime offend bulle- 
tins.” individu on these bulletin be not 
necessarili “wanted” nor do they have 



12 american sociolog review 00(0) 

outstand warrant for their arrest. rather, it 
be an “inform only” bulletin that includ 
physic descriptor and oddities, gang affilia- 
tion, crimin history, parole/prob status, 
vehicles, frequent areas, and law enforce- 
ment contacts. the goal of these bulletin be to 
give offic what they refer to a “situat 
awareness.” offic previous have to reli 
exclus on their direct knowledg of a 

case and specif crimin networks, but by 
creat a list and dissemin bulletins, the 
point system and associ bulletin broad- 
en previous particular polic familiar- 
iti of individu on the street. 

ideally, one offic explained, they could 
put one offic on everi individu on the list 
and “odd be [you’re] probabl go to find 
them commit anoth crime.” however, 

figur 3. field interview (fi) card 
source: lapd. 



brayn 13 

the polic oper in an organiz context 
with resourc constraints; respond fre- 
quentli refer budget cut and personnel 
shortages. therefore, instead of have one 
offic on everi chronic offender, offic 
engag in what I term “stratifi surveillance”: 
differenti surveil individu accord 
to their risk score. An offic explained: 

[we] util undercov operations, or 
undercov unit and . . . then sit our surveil- 
lanc on some of the high point offend 
and just watch them on a daili basis. . . . and 
you start build either, you know, there’ 
two way of look at it. either kind of 
conduct your investig to see if 
mayb there be a crime that have just be 
committed. or, “we know who you are, you 
know, I just call you johnny, i’v never 
realli met you before, but I know who you 
be now,” so mayb it’ put in hi mind, “oh, 
they’r on to me, they know who I am.” 

thi excerpt shed light on the multipl purpos 
of stratifi surveillance, includ ongo 
intellig gather and deterr through 
signal to individu on the street that they be 
be track by law enforcement. 

whi do the polic turn to the point system 
in thi division? In the word of one officer, 

the code of feder regulations. they say 
you shouldn’t creat a—you can’t target 
individu especi for ani race or I for- 
get how you say that. but then we didn’t 
want to make it look like we’r creat a 
gang depositori of just gang affili or 
gang associates. . . . We be just tri to 
cover and make sure everyth be right on 
the front end. 

other respond echo thi sentiment, 
explain the strategi be adopted, in part, 
a a legal complianc mechanism. 

the point system be a form of quantifi 
policing, but it be not dramat differ 
from it discretionari predecessor. As indi- 
cat by the low degre of transform in 
figur 2, it be larg a quantifi recapitula- 
tion of tradit surveil practices. 

shift from reactiv to predict 
analyt 

historically, polic be mostli reactive. 
patrol offic use to spend much of their 
time “chase the radio.” In the earli 1980s, 
face with evid that reactiv strategi 
be ineffect at reduc crime, there be 
a paradigm shift toward more proactive, problem- 
orient polic strategies, includ hot 
spot policing. predict polic be an exten- 
sion of hot spot policing, make possibl by 
the tempor densiti of big data (i.e., high- 
frequenc observations). In 2012, the lapd 
begin use softwar design by predpol, a 
predict polic company. predpol us a 
proprietari algorithm8 predic on the near- 
repeat model, which suggest onc a crime 
occur in a location, the immedi surround- 
ing area be at increas risk for subsequ 
crime. predpol us three type of inputs— 
past type, place, and time of crime—to iden- 
tifi area where futur crime be most like to 
occur. predict polic be expand rap- 
idli within the department; a of march 2015, 
it have dissemin to 10 divisions.9 

offic receiv printout at the begin 
of their shift that show 500 by 500 square- 
foot box overlay small area of divis 
maps. patrol offic be encourag to spend 
time in predict boxes, a strategi refer to 
a “risk-bas deployment.” deploy be 
base on avail time, such a when offic- 
er be not respond to call or “book a 
body.” offic record their self-report 
minut in the predict box on their in-car 
computers. although “data drive deploy- 
ment,” what the polic do onc in the predic- 
tive box, and how long they stay there, 
remain within their discretion. 

one supervisor explain that by reli 
on data, rather than human interpret of 
crime patterns, it help him deploy hi 
resourc more efficiently:10 

there’ an emot element to it, and you 
think right now with crime be thi low, a 
cluster could be three or four crimes. clus- 
ter use to be 10, 12 crimes. now three or 
four and they jump on it, you know. so, 



14 american sociolog review 00(0) 

there could be overreaction. because, 
there’s, you know, I mean it’ a human 
do it. and they cannot sort out what’ 
noise. 

offic be quick to emphas the contin- 
u import of their own expertise. when 
discuss predict policing, most patrol 
offic say some version of the follow 
statement make by a sergeant on a ride-along: 
“I alreadi know where the crime’ at.” part of 
thi sentiment may stem from officers’ concern 
that the use of algorithm repres a form of 
deskilling, devalu their local and experien- 
tial knowledg and threaten their profes- 
sional autonomy. In that vein, one captain 
describ a typic exchang with hi officers: 

they’r like, “you know what, I know 
where the crime’ occurring.” . . . and I 
show them the forecast and they say, “okay, 
so [at intersection], I know there be crimes, 
I could have told you that. i’v be work- 
ing here 10 years! there’ alway crime 
there.” I go, “okay, you’r work here 10 
year on that car, whi be there still crime 
there if you’r so knowledgeable?” 

despit some within-depart conflict over 
their efficacy, predpol output still inform 
where some offic drove dure their 
uncommit time. for example, when driv- 
ing back from book an individu at the 
station, a sergeant I be with decid to drive 
to an area not know to him for be high- 
crime, becaus he thought the locat of the 
predpol box be odd and he want to see 
what be go on there. In other words, pre- 
dictiv polic output sometimes—but not 
always—act a a substitut for local 
experienti knowledge. 

A relat but distinct reason whi offic 
contest predict polic be becaus they 
believ it place offic themselv under 
great surveillance. for example, when we 
arriv at a crime scene on my first ride-along, 
I be surpris to see an offic manual type 
our locat on hi laptop. consid how 
technolog advanc the depart be 

in other ways, I assum cars’ locat would 
be track automatically. when I ask the 
offic whi he manual place himself at the 
scene, he explain that although everi polic 
unit be equip with an automat vehicl 
locat (avl) that ping the vehicle’ locat 
everi five seconds, they be not turn on 
becaus of resist from lapd union 
representatives.11 

shift from query-bas to alert- 
base system 

the shift from query-bas to alert-bas sys- 
tem represents, in part, an extens of exist- 
ing practic and, in part, a fundament 
transform in surveil activities. By 
“query-bas systems,” I mean databas to 
which user submit request for inform in 
the form of a search. A familiar exampl of a 
queri be when a polic offic run a licens 
plate dure a traffic stop. In alert-bas sys- 
tems, by contrast, user receiv real-tim noti- 
ficat (alerts) when certain variabl or 
configur of variabl be present in the 
data. the shift from query-bas to alert-bas 
systems—which be make possibl by high fre- 
quenci data collection—ha implic for 
the relat structur of surveillance. 

consid the follow example: all war- 
rant in l.a. counti can be translat into 
object represent spatially, temporally, 
and topic in palantir. through tagging, 
user can add everi know associ that 
warrant have to people, vehicles, addresses, 
phone numbers, documents, incidents, cita- 
tions, call for service, alpr readings, fis, 
and the like. offic and analyst can then set 
up alert by put a geo-fenc around an area 
and request an alert everi time a new war- 
rant be issu within the area. warrant be but 
one example; user can request alert for ani 
data point relat to the entiti they be inter- 
est in (e.g., call for service, involv in 
or wit to a traffic accident, alpr [auto- 
matic licens plate reader] readings, fis, and 
so on). use a mechan in palantir similar 
to an rss feed, offic can be automat 
notifi of warrant or event involv 



brayn 15 

specif individu (or match descript 
of individuals), addresses, or car directli on 
their cell phone. prior to autom alerts, law 
enforc would know individuals’ real- 
time locat onli if they be conduct 1:1 
surveillance, receiv a tip, or encount 
them in person. 

real-tim notif can be use in 
oper planning. An interviewe who 
work at the fusion center describ how if 
he be about to conduct a search of a house, he 
can draw a fenc around the hous and receiv 
notif about risk such a whether a 
know gang associ live in the home, if 
there be a gun regist in the hous next 
door, or if there be a warrant for assault with 
a deadli weapon issu down the street. 

alert can also be use to break down infor- 
mation silo within the department. lapd’ 
jurisdict be almost 500 squar miles. there- 
fore, individu detect may not abl to 
connect crime seri that occur across differ 
divisions. one captain explained: 

let’ say I have someth go on with 
the medic marijuana clinic where they’r 
get robbed. okay? and it happen all 
over, right? but i’m a detect here in 
[division], I can put in an alert to palantir 
that say anyth that have to do with medi- 
cal marijuana plu robberi plu male, black, 
six foot. 

He continued, “I like throw the net out 
there, you know? throw it out there, let it 
work on it while you’r do your other stuff, 
you know?” relatedly, an interviewe in 
robbery-homicid divis describ a pilot 
project in which autom data graze can 
flag potenti crime seri that span jurisdic- 
tional boundari and be therefor difficult 
for ani one person to identify. He said, “you 
could get an alert that would say, you know 
what, your case be pretti similar to thi case 
over in miami.” If the case reach a “merit 
score” (i.e., a threshold at which a certain con- 
figur of variabl be present), the system 
flag the case a similar. the system match 
on field such a suspect description, licens 

plate, type of weapon, caus of death, motive, 
type of crime, and m.o., such a “what kind 
of bind be use . . . or be there tortur 
involved? what type of trauma have occurred? 
wa there, you know, be there some type of 
symbol activity?” although the match 
process be automated, decis about what 
paramet the system match on remain 
within the discret of individu at vicap, 
a unit of the fbi. 

that said, the use of alert repres not just 
a scale up of exist polic practices, but also 
a fundament transform in how patrol 
offic and investig gener case knowl- 
edge. under the tradit surveil model, 
alert about hot incid and suspect be sent 
out from dispatch centers. however, by exploit- 
ing variat in divis that do and do not 
use place- and person-bas predict polic- 
ing—and divis that start use big data 
dure the cours of my fieldwork—i be abl 
to observ the autom of alert and rel 
lack of human intermedi in broadcast 
out these alert or conduct data grazing. 

It be worth note that alert-bas system 
be supplementing, rather than replacing, 
query-bas systems. search be still criti- 
cal featur of law enforc inform 
systems. In fact, one of the transform 
featur of big data system be that queri 
themselv be becom data. one detect 
explained: 

I queri the system a certain way and then 
anoth person queri the system a certain 
way . . . we be look for someth veri 
similar in our query, and so even though the 
data may not have connect the two, the 
queri be similar. yeah, so then it will be 
abl to say hey, listen, there’ an analyst in 
san francisco PD that ran a veri similar 
queri a to your and so you guy might be 
look for the same thing. 

A differ detect explain how when he 
search someone’ name in one nation sys- 
tem, he can see the number of time that name 
have be queri by other people. when I 
ask whi he would want to know how mani 



16 american sociolog review 00(0) 

time someone’ name have be queried, he 
repli that “if you aren’t do anyth 
wrong,” the cop be not go to be look 
you up veri mani time over the cours of 
your life. He continued: “just becaus you 
haven’t be arrest doesn’t mean you 
haven’t be caught.” In other words, in aud- 
itabl big data systems, queri can serv a 
quantifi proxi for suspiciousness. 

lower databas inclus threshold 

the last two shift in practic repres the 
most fundament transform in surveil- 
lanc activities. law enforc databas 
have long includ inform on individu 
who have be arrest or convict of crimes. 
more recently, they also includ inform 
on peopl who have be stopped, a evi- 
denc by the prolifer of stop-and-frisk 
databases. however, a new data sensor and 
analyt platform be incorpor into law 
enforc operations, the polic increas- 
ingli util data on individu who have not 
have ani polic contact at all. quotidian activi- 
tie be be codifi by law enforc 
organizations. one way thi be occur be 
through network analysis. figur 4 be a de- 
identifi mockup I ask an employe at 
palantir to creat base on a real network 
diagram I obtain from an offic in the 
lapd. the person of interest, “guy cross,” be 
an individu with a high point value. An 
lapd offic explained, “with the [palantir] 
system . . . I click on him and then [a] web 
would spread out and show me the phone that 
he’ associ with and the cars.” 

radiat out from “guy cross,” who have 
direct polic contact, be all the entiti he be 
relat to, includ people, cars, addresses, 
and phone numbers. each line indic how 
they be connected, such a by be a sib- 
ling, lover, cohabiter, co-worker, co-arrestee, 
or list on a vehicl registration. the net- 
work diagram illustr onli one degre of 
separation, but network can expand outward 
to a mani degre of separ a user 
have inform and can tie in with other 
networks. To be in what I call the “secondari 

surveil network,” individu do not 
need to have direct law enforc contact; 
they simpli need to have a link to the central 
person of interest. onc individu relation- 
ship be input and social network be 
built into the system, individu can be 
“autotracked,” mean offic can receiv 
real-tim alert if individu in the network 
come into contact with the polic or other 
govern agenc again. 

the automat licens plate reader 
(alpr) be anoth exampl of a low-threshold 
“trigger mechanism” (traci and morgan 
2000) that result in more widespread inclu- 
sion in a database. alpr be dragnet surveil- 
lanc tools; they take read on everyone, 
not mere those under suspicion. camera 
mount on polic car and static alpr at 
intersect take two photo of everi car that 
pass through their line of vision—on of 
the licens plate and one of the car—and 
record the time, date, and gp coordin 
(see figur 5). law enforcement–collect 
alpr data can be supplement with pri- 
vate collect alprs, such a those use 
by repossess agents. alpr data give the 
polic a map of the distribut of vehicl 
throughout the citi and, in some cases, may 
enabl law enforc to see an individual’ 
typic travel patterns. for example, an ana- 
lyst use alpr data to see that a person of 
interest be frequent park near a particu- 
lar intersect at night, explain to me that 
thi intersect be like near that person’ 
resid or “honeycomb” (hideout). 

there be sever way to use alpr data. 
one be to compar them against “heat lists” of 
outstand warrant or steal cars. anoth 
strategi be to place a geo-fenc around a loca- 
tion of interest in order to track car near the 
location. for example, after a seri of copper 
wire theft in the city, the polic found the car 
involv by draw a radiu in palantir 
around the three place the wire be steal 
from, set up time bound around the time 
they knew the theft occur at each site, and 
queri the system for ani licens plate 
captur by alpr in all three locat dur- 
ing those time periods. 



brayn 17 

however, the most common use of alpr 
be simpli to store data for potenti use dure 
a futur investigation. for example, one ser- 
geant describ a “bodi dump” (the dispos 
of a dead body) that occur in a remot 
locat near a tourist attract where there 
be an alpr. By search alpr read 
within the time frame that polic determin 
the bodi be disposed, they captur three 
plates—on from utah, one from new mex- 
ico, and one from compton. the sergeant 
explain that assum the compton car be 
most like to be involved, they ran the plate, 
saw the name it be regist under, search 
the name in calgang (gang database), saw 
that the individu be affili with a gang 
current at war with the victim’ gang, and 
use that inform to establish probabl 
caus to obtain a search warrant, go to the 
address, find the car, search the car for trace 
evidence, and arrest the suspect. 

although lapd and palantir employe 
frequent told me that to be “in the system,” 
a person need to have have crimin justic 
contact, the use of network diagram and the 

inclus of alpr data in the palantir plat- 
form offer clear exampl in which individu- 
al with no crimin justic contact be 
includ in law enforc databases. 

institut data system are 
integr 

finally, the prolifer of digit record 
make it possibl to merg data from previ- 
ousli separ institut sourc into an 
integrated, structur system in which dispa- 
rate data point be display and searchabl 
in relat to one another, and individu can 
be cross-referenc across databases. thi 
integr facilit one of the most trans- 
form featur of the big data landscape: 
the creep of crimin justic surveil into 
other, non–crimin justic institutions. func- 
tion creep—th phenomenon of data origi- 
nalli collect for one purpos be use for 
another—contribut to a substanti increas 
in the data polic have access to. indeed, law 
enforc be follow an institut data 
imper (fourcad and heali 2017), 

figur 4. network in palantir 
source: palantir technologies. 



18 american sociolog review 00(0) 

secur routin access to a wide rang of 
data on everyday activ from non-polic 
databases. befor palantir, offic and ana- 
lyst conduct predominantli one-off 
search in “siloed” systems: one to look up a 
rap sheet, anoth to search a licens plate, 
anoth to search for traffic citations, and so 
on. the palantir platform integr dispar 
data sourc and make it possibl to quickli 
search across databases. 

express hi faith in the department’ 
invest in the platform, one captain told 
me, “we’v dump hundr of thousand 
into that [palantir]. . . . they’r gonna take 
over the world. . . . I promis you they’r 
gonna take over the world.” dure my field- 
work, there be more than 1,300 train pal- 
antir user in the region. new data sourc be 
incorpor regularly, includ inform 
collect by the department, extern data col- 
lect by other govern agencies, and pri- 
vate collect data the depart purchases. 
remark on the growth, one captain said: 

i’m so happi with how big palantir got. . . . 
I mean it’ just everi time I see the entri 

screen [figur 6] where you log on there’ 
anoth icon about anoth databas that’ 
be add . . . they now have be work 
with palantir to develop a databas of all the 
foreclosur properti . . . they just go out 
and found some public data on foreclosures, 
drag it in, and now they’r map it 
where it would be rel to our crime data 
and stuff. 

the palantir platform allow user to 
organ and visual structur and unstruc- 
ture data content (e.g., e-mails, pdfs, and 
photos) through “tagging,” the process of 
label and link object and entiti to 
identifi emerg relationships. By tag 
object and entities—including, but not lim- 
ite to, persons, phone numbers, addresses, 
document such a law enforc report 
or tip and leads, and call for service—and 
display the data spatially, temporally, or 
topically, user can see data point in context 
and make new connections. 

anoth import interag data inte- 
gration effort be the initi to creat an 
enterpris master person index (empi) in 

figur 5. plot alpr read 
source: palantir technologies. 



brayn 19 

l.a. county. l.a. empi would creat a singl 
view of a client across all govern system 
and agencies; all of an individual’ interac- 
tion with law enforcement, social services, 
health services, mental health services, and 
child and famili servic would be merg 
onto one uniqu id. although interviewe 
work in the county’ inform technol- 
ogi offic state the explicit motiv 
behind the initi be to improv servic 
delivery, such initi effect serv the 
latent function of extend the govern 
and social control capac of the crimin 
justic system into other institutions. 

I encount sever other exampl of 
law enforc use extern data origin 
collect for non–crimin justic purposes, 
includ data from repossess and collec- 
tion agencies; social media, foreclosure, and 
electron toll pa data; and address and 
usag inform from util bills. respond- 
ent also indic they be work on 
integr hospital, pay park lot, and 

univers camera feeds; rebat data such a 
address inform from contact len rebates; 
and call data from pizza chains, includ 
names, addresses, and phone number from 
papa john and pizza hut. In some instances, 
it be simpli easi for law enforc to pur- 
chase privat collect data than to reli on 
in-hous data becaus there be few consti- 
tution protections, report requirements, 
and appel check on privat sector surveil- 
lanc and data collect (pasqual 2014). 
moreover, respond explained, privat 
collect data be sometim more up-to-date. 

It be worth note that such data integr 
be not seamless. merg data from differ 
sourc and creat interoper system be 
part of the invis labor that make big data 
analyt possible. one civilian employe 
lamented, “you alway forget about the data 
guy . . . [the] guy that do all the dirti work 
be usual forgotten. i’m that guy.” moreover, 
effort at acquir new data be not receiv 
evenli throughout the department. A vocal 

figur 6. palantir homepag 
source: lapd. 



20 american sociolog review 00(0) 

minor of interviewe explain they do 
not believ leadership be fulli think 
through the implic of collect such a 
wide rang of new data. A civilian employe 
complain about the seduct of new tech- 
nology, saying: “we tend to just say, ‘let’ 
just go for the sexi tool,’ right? . . . We just 
never think about to what end.” He added, 

mayb we shouldn’t collect thi informa- 
tion. mayb we shouldn’t add consum 
information. mayb we shouldn’t get every- 
body’ twitter feed in. . . . all we’r do 
right now is, “let’ just collect more and 
more and more data and someth good 
will just happen.” and that’ I think that’ 
kind of wish thinking. 

law enforcement’ adopt of data and 
analyt tool without a specif technic pur- 
pose also surfac dure my time at surveil- 
lanc industri conferences. when I first 
observ softwar repres interact 
with potenti law enforc customers, I 
assum law enforc would tell softwar 
repres their need and ask how the 
product could help them achiev their opera- 
tional goals. however, the invers pattern be 
more frequent the case: softwar representa- 
tive demonstr the use of their platform in 
a non-law enforcement—usu military— 
context, and then ask local law enforc 
whether they would be interest in a similar 
applic in their local context. In other 
words, instead of fill analyt gap or tech- 
nical void identifi by law enforcement, 
softwar repres help creat new 
kind of institut demand. 

discussion: big data AS 
social 
thi articl draw on uniqu data to offer an 
on-the-ground account of big data surveil- 
lance. provid a case studi of the lo 
angel polic depart (lapd), it offer 
insight into the reason whi the use of big 
data analyt spread throughout the organi- 
zation, includ factor particular to the 

lapd such a consent decre mandates, but 
also broader isomorph shift (dimaggio 
and powel 1983) toward use of predict 
analyt across organiz fields. In ana- 
lyze how the lapd us big data in their 
surveil activities, I argu it be both con- 
tinuou and transformative: the adopt of 
advanc analyt facilit amplif 
of exist surveil practices, but also 
fundament chang daili operations. I 
describ five key shift in practic associ 
with adopt of big data analytics, each of 
which fall on differ point on the contin- 
uum between law enforc and intelli- 
genc activities. wherea the person-bas 
point system and place-bas predict algo- 
rithm be larg quantifi recapitul 
of “traditional” (marx 2016) surveillance, the 
inter-institut integr of data and pro- 
lifer of dragnet surveil practices— 
includ the use of data on individu with 
no direct polic contact and data gather 
from institut typic not associ with 
crime control—repres fundament trans- 
format in the veri natur of surveillance. 

big data and associ new technolog 
tool permit unprecedentedli broad and deep 
surveillance. By broad, I mean surveil 
capabl of passiv track a larg number 
of people. inform that would previous 
have be unknown to law enforc 
becaus it be too labor intens to retriev 
be more readili available, and individu 
previous unknown to law enforc be 
now part of the corpu through dragnet sur- 
veillanc and data collect by non–crimin 
justic organizations. By deep, I mean abl to 
track one individu more intens over 
time, includ across differ institut 
settings. the intend and unintend social 
consequ of new surveil practic 
have implic for social inequality, law, 
and futur research on big data surveil in 
other fields. 

implic for social inequ 

the role of the crimin justic system in the 
reproduct of inequ have receiv 



brayn 21 

consider attent in the literatur (for a 
review, see laub 2014). however, the impact 
of the use of big data surveil on inequal- 
iti remain an open empir question. the 
use of new surveil technolog could 
either reduc or reinforc exist inequali- 
ties. By contribut new insight into how 
big data play out on the ground in policing, 
thi research help adjud between the 
two possibilities. 

On the one hand, big data analyt may be 
a mean by which to amelior persist 
inequ in policing. data can be mar- 
shale to replac unparticular suspicion of 
racial minor and human exagger of 
pattern with less bia predict of risk. 
social psycholog research demonstr 
that human be “cognit misers” (fisk and 
taylor 1991) who reli on shortcuts—such a 
the conflat of black and crimin 
(quillian and pager 2001)—to understand the 
world. becaus stereotyp have the most cog- 
nitiv util in the face of incomplet informa- 
tion, if big data can be util to provid more 
complet information, it may lead offic to 
reli less on stereotyp about race and class. In 
that sense, the use of big data may serv to 
reduc hyper-surveil of minor neigh- 
borhood and the consequ eros of com- 
muniti trust (sampson and bartusch 1998). 
big data may also be use to “polic the 
police.” digit trail be suscept to over- 
sight. therefore, aggreg data on polic 
practic may shed light on systemat pattern 
and institut practic previous dis- 
miss a individual-level bias, ultim pro- 
vide an opportun to increas transpar 
and accountability. however, transpar and 
account do not flow automat from 
big data policing. data-bas surveil be 
less visibl than tradit street polic 
method (joh 2016) and be emb in power 
structures. the outcom of struggl between 
law enforcement, civilians, and inform 
technolog companies—who increasingli 
own the storag platform and proprietari 
algorithm use in data analysis—wil play a 
role in determin whether big data polic 
will amelior or exacerb inequalities. 

On the other hand, thi research highlight 
how data-driven surveil practic may 
be implic in the reproduct of inequal- 
iti in at least three ways: by deepen the 
surveil of individu alreadi under sus- 
picion; widen the crimin justic dragnet 
unequally; and lead peopl to avoid “sur- 
veilling” institut that be fundament to 
social integration. first, mathemat polic 
practic serv to place individu alreadi 
under suspicion under new and deeper form 
of surveillance, while appear to be objec- 
tive, or, in the word of one captain, “just 
math.” despit the state intent of the point 
system to avoid legal contest bia in 
polic practices, it hide both intent and 
unintent bia in polic and creat a 
self-perpetu cycle: if individu have a 
high point value, they be under heighten 
surveil and therefor have a great like- 
lihood of be stopped, further increas 
their point value. such practic hinder the 
abil of individu alreadi in the crimin 
justic system from be further drawn into 
the surveil net, while obscur the role 
of enforc in shape risk scores. more- 
over, individu live in low-income, 
minor area have a high probabl of 
their “risk” be quantifi than those in 
more advantag neighborhood where the 
polic be not conduct point-driven sur- 
veillance. importantly, thi quantifi modal- 
iti of social control have consequ that 
reach beyond individu with high point 
values. field interview card record informa- 
tion not onli about the individu in question, 
but also inform on peopl the individu 
be with. the exponenti captur of person 
data beyond the primari individu involv 
in the polic encount be a strateg mean of 
channel more individu into the system, 
thu facilit futur tracking. 

wherea the point system be consequenti 
for racial and class inequality, if not imple- 
ment effectively,12 place-bas algorithm 
may exacerb neighborhood inequalities. 
histor crime data be incomplete; esti- 
mate of unreport crime rang from less 
than 17 percent to over 68 percent, depend 



22 american sociolog review 00(0) 

on the offens (langton et al. 2012). more- 
over, crime data be not miss at random. 
therefore, there be systemat bia in the train- 
ing data: crime that take place in public place 
be more visibl to polic and therefor more 
like to be record (duster 1997); individu- 
al and group who do not trust the polic be 
less like to report crime (sampson and bar- 
tusch 1998); and polic focu their attent 
and resourc on black commun at a dis- 
proportion high rate rel to drug use 
and crime rate (beckett et al. 2005). these 
social dynam inform the histor crime 
data that be fed into the predict polic 
algorithm. however, onc they be input a 
data, the predict appear impartial; human 
judgment be hidden in the black box (pasqual 
2014) under a patina of objectivity. 

uncheck predict may lead to an 
algorithm form of confirm bias, and 
subsequently, a misalloc of resources. 
they may justifi the over-pol of minor- 
iti commun and potenti take away 
resourc from individu and area invis 
to data collect sensor or subject to sys- 
temat underreporting. put differently, the 
mechan for inclus in crimin justic 
databas determin the surveil pattern 
themselves. predict model be performa- 
tive, creat a feedback loop in which they 
not onli predict event such a crime or 
polic contact, but also contribut to their 
futur occurrence.13 

second, new digit surveil prac- 
tice broaden the scope of peopl law enforce- 
ment can track. thi can be understood a a 
new form of “net widening” (cohen 1985), 
effect widen the crimin justic 
dragnet, and do so unequally. consid 
alprs, one of the primari mean of track 
peopl without polic contact. even though 
alpr be dragnet surveil tool that 
collect inform on everyone, rather than 
mere those under suspicion, the likelihood 
of be input into the system be not ran- 
domli distributed. crime and enforc 
pattern lead to unequ data captur across 
individuals, groups, and the city. alpr be 

deploy base on depart crime statist 
(i.e., to high crime areas), rais similar 
question to those pose earli about unequ 
enforc and report practic along 
line of race, class, and neighborhood. In that 
sense, alpr dataset be investigatori tool 
for law enforcement, but they be dispropor- 
tionat “popul by the movement of 
particular groups” (renan 2016:1059). simi- 
larly, the abil to build out secondari sur- 
veillanc network in palantir have implic 
for inequality, a minor individu and 
individu in poor neighborhood have a 
high probabl of be in the primari 
(and thu secondary) surveil net than do 
peopl in neighborhood where the polic be 
not conduct point-driven or other data- 
intens form of policing. 

how be unequ mechan for inclus 
in the surveil net consequenti for social 
inequality? recal the oper theori from a 
detect that if peopl be not do anyth 
wrong, the polic should not be look them 
up mani time over the cours of their lives. 
however, queri be not raw data (gitelman 
2013); rather, they are, in part, a product of 
enforc practices. empir research 
consist demonstr that stop-and-queri 
pattern be unequ distribut by race, 
class, and neighborhood (epp, maynard- 
moody, and haider-markel 2014). quantifi 
practic may thu serv to exacerb inequal- 
iti in stop patterns, creat arrest statist 
need to justifi stereotypes, and ultim 
lead to self-fulfil statist propheci 
(merton 1948). moreover, a polic contact be 
the entri point into the crimin justic system, 
the digit feedback loop associ with pre- 
dictiv polic may ultim justifi the 
growth and perpetu of the carcer state. 

one might argu that if you have noth 
to hide, be includ in polic databas be 
noth to fear. however, onc individu 
be in the primari or secondari surveil 
net, they can becom intellig target and 
link to futur data points. By virtu of 
be in the system, individu be more 
likely—correctli or incorrectly—to be 



brayn 23 

identifi a suspicious. consid how the 
quantif of previou stop in the point 
system serf a justif for futur stops, 
or how the detect suggest a man be 
suspici becaus hi name have be que- 
rie multipl times. use a seri of data 
point to reconstruct an individual’ inten- 
tion and behaviors, whether incrimin or 
exculpatory, rest on the assumpt of an 
infal state and of actor who run search 
without error or prejudice. much like in dna 
databas (duster 2005; hindmarsh and 
prainsack 2010; lynch et al. 2008), in order 
to be a hit, one have to be in the databas in the 
first place. unequ rate of databas inclu- 
sion can have real consequences—african 
american be seven time more like than 
white to be wrongli convict of murder 
(gross, possley, and stephen 2017). there- 
fore, analyz the feeder mechan by 
which individu be channel into crimin 
justic databas help u good understand 
how inequ produc by differenti sur- 
veillanc may be magnifi a individu be 
process through the crimin justic 
system. 

third, integr external, non-polic 
data into the law enforc corpu have 
unanticip consequences. although inte- 
grate system creat new opportun for 
servic delivery, they also make surveil 
possibl across formerli discret institut 
boundaries. By use other institutions’ data, 
crimin justic surveil practic may 
have a chill effect, deter peopl from 
use such institut and therebi subvert 
their origin mandates. for example, indi- 
vidual wari of crimin justic surveil 
may avoid interact with import institu- 
tion where they would leav a digit trace. 
previou research demonstr that individu- 
al involv in the crimin justic system 
(i.e., who have be stop by police, 
arrested, convicted, or incarcerated) engag 
in “system avoidance,” systemat avoid- 
ing surveil institut such a medical, 
financial, educational, and labor market insti- 
tution that keep formal record (i.e., put 
them “in the system”) (brayn 2014). given 

that involv with the crimin justic 
system be highli stratified, the neg con- 
sequenc of system avoidance—for futur 
health outcomes, financi self-sufficiency, 
acquisit of human capital, and upward 
econom mobility—wil be similarli dispro- 
portion distributed, thu exacerb 
ani preexist inequ for an expand 
group of alreadi disadvantag individuals. 

thi research build on work on label 
theory, extend the relationship between the 
stigma of crimin justic contact and ine- 
qualiti into the digit age (becker 1963; 
brayn 2014; goffman 2014; goffman 1963; 
kohler-hausmann 2013; lyon 2006; pager 
2007; rio 2011; stuart 2016; wakefield and 
wildeman 2013; western and pettit 2005). 
the integr of record may effect 
extend the mark of a crimin record (pager 
2007)—or mere the mark of crimin jus- 
tice contact—into other institutions. thi 
creep of data across institut context can 
lead to “cascad disadvantages” (pasqual 
2014:218; see also gandi 2009). As individu- 
al leav more digit traces, a “new economi 
of moral judgement” (fourcad and heali 
2017:24) becom possible. build on 
weber’ concept of class situation, fourcad 
and heali (2013) argu that institut now 
use actuari techniqu to track, sort, and 
categor individu into “classif sit- 
uations” with differ reward and punish- 
ment attached. these classif situat 
differenti shape life chanc (see also 
bowker and star 2000). for example, classi- 
fy individu a low or high risk for 
crime, terrorist activity, loan default, or medi- 
cal condit structur not onli if and how 
they will be surveilled, but also their life 
chanc more generally. thi research begin 
to account for how the mark process may 
be chang in the age of digit policing, 
and how the big data environ creat 
potenti farther-reach digit collat- 
eral consequ of involv in the 
crimin justic system. 

In summary, the burden of new surveil 
practic be not born equally, nor be the error 
they produc (guzik 2009). that said, thi 



24 american sociolog review 00(0) 

research do not necessarili suggest the polic 
intent use big data maliciously. rather, 
a baroca and selbst (2016) argue, discrimina- 
tion may be, at least in part, an artifact of the 
data collect and analysi process itself. 
algorithm decis procedur can “repro- 
duce exist pattern of discrimination, inherit 
the prejudic of prior decis makers, or sim- 
pli reflect the widespread bia that persist in 
society” (baroca and selbst 2016:674). under- 
stand each step of data collect and analy- 
si be crucial for understand how data 
systems—despit be thought of a objec- 
tive, quantified, and unbiased—may inherit the 
bia of their creator and users. As an institut 
histor implic in the reproduct of 
inequality, understand the intend and 
unintend consequ of machine-learn 
decis and new surveil technolog in 
the crimin justic system be of paramount 
importance. 

implic for law 

technolog tool for surveil be far 
outpac legal and regulatori respons to 
the new surveil landscape. therefore, the 
find from thi project have import 
implic for law. first, current privaci 
laws—such a the privaci act of 1974—are 
anachronist becaus they larg concern 
control at the point of data collection. with 
the increas capac to store vast amount 
of data for signific period of time, privaci 
law now must also account for function 
creep, protect individu from potenti 
futur secondari us of their data. relatedly, 
law enforc routin purchas pri- 
vate collect data, blur the line 
between public and privat and highlight 
the import of revisit third-parti doc- 
trine in the digit age.14 

second, use of big data for predict ana- 
lytic challeng the tradit paradigm of 
fourth amend law, which be transac- 
tional: it focu on one-off interact 
between law enforc and a suspect. 
however, polic surveil be increasingli 
programmatic: it be ongoing, cumulative, and 

sometim suspicionless (renan 2016). In 
term of alprs, for example, “what begin 
a more gener collect can morph 
into someth quit differ when the gov- 
ernment run individu search in it 
datasets” (renan 2016:1053). therefore, it be 
an open question whether cumul surveil- 
lanc should requir differ legal frame- 
works, such a administr law, “from 
those that govern each isol step” (renan 
2016:1058), name crimin procedure. 

third, when big data—such a predict 
polic forecasts—ar combin with small 
data—such a tradit individu sus- 
picion base on particular fact about a 
suspect—it effect make it easi for law 
enforc to meet the reason suspicion 
standard in practice. In the word of one cap- 
tain, “some offic somewher if thi [predic- 
tive policing] get big enough be go to say, 
‘okay, everybodi in the box be open season,’ 
you know? and that’ not the case.” there- 
fore, legal scholar such a ferguson (2015: 
336) suggest the court should “requir a 
high level of detail and correl use the 
insight and capabl of big data.” 

fourth, dragnet surveil tool such a 
alpr repres a prolifer of pre- 
warrant surveil and make everyday mass 
surveil possibl at an unpreced 
scale. pre-crim data can be mine for link 
onc crimin suspicion come into play. 
onc in a database, a suspect can repeatedli 
be surveilled; law enforc can retroac- 
tive search alpr data and identifi indi- 
viduals, vehicles, times, and places, rather 
than start to gather inform on them 
onli onc they come under suspicion. the 
retroact natur of polic in an era of 
dragnet data collect mean inform be 
routin accumul and file be lie in 
wait. In that sense, individu lead incrimi- 
nate lives—daili activities, now codifi a 
data, can be marshal a evid ex post 
facto. the prolifer of pre-warr sur- 
veillanc tool also creat new opportun 
for parallel construction, the process of build- 
ing a separ evidentiari base for a crimin 
investig to conceal how the investig 



brayn 25 

began, if it involv warrantless surveil 
or other inadmiss evidence. 

finally, previou practic constraints, 
which place natur limit on the scope of 
surveillance, be less relev in light of new 
dragnet tools. one new analyt techniqu or 
surveil technolog on it own may not be 
consequential, but the combin power of 
using, for example, the person-bas point 
system in conjunct with alpr data in 
conjunct with network diagram in pal- 
antir grant author a level of insight into 
an individual’ life that histor would 
have constitut a fourth amend search 
and thu requir a warrant. however, 
becaus no one of those surveil practic 
fall outsid the paramet of the law in iso- 
lation, neither do their combination.15 In 
that sense, intellig be essenti pre- 
warrant surveillance. detect and prosecu- 
tor rare find a “smoke gun,” a member of 
palantir’ legal counsel explained, but they 
can now build up a sequenc of event that 
they be previous unabl to. By “integrat- 
ing data into a singl ontology,” he continued, 
user can draw connect between actor 
and depict a coher scheme. hunch that 
would be insuffici ground for obtain a 
warrant can be retroact back up use 
exist data, and queri can be justifi in 
hindsight after data confirm offic suspi- 
cions. instead of need to justifi to a judg 
whi they requir a warrant, law enforc 
can first take advantag of the surveil 
opportun new technolog provide. 

implic for research in other 
field 

big data be be util for surveil 
practic in a wide rang of institut 
domain beyond policing, includ but not 
limit to health, finance, credit, marketing, 
insurance, education, immigration, defense, 
and activism. although thi studi focu on 
law enforcement, big data surveil be not 
someth over which the lapd have exclu- 
sive domain. rather, thi case reflect broader 
institut shift toward the use of emerg 

technolog and advanc analytics. think- 
ing beyond policing, futur research may 
consid how big data surveil practic 
identifi in thi studi may oper in similar 
or differ way across fields. 

draw from work in surveil studi 
help u systemat compar use of the new- 
est modal of surveillance—big data—across 
domains. inform by lyon’ (2003) theori of 
surveil a social sort and marx’ (2016) 
discuss of surveil means, goals, and 
data attributes, I offer three concret question 
for futur research that could help u good 
understand the use of big data for surveil 
across institut domains: whi be big data 
surveil adopt (goals)? how be big data 
surveil conduct (means)? what inter- 
vention be make base on big data surveil- 
lance, and to what consequ (ends)? tabl 1 
summar these questions. 

first, whi be big data surveil 
adopted? what institut goal be it 
intend to achieve? lyon (2003:1) argu 
that the organiz imper for surveil- 
lanc be one of social sorting: “surveil 
today sort peopl into categories, assign 
worth or risk, in way that have real effect on 
their life-ch . . . it be a vital mean of 
sort popul for discriminatori treat- 
ment” (see also ericson and haggerti 1997; 
rule 2007). He identifi differ categori 
of surveillance, each of which have differ 
mandat and classificatori goals. actor in 
the crimin justic system, for example, 
engag in “categor suspicion” (lyon 
2003), collect inform to classifi indi- 
vidual accord to risk and to identifi 
threat to law and order. the purpos of sur- 
veillanc in other institutions, however, may 
not be categor suspicion but rather “cate- 
goric seduction”—classifi custom for 
target marketing, financi services, or 
credit (lyon 2003; see also gandi [1993] on 
the “panopt sort”)—or “categor care”— 
surveil in health and welfar organiza- 
tion aim at improv servic through 
good coordin of person data (ball and 
webster 2007). analyz chang and conti- 
nuiti in the structur of relationship 



26 american sociolog review 00(0) 

between agent of surveil and those who 
be surveil (marx 2016) may help u more 
fulli understand the social process of big data 
surveil and it consequ for social 
stratification. 

wherea surveil goal have not fun- 
dament chang much over the past cen- 
tury, surveil mean have transform 
considerably. By provid a detail analysi 
of how the mean of surveil have 
chang in the age of big data, thi studi may 
inform futur research on big data surveil- 
lanc in other fields. are the five shift in 
practic identifi in thi study—discretion- 
ari to quantifi risk assessments, explana- 
tori to predict analytics, query-bas to 
alert-bas systems, moder to low inclu- 
sion thresholds, and dispar to integr 
databases—occur in other institut 
contexts? for example, to what extent be 
data collect beyond their proxim 

institut environ be use in 
healthcar or finance? 

the goal and mean of big data surveil- 
lanc inform the final question pose for 
futur research: what be the end of big data 
surveillance? what do institut actor do 
base on insight glean from big data sur- 
veillance, and with what consequence? sur- 
veillanc involv extract inform 
from differ flow (deleuz and guattari 
1987; haggerti and ericson 2000; marx 
2016). distinct inform flow be then 
reassembl into a “data double”—a digit 
approxim of individu base on the 
electron trace they leav (poster 1990:97)— 
which be use to decid on differenti treat- 
ment. digit score and rank can be 
understood a a form of capit (fourcad and 
heali 2017), use to determin who the 
polic stop, who credit bureau determin a 
credit-worthy, and who public assist 

tabl 1. framework for analyz big data surveil across institut context 

goal mean end 

type of 
surveil 

institut 
field 

relationship 
between 
individu 
and 
institut 

shift in 
surveil 
practic 
associ with 
big data 

institut 
intervent 

consequ 
for inequ 

categor 
suspicion 

crimin 
justice, 
intellig 

classifi 
individu 
accord to 
risk; potenti 
a criminals/ 
terrorist 

1) discretionari 
to quantifi 
risk assess 

2) explanatori 
to predict 
analyt 

3) query-bas 
to alert-bas 
system 

4) moder to 
low inclus 
threshold 

5) dispar to 
integr 
data 

marking, 
apprehension, 
social control 

stigma, spillov 
into other 
institut 

categor 
seduct 

finance, 
marketing, 
credit 

classifi 
individu 
accord to 
their valu to 
companies; 
potenti a 
custom 

differ 
products, 
perks, access 
to credit, 
opportunities, 
constraint 

upward or 
downward 
econom 
mobility; 
reproduc 
current 
pattern 

categor 
care 

medic care, 
public 
assist 

classifi 
individu 
accord to 
their need; 
potenti a 
client 

person 
medicine, 
welfarist 
servic 
deliveri 

may reduc 
inequ 
except when 
intersect with 
suspicion or 
seduct 





brayn 27 

agenc deem elig for benefits. simpli 
put, one’ surveil profil structur the 
type of communications, opportunities, con- 
straints, and care one receives. big data sur- 
veillanc could therefor have stratifi 
effect if individu in posit of structur 
disadvantag be more like to be subject to 
harm form of surveillance, and those in 
posit of structur advantag be more 
like to be target by advantag surveil- 
lanc and classif scheme (fourcad 
and heali 2017). therefore, categor sus- 
picion, seduction, and care may have veri 
differ implic for social inequality, 
depend on what institut actor do 
base on the intellig acquir through 
big data surveillance. 

thi articl demonstr that in the digit 
age, individu leav data trace hundr of 
time throughout the day, each of which con- 
tribut to the corpu of big data that a grow 
number of institut use for decision- 
making. institut actor make decis 
base on big data may assum that data doubl 
be more accurate, or unbiased, represent 
of a person’ profil than be those glean 
from “small” data, such a person observa- 
tions. however, thi perspect obscur the 
social side of big data surveillance. systemat 
bias—wheth intent or unintentional— 
exist in train data use for machin learn- 
ing algorithms, and it may be an artifact of 
human discret or the data mine process 
itself. moreover, the implic of fals posi- 
tive and fals neg associ with big 
data surveil vari wide across domains. 
the stake for be wrongli arrest for a 
crime you do not commit be veri differ 
from receiv a movi recommend not to 
your taste. furthermore, categori of surveil- 
lanc be not mutual exclus in the age of 
big data, a inform can be share across 
previous separ institut boundaries. 
for example, electron medic record be 
origin creat to improv prescript drug 
and care coordination, but they be increas- 
ingli use to polic the illicit use and sale of 
prescript drugs. the place where catego- 
rie of surveil intersect, and therefor 

have ambigu implic for inequality, 
may be particularli fruit site for futur 
sociolog inquiry. 

finally, futur research may examin the 
polit economi underpin the procure- 
ment of analyt softwar that organ 
use for big data surveillance. examin the 
genealog of surveil technologies, for 
example, reveal that mani of the resourc 
for develop big data analyt come from 
feder funds. In the law enforc context, 
those grant quickli becom subsum into 
polic organizations’ oper budgets. 
therefore, depart have an incent to 
continu use big data—or appear to be 
use it—even if it be not an effect mean 
of solv the organization’ first-ord prob- 
lems, such a reduc crime. 

understand the implic of big data 
surveil be more complex than simpli 
know who be surveil more or less. 
instead, we need to understand who be sur- 
veill by whom, in what way, and for what 
purpose. how surveil structur life 
chanc may differ accord to the goals, 
means, and end involved. although surveil- 
lanc be a generaliz organiz imper- 
ative, big data be chang the mean of 
surveillance. accordingly, thi articl help u 
good understand how big data surveil be 
conducted, and call for systemat research 
on the relationship between the goals, means, 
and end of big data surveil across insti- 
tution domains. 

conclus 
through a case studi of the lo angel 
polic department, thi articl analyz the 
role of big data in surveil practices. By 
social situat big data, I examin whi it 
be adopted, how it be used, and what the 
implic of it use are. focus on the 
interplay between surveil practices, law, 
and technolog offer new insight into social 
control and inequality. I argu that big data 
particip in and reflect exist social 
structures. far from elimin human dis- 
cretion and bias, big data repres a new 



28 american sociolog review 00(0) 

form of capit that be both a social product 
and a social resource. what data law enforce- 
ment collects, their method for analyz 
and interpret it, and the way it inform 
their practic be all part of a fundament 
social process. character predict 
model a “just math,” and fetish com- 
putat a an object process, obscur the 
social side of algorithm decision-making. 
individuals’ interpret of data occur in 
preexist institutional, legal, and social set- 
tings, and it be through that interpret pro- 
ce that power dynam come into play. 

use of big data have the potenti to amelio- 
rate discriminatori practices, but these find- 
ing suggest implement be of paramount 
importance. As organiz theori and lit- 
eratur from scienc and technolog studi 
suggests, when new technolog be overlaid 
onto an old organiz structure, long- 
stand problem shape themselv to the 
contour of the new technology, and new unin- 
tend consequ be generated. the pro- 
ce of transform individu action into 
“objective” data rais fundament socio- 
logic question that thi research onli begin 
to address. In mani ways, it transpos classic 
concern from the sociolog of quantif 
about simplification, decontextualization, and 
the privileg of measur complex social 
phenomenon onto the big data landscape. 

surveil be alway ambiguous; it be 
implic in both social inclus and exclu- 
sion, and it creat both opportun and 
constraints. the way in which surveil 
help achiev organiz goal and struc- 
ture life chanc may differ accord to the 
individu and institut involved. exam- 
ine the mean of big data surveil 
across institut domain be an open and 
time line of inquiry, becaus onc a new 
technolog be dissemin in an institut 
setting, it be difficult to scale back. 

acknowledg 
I wish to thank devah pager for her invalu support and 
guidance. I be also grate for the mani help comment 
I receiv from paul dimaggio, janet vertesi, kim lane 
scheppele, maria abascal, david pedulla, becki pettit, the 

social media collect at microsoft research, and the 
asr editor and anonym reviewers. finally, I wish to 
thank anonym individu within the lo angel 
polic depart for make thi research possible. 

fund 
thi research be fund by the horowitz foundat 
for social policy. addit support be provid by 
grant, 5 r24 hd042849, award to the popul 
research center at the univers of texa at austin by 
the eunic kennedi shriver nation institut of child 
health and human development. 

note 
1. for example, one divis in the valley begin use 

predpol (predict policing) in 2012, and nine 
other divis follow suit between then and 
march 2015. 

2. more than 25 offic in rampart division’ special 
oper anti-gang unit, c.r.a.s.h., be investi- 
gate or charged, and over 100 crimin case be 
overturn due to polic misconduct. 

3. A consent decre be a bind court order memori- 
aliz an agreement between parti in exchang 
for an end to a civil litig or a withdraw of a 
crimin charge. 

4. brown v. plata be a 2011 u.s. suprem court deci- 
sion hold that the overcrowd of california 
prison and lack of access to adequ healthcar 
violat prisoners’ eighth amend constitu- 
tional rights. 

5. To date, one studi have evalu the efficaci of 
oper laser (uchida and swatt 2015). It 
found a reduct in crime in report district 
that adopt both person-bas and location-bas 
approaches. the program have not yet be subject to 
extern evaluation; the author be the presid of 
and senior research associ at justic and secu- 
riti strategies, who design oper laser. 

6. block quot be drawn from audiotaped, tran- 
scribe interviews. 

7. consensu stop may be conduct at ani time 
when the polic lack the “specif and articul 
facts” (terri v. ohio 392 u.s. at 21) that justifi 
detent or arrest. 

8. predpol’ algorithm be publish by mohler and 
colleagu in 2015. 

9. In line with other law enforc agencies, the 
lapd be a hierarch organ and employ- 
ee be usual subject to tight manageri con- 
trol. however, there be more between-divis 
variat in the use of algorithm than I origin 
expected. big data technolog be not adopt 
in the 21 area divis and the special divi- 
sion at the same time, larg due to the autonomi 
grant to captain in each divis dure the earli 
stage of algorithm policing. entrepreneuri 



brayn 29 

captain who be earli adopt use algorithm 
techniqu larg of their own volition, but a pre- 
dictiv polic be pilot in more divisions, one 
captain explain to me that he be start to feel 
pressur to use it in hi division, becaus he do not 
want to be the last to sign on. 

10. In a random control field trial, mohler and 
colleagu (2015) found predpol’ algorithm out- 
perform crime analyst predict crime, and 
that polic patrol use algorithm forecast- 
ing lead to signific reduct in crime volume. 
the algorithm have not yet be subject to extern 
evaluation; the author includ co-found and 
stockhold of predpol. 

11. after protract negotiations, avl be turn on 
in central bureau in march 2015. 

12. place-bas algorithm be most effect (and least 
biased) when predict crime with high report 
rates, such a motor vehicl theft. 

13. for relat work on perform in a differ field— 
finance—se mackenzie, muniesa, and siu (2007). 

14. accord to unit state v. miller (1939) and 
smith v. maryland (1979), the third-parti doctrin 
maintain that “when an individu voluntarili 
share inform with third parties, like telephon 
companies, banks, or even other individuals, the 
govern can acquir that inform from the 
third-parti absent a warrant” (execut offic of 
the presid 2014). 

15. see justic sotomayor’ concur opinion in 
unit state v. jone (2012) and joh (2016). 

refer 
angwin, julia. 2014. dragnet nation: A quest for pri- 

vacy, security, and freedom in a world of relentless 
surveillance. new york: time books. 

ball, kirstie, and frank webster, eds. 2007. the intensi- 
ficat of surveillance: crime, terror & warfar 
in the inform age. london, uk: pluto press. 

barley, stephen R. 1986. “technolog a an occas for 
structuring: evid from observ of CT scan- 
ner and the social order of radiolog departments.” 
administr scienc quarterli 31(1):78–108. 

barley, stephen R. 1996. “technician in the workplace: 
ethnograph evid for bring work into orga- 
nizat studies.” administr scienc quarterli 
41(3):404–441. 

barocas, solon, and andrew D. selbst. 2016. “big data’ 
dispar impact.” california law review 104:671–732. 

becker, howard S. 1963. outsiders: studi in the soci- 
olog of deviance. new york: free press. 

beckett, katherine, kri nyrop, lori pfingst, and melissa 
bowen. 2005. “drug use, drug possess arrests, 
and the question of race: lesson from seattle.” 
social problem (52)3:419–41. 

bittner, egon. 1967. “the polic on skid-row: A studi 
of peac keeping.” american sociolog review 
32(5):699–715. 

bonczar, thoma p., and erinn J. herberman. 2014. 
“probat and parol in the unit states, 2013.” 
washington, dc: bureau of justic statistics. 

bowker, geoffrey c., and susan leigh star. 2000. sort- 
ing thing out: classif and it consequences. 
cambridge, ma: mit press. 

boyd, danah, and kate crawford. 2012. “critic ques- 
tion for big data: provoc for a cultural, tech- 
nological, and scholarli phenomenon.” information, 
commun & societi 15(5):662–79. 

braga, anthoni a., and david L. weisburd. 2010. polic- 
ing problem places: crime hot spot and effect 
prevention. new york: oxford univers press. 

braverman, harry. 1974. labor and monopoli capital: 
the degrad of work in the twentieth century. 
new york: monthli review press. 

brayne, sarah. 2014. “surveil and system avoid- 
ance: crimin justic contact and institut 
attachment.” american sociolog review 79(3): 
367–91. 

brown v. plata. 2011. 563 u.s. 493. 
browne, simone. 2015. dark matters: On the surveil- 

lanc of blackness. durham, nc: duke univers 
press. 

carson, E. ann. 2015. “prison in 2014.” washington, 
dc: bureau of justic statistics. 

christin, angèle. 2016. “from daguerreotyp to algo- 
rithms: machines, expertise, and three form of 
objectivity.” acm comput & societi 46(1): 
27–32. 

cohen, stanley. 1985. vision of social control: crime, 
punish and classification. malden, ma: politi 
press. 

deleuze, gilles, and felix guattari. 1987. A thousand 
plateaus: capit and schizophrenia. minneapo- 
lis: the univers of minnesota press. 

dimaggio, paul j., and walter W. powell. 1983. “the 
iron cage revisited: institut isomorph and 
collect ration in organiz fields.” 
american sociolog review 48(2):147–60. 

duster, troy. 1997. “pattern, purpos and race in the 
drug war.” pp. 206–287 in crack in america: 
demon drug and social justice, edit by C. rein- 
arman and H. G. levine. berkeley: univers of 
california press. 

duster, troy. 2005. “race and reific in science.” 
scienc 307:1050–51. 

epp, charl r., steven maynard-moody, and donald P. 
haider-markel. 2014. pull over: how polic stop 
defin race and citizenship. chicago: univers of 
chicago press. 

ericson, richard v., and kevin D. haggerty. 1997. polic 
the risk society. toronto: univers of toronto press. 

ericson, richard v., and kevin D. haggerty. 2006. the 
new polit of surveil and visibility. toronto: 
univers of toronto press. 

espeland, wendi n., and berit I. vannebo. 2007. 
“accountability, quantif and law.” annual 
review of law and societi 3:21–43. 



30 american sociolog review 00(0) 

execut offic of the president. 2014. “big data: seiz- 
ing opportunities, preserv values.” washington, 
dc: the white house. 

feeley, malcolm m., and jonathan simon. 1992. “the 
new penology: note on the emerg strategi 
of correct and it implications.” criminolog 
30(4):449–74. 

ferguson, andrew G. 2015. “big data and predict 
reason suspicion.” univers of pennsylvania 
law review 63(2):327–410. 

fiske, john. 1998. “surveil the city: whiteness, the 
black man and democrat totalitarianism.” theory, 
cultur and societi 15(2):67–88. 

fiske, susan t., and shelley E. taylor. 1991. social cog- 
nition, 2nd ed. new york: mcgraw-hill. 

foucault, michel. 1977. disciplin and punish: the birth 
of the prison. new york: random house. 

fourcade, marion, and kieran healy. 2013. “classifica- 
tion situations: life-ch in the neoliber era.” 
accounting, organ and societi 38:559–72. 

fourcade, marion, and kieran healy. 2017. “see like 
a market.” socioeconom review 15(1):9–29. 

gandy, oscar H. 1993. the panopt sort: A polit 
economi of person information. boulder, co: 
westview press. 

gandy, oscar H. 2002. “data mine and surveil 
in the post-9.11 environment.” present to the 
polit economi section, intern associ 
for media and commun research. 

gandy, oscar H. 2009. come to term with chance: 
engag ration discrimin and cumul 
disadvantage. farnham, uk: ashgat publishing. 

garland, david. 2001. the cultur of control: crime and 
social order in contemporari society. new york: 
oxford univers press. 

giddens, anthony. 1990. the consequ of moder- 
nity. stanford, ca: stanford univers press. 

gilliom, john. 2001. overs of the poor: surveillance, 
resistance, and the limit of privacy. chicago: uni- 
versiti of chicago press. 

gitelman, lisa, ed. 2013. raw data Is an oxymoron. 
cambridge, ma: mit press. 

goffman, alice. 2014. On the run: fugit life in an 
american city. chicago: univers of chicago press. 

goffman, erving. 1963. stigma: note on the manage- 
ment of spoil identity. englewood cliffs, nj: pren- 
tice-hall. 

gross, samuel r., mauric possley, and kalara stephens. 
2017. “race and wrong convict in the unit 
states.” nation registri of exonerations, newkirk 
center for scienc and society, univers of cali- 
fornia-irvine. 

gustafson, kaaryn S. 2011. cheat welfare: public 
assist and the crimin of poverty. new 
york: nyu press. 

guzik, keith. 2009. “discrimin by design: predic- 
tive data mine a secur practic in the unit 
states’ ‘war on terrorism.’” surveil and societi 
7(1):1–17. 

hacking, ian. 1990. the tame of chance. cambridge, 
uk: cambridg univers press. 

haggerty, kevin d., and richard V. ericson. 2000. “the 
surveil assemblage.” british journal of sociol- 
ogi 51(4):605–622. 

harcourt, bernard E. 2006. against prediction: profiling, 
policing, and punish in an actuari age. chi- 
cago: univers of chicago press. 

hindmarsh, richard, and barbara prainsack, eds. 2010. 
genet suspects: global govern of forens 
dna profil and databasing. cambridge, uk: 
cambridg univers press. 

innes, martin. 2001. “control creep.” sociolog 
research onlin 6:1–10. 

joh, elizabeth E. 2016. “the new surveil discre- 
tion: autom suspicion, big data, and policing.” 
harvard law and polici review 10(1):15–42. 

kitchin, rob. 2014. the data revolution: big data, 
open data, data infrastructur & their conse- 
quences. london, uk: sage. 

kling, rob. 1991. “computer and social trans- 
formations.” science, technolog & human valu 
16(3):342–67. 

kohler-hausmann, issa. 2013. “misdemeanor justice: 
control without conviction.” american journal of 
sociolog 119(2):351–93. 

laney, doug. 2001. “3d data management: control 
data volume, velocity, and variety.” stamford, ct: 
meta group. 

langton, lynn, marcu berzofsky, christoph krebs, 
and hope smiley-mcdonald. 2012. “victim 
not report to the police, 2006-2010.” washington, 
dc: bureau of justic statistics. 

laub, john H. 2014. “understand inequ and the 
justic system response: chart a new way for- 
ward.” new york: william T. grant foundation. 

lazer, david, and jason radford. 2017. “data ex 
machina: introduct to big data.” annual review 
of sociolog 43:19–39. 

lo angel polic department. 2017. “sworn per- 
sonnel by rank, gender, and ethnic (sprge) 
report” (http://www.lapdonline.org/sworn_and_ 
civilian_report). 

lynch, michael, simon A. cole, ruth mcnally, and 
kathleen jordan. 2008. truth machine: the conten- 
tiou histori of dna fingerprinting. chicago: uni- 
versiti of chicago press. 

lyon, david. 1994. the electron eye: the rise of sur- 
veillanc society. minneapolis: univers of min- 
nesota press. 

lyon, david, ed. 2003. surveil a social sorting: 
privacy, risk, and digit discrimination. new york: 
routledge. 

lyon, david, ed. 2006. theoriz surveillance: the 
panopticon and beyond. new york: polity. 

lyon, david. 2015. surveil after snowden. new 
york: polity. 

mackenzie, donald, fabian muniesa, and lucia siu, eds. 
2007. Do economist make markets? On the perfor- 



brayn 31 

mativ of economics. princeton, nj: princeton uni- 
versiti press. 

manning, peter K. 2011. the technolog of policing: 
crime mapping, inform technology, and the 
ration of crime control. new york: nyu press. 

manning, peter k., and john van maanen, eds. 1978. 
policing: A view from the street. new york: random 
house. 

marx, gari T. 1974. “thought on a neglect categori 
of social movement participant: the agent provoca- 
teur and the informant.” american journal of sociol- 
ogi 80(2):402–442. 

marx, gari T. 1988. undercover: polic surveil in 
america. berkeley: univers of california press. 

marx, gari T. 1998. “ethic for the new surveillance.” 
the inform societi 14(3):171–85. 

marx, gari T. 2002. “what’ new about the ‘new sur- 
veillance’? classifi for chang and continuity.” 
surveil and societi 1(1):9–29. 

marx, gari T. 2016. window into the soul: surveil 
and societi in an age of high technology. chicago: 
univers of chicago press. 

mayer-schönberger, viktor, and kenneth cukier. 2013. 
big data: A revolut that will transform how We 
live, work, and think. new york: houghton mifflin 
harcourt. 

merton, robert K. 1948. “the self-fulfil prophecy.” 
the antioch review 8(2):193–210. 

meyer, john w., and brian rowan. 1977. “institutional- 
ize organizations: formal structur a myth and 
ceremony.” american journal of sociolog 83(2): 
340–63. 

mohler, georg o., martin B. short, sean malinowski, 
mark johnson, georg E. tita, andrea L. bertozzi, 
and P. jeffrey brantingham. 2015. “random con- 
troll field trial of predict policing.” journal of 
the american statist associ 110:1399–1411. 

monahan, torin, and neal A. palmer. 2009. “the emerg- 
ing polit of dh fusion centers.” secur dia- 
logu 40(6):617–36. 

moskos, peter. 2008. cop in the hood: My year polic 
baltimore’ eastern district. princeton, nj: princeton 
univers press. 

oxford american dictionari of current english. 1999. 
oxford: oxford univers press. 

pager, devah. 2007. marked: race, crime, and find 
work in an era of mass incarceration. chicago: uni- 
versiti of chicago press. 

papachristos, andrew v., david M. hureau, and anthoni 
A. braga. 2013. “the corner and the crew: the 
influenc of geographi and social network on 
gang violence.” american sociolog review 
78(3):417–47. 

pasquale, frank. 2014. the black box society: the secret 
algorithm that control money and information. 
cambridge, ma: harvard univers press. 

perry, walter l., brian mcinnis, carter C. price, susan 
C. smith, and john S. hollywood. 2013. “predict 
policing: the role of crime forecast in law 

enforc operations.” rand safeti and justic 
program. santa monica, ca. retriev juli 6, 2017 
(http://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_ 
reports/rr200/rr233/rand_rr233.pdf). 

porter, theodor M. 1995. trust in numbers: the pursuit 
of object in scienc and public life. princeton, 
nj: princeton univers press. 

poster, mark. 1990. the mode of information. chicago: 
univers of chicago press. 

quillian, lincoln, and devah pager. 2001. “black neigh- 
bors, higher crime? the role of racial stereotyp 
in evalu of neighborhood crime.” american 
journal of sociolog 107(3):717–67. 

ratcliffe, jerry. 2008. intelligence-l policing. 
cullompton, uk: willan publishing. 

reiss, albert J. 1971. the polic and the public. new 
haven, ct: yale univers press. 

renan, daphna. 2016. “the fourth amend a 
administr governance.” stanford law review 
68(5):1039–1129. 

rios, victor M. 2011. punished: polic the live of 
black and latino boys. new york: nyu press. 

roush, craig R. 2012. “qui custodiet ipso custodes? 
limit on widespread surveil and intellig 
gather by local law enforc after 9/11.” 
marquett law review 96(1):315–76. 

rule, jame B. 1974. privat live and public surveil- 
lance: social control in the comput age. new 
york: schocken books. 

rule, jame B. 2007. privaci in peril: how We are 
sacrif a fundament right in exchang for 
secur and convenience. new york: oxford uni- 
versiti press. 

sampson, robert j., and dawn J. bartusch. 1998. “legal 
cynic and (subcultural?) toler of deviance: 
the neighborhood context of racial differences.” 
law and societi review 32:777–804. 

scott, richard W. 1987. organizations: rational, natu- 
ral, and open systems. englewood cliffs, nj: pren- 
tice-hall. 

scott, richard W. 2004. “reflect on a half-centuri 
of organiz sociology.” annual review of soci- 
olog 30:1–21. 

sherman, lawrenc W. 2013. “targeting, test and 
track polic services: the rise of evidence- 
base policing, 1975–2025.” crime and justic 
42(1):377–451. 

sherman, lawrenc w., patrick R. gartin, and michael 
E. buerger. 1989. “hot spot of predatori crime: 
routin activ and the criminolog of place.” 
criminolog 27(1):27–55. 

skogan, wesley G. 2006. polic and commun in chi- 
cago: A tale of three cities. new york: oxford uni- 
versiti press. 

smith v. maryland. 1979. 442 u.s. 735. 
soss, joe, richard C. fording, and sanford F. schram. 

2011. disciplin the poor: neoliber patern 
and the persist power of race. chicago: univer- 
siti of chicago press. 



32 american sociolog review 00(0) 

stuart, forrest. 2016. down, out & under arrest: polic- 
ing and everyday life in skid row. chicago: univer- 
siti of chicago press. 

terri v. ohio. 1968. 392 u.s. 1. 
tracy, paul e., and vincent morgan. 2000. “big brother 

and hi scienc kit: dna databas for 21st cen- 
turi crime control.” journal of crimin law and 
criminolog 90(2):635–90. 

travis, jeremy, bruce western, and steve redburn, eds. 
2014. growth of incarcer in the unit states: 
explor caus and consequences. washington, 
dc: nation academi of science. 

uchida, craig d., and marc L. swatt. 2015. “oper 
laser and the effect of hotspot patrol: A 
panel analysis.” polic quarterli 16(3):287–304. 

unit state v. jones. 2012. 132 S. ct. 945, 565 u.s. 
unit state v. miller. 1939. 307 u.s. 174. 
u.s. depart of justice. 2001 [2015]. “l.a. consent 

decree.” washington, dc: u.s. depart of justice. 
wakefield, sara, and christoph uggen. 2010. “incar- 

cerat and stratification.” annual review of sociol- 
ogi 36:387–406. 

wakefield, sara, and christoph wildeman. 2013. chil- 
dren of the prison boom: mass incarcer and the 
futur of american inequality. new york: oxford 
univers press. 

waxman, matthew C. 2009. “polic and nation secu- 
rity: american local law enforc and counter- 
terror after 9/11.” journal of nation secur 
law and polici 3:377–407. 

weber, max. 1978. economi and society: An outlin 
of interpret sociology. berkeley: univers of 
california press. 

weisburd, david, stephen D. mastrofski, ann mari 
mcnally, rosann greenspan, and jame J. willis. 
2003. “reform to preserve: compstat and stra- 
tegic problem-solv in american policing.” crimi- 
nolog and public polici 2:421–56. 

western, bruce. 2006. punish and inequ in 
america. new york: russel sage foundation. 

western, bruce, and becki pettit. 2005. “black-whit 
wage inequality, employ rates, and incarcer- 
ation.” american journal of sociolog 111(2):553– 
78. 

white hous polic data initiative. 2015. “launch 
the polic data initiative” (https://obamawhitehous 
.archives.gov/blog/2015/05/18/launching-police- 
data-initiative). 

whren v. unit states. 1996. 517 u.s. 806. 
willis, jame j., stephen D. mastrofski, and david 

weisburd. 2007. “make sens of compstat: A 
theory-bas analysi of organiz chang in 
three polic departments.” law and societi review 
41(1):147–88. 

wilson, jame Q. 1968. varieti of polic behavior: the 
manag of law and order in eight communi- 
ties. cambridge, ma: harvard univers press. 

sarah brayn be an assist professor of sociolog and 
faculti research associ in the popul research 
center at the univers of texa at austin. use quali- 
tativ and quantit methods, her research examin 
the use of “big data” within the crimin justic system a 
well a the consequ of surveil for law and 
social inequality. 


