






































â•ÿblur faceâ•ž news anonym get an artifici intellig spin - sfu new - simon fraser univers 


A research team from sfu’ school of interact art and technolog (siat) have come up with a way to replac the use of ‘blurring’ face in news report when anonym be 

needed. the team' method us arti icial intellig (ai) techniqu that aim to improv visual while amplifi emot tie to the story. 

siat professor steve dipaola and kate hennessy, togeth with taylor owen from ubc’ journal school, receiv a google/knight foundat grant to carri out the research. 

they present the work to intern journalist at a journal 360 demo event honor grante in new york on juli 24, and the next day at a full confer held across the 

street from the new york time headquarters. 

“our goal be to creat a work techniqu that would be much good at convey emot and knowledg inform than current anonym techniques,” say dipaola, a 

pioneer in ai/vr facial recognit processes. 

base on it research, the team have creat an updat pixel techniqu use an AI “painting” approach to anonymization. 

“when artist paint a portrait, they tri to convey the subject’ outer and inner resemblance,” say dipaola. “with our ai, which learn from more than 1,000 year of artist 

technique, we have taught the system to low the outer resembl and keep a high a possibl the subject’ inner resembl – in other words, what they be convey and 

how they be feeling. 

“our system us ive level of AI process to simul a smart painter, use art abstract to repaint the video a if an artist be paint everi frame. the result be more 

engaging, especi sinc not everyon listen to stori – so the art compon becom more relevant.” 

‘blur face’ news anonym get an artifici intellig spin - sfu... https://www.sfu.ca/sfunews/stories/2018/08/blurred-face-anonymity-gets... 

1 sur 2 09-08-18 à 18:45 



the system doesn’t chang the pixel of the video frame a adobe-lik system can, but instead produc a painting-styl result of everi frame, dipaola notes. “it’ actual an open 

and dynam process that allow level of control throughout. We eventu want to the subject or produc to be abl to custom the inal result base on their needs.” 

dipaola say the tool’ effect at anonym while retain a strong degre of emot connect or reson should result in good inal product for anonym video, 

especi in 360 or vr. the team plan to put the technolog to work in a varieti of projects. 

while at the confer dipaola' team garnish interest from sever major medium compani look to explor new medium approaches, includ the new york times, 

washington post and the bbc. 

for more on the research see aipaint360.org. 

‘blur face’ news anonym get an artifici intellig spin - sfu... https://www.sfu.ca/sfunews/stories/2018/08/blurred-face-anonymity-gets... 

2 sur 2 09-08-18 à 18:45 


