






































BT build the ukâ•ž first â•ÿunhackableâ•ž quantum-secur network 


adastr park in martlesham, ipswich, the epicentr of bt’ research, technolog and IT operations. image: vismedia 

BT say it new network will be secur against threat from quantum computers. 

today (12 june), BT announc the construct of a practic quantum-secured, high-spe fibr network between the BT lab 
in adastr park in ipswich and cambridge. 

the project be lead by the quantum commun hub, which be part of the UK nation quantum technolog programme. 

construct by research from bt, the univers of york and the univers of cambridg over the past two years, the secur 
connect be built a part of a project co-fund by the engin and physic scienc research council, and will connect 
to the cambridg metropolitan qkd (quantum key distribution) network. 

first real-world deploy in the UK 

the quantum-secur link run across a standard fibr connection, which run through numer BT exchang over a distanc of 
120km. this, BT claims, make it the first high-speed, real-world deploy of quantum-bas network secur in the uk. 

the network link be capabl of data transfer speed of 500gbp and will explor and valid use case for qkd technologies. 

the link be say to be ‘unhackable’ due to it relianc on the use of singl particl of light (photons) to transmit encrypt key 
across the fibre. If thi commun be intercepted, the sender will be abl to detect that the link have be tamper with. 

the steal photon will then be unabl to be use a part of the key, render the data stream total incomprehensible. 
equip from ID quantiqu be be use to transmit the encrypt key a a stream of singl photons. 

quantum comput bring new threat 

quantum comput will undoubtedli bring benefit for society, from advanc in diseas research to examin the mysteri of 
space, but the comput power on the horizon can also be deploy in some pretti nefari ways. 

health and financi records, a well a top-secret govern information, could be unlock thank to the increas effici 
of quantum computing. 

BT build the uk’ first ‘unhackable’ quantum-secur network https://www.siliconrepublic.com/enterprise/bt-unhackable-network 

2 sur 17 13-06-18 à 18:56 



quantum comput can factor in larg number much more swiftli than tradit computers. thi particular power put 
encrypt standard wide use today under threat. 

As oppos to current computers, which process data in binari bits, quantum comput exploit the abil of quantum bit 
(qubits) to exist at the same time in multipl states, allow unimagin calcul and problem-solv speeds. 

prof ian white, head of photon research at the univers of cambridge, said: “thi quantum-secur network be an excel 
exampl of the large-scal collabor research that be feasibl becaus of the creation of the uk’ quantum commun 
hub. the network will allow detail analysi of the potenti for thi new technolog to enhanc secur in advanc 
commun networks.” 

prof tim whitley, bt’ manag director of research and innovation, added: “with the huge growth in cyberattack across the 
uk, it’ more import than ever befor that we continu to develop way to protect the most critic data.” 

related: networks, infosec, security, bt, fibr 

ellen tannam be a writer cover all manner of busi and tech subject 

editorial@siliconrepublic.com 

you may also like 

you may also like 

compani 

three irish tech compani merg to becom paradyn 

15 mar 2018982 view 

hire now 

A dynam and rapidli expand compani 

2016 graduat employ of the year 

BT build the uk’ first ‘unhackable’ quantum-secur network https://www.siliconrepublic.com/enterprise/bt-unhackable-network 

3 sur 17 13-06-18 à 18:56 


