






































can We quantifi machin consciousness? - ieee spectrum 


artifici intellig might endow some comput with self-awareness. here’ 
how we’d know 

advertis 

time in the not-too-dist 

future, you’v bought a smartphon that come 

bundl with a person digit assist (pda) live 

in the cloud. you assign a sexi femal voic to the 

pda and give it access to all of your emails, social 

medium accounts, calendar, photo album, contacts, and 

other bit and flotsam of your digit life. she—for 

that’ how you quickli think of her—know you good 

than your mother, your soon-to-b ex-wife, your 

friends, or your therapist. her command of english be 

flawless; you have endless convers about daili 

events; she get your jokes. she be the last voic you 

hear befor you drift off to sleep and the first upon 

awakening. you panic when she’ off-line. she 

becom indispens to your well-b and so, 

naturally, you fall in love. occasionally, you wonder 

whether she truli reciproc your feel and 

whether she be even capabl of experi anyth 

at all. but the warm, huski tone of her voic and her 

abil to be that perfect foil to your narcissist 

desir overcom these existenti doubts. alas, your 

infatu eventu cool off after you realiz she be 

carri on equal intim convers with 

thousand of other customers. 

imagin that at some 

this, of course, be the plot of 

, a 2013 

movi in which an anodyn theodor twombl fall 

in love with the softwar pda samantha. 

her 

(http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1798709/) 

over the next few decad such a fiction scenario 

will becom real and commonplace. 

, speech recognition, and 

relat technolog have dramat progressed, 

lead to amazon’ 

, apple’ 

, google’ , and 

deep machin 

learn (https://en.wikipedia.org 

/wiki/deep_learning) 

alexa 

(https://developer.amazon.com/alexa) siri 

(https://www.apple.com/ios/siri/) now (http://www.androidcentral.com/google-now) 

can We quantifi machin consciousness? - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/can-we-quantify-machine-consci 

1 sur 8 07/08/2017 19:46 



(/static/special- 

report-can-we- 

copy-the-brain) 

illustration: chad hagen 

microsoft’ 

. these 

virtual assist will continu to improv until 

they becom hard to distinguish from real people, 

except that they’ll be endow with perfect recall, 

poise, and patience—unlik ani live being. 

cortana (https://www.microsoft.com 

/en-us/mobile/experiences/cortana/) 

the avail of such digit simulacrum of mani 

qualiti we consid uniqu human will rais 

profound scientific, psychological, philosophical, 

and ethic questions. these emul will 

ultim upend the way we think about 

ourselves, about human exceptionalism, and about 

our place in the great scheme of things. 

here we will survey the intellectu lay of the land 

concern these come developments. our view 

be that a long a such machin be base on 

present-day comput architectures, they may act 

just like people—and we may be tempt to treat 

them that way—but they will, in fact, feel noth 

at all. If comput be built more like the brain is, 

though, they could well achiev true 

consciousness. 

be faith in the digit computer—program properly, it will give u all we wish. 

cornucopia. indeed, smart money in silicon valley hold that digit comput will be abl to replic 

and soon exceed anyth and everyth that human be capabl of. 

the faith of our age 

but could suffici advanc comput ever becom conscious? one answer come from those who 

subscrib to , the 

reign theori of mind in contemporari philosophy, psychology, and neuroscience. It aver that all 

mental states—such a your consciou experi of a god-aw toothach or the love you feel for your 

partner—ar comput states. these be fulli character by their function relationship to 

relev sensori inputs, behavior outputs, and other comput state in between. that is, brain 

be elabor input-output devic that comput and process symbol represent of the world. 

brain be computers, with our mind be the software. 

computation (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/computational_theory_of_mind) 

adher to computation appli these precept not onli to brain and to the behavior they gener 

but also to the way it to be a brain in a particular state. after all, that’ what conscious is: ani 

subject feeling, ani experience—what we see, hear, feel, remember, think. 

feel 

computation assum that my pain experi of a toothach be but a state of my brain in which 

certain nerv cell be activ in respons to the infect tooth, lead to my propens to moan, hold my 

jaw, not eat on that side of my mouth, inabl to focu on other tasks, and so on. If all of these state be 

simul in softwar on a digit computer, the think goes, the system a a whole will not onli behav 

exactli like me but also exactli like me. that is, conscious be computable. explicitli or 

implicitly, thi be one of the central tenet held by the digerati in academe, media, and industry. 

feel and think 

can We quantifi machin consciousness? - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/can-we-quantify-machine-consci 

2 sur 8 07/08/2017 19:46 



In thi view, there be noth more to conscious than the instanti of the relev comput 

states. noth els matters, includ how the comput be implement physically, whether on 

the hardwar of a digit comput or on the squishi stuff insid the skull. accord to 

computationalism, a futur samantha—or even better, an embodi exampl like ava in the brilliant, 

dark movi —will have experi and feel 

just a we do. she will experi sight and sounds, pleasur and pain, love and hate. 

Ex machina (http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0470752/) 

Or perhap she won’t. 

computation be base on the assumpt that if two system be indistinguishable, they 

will be indistinguishable. becaus we experi the world, the argument goes, a digit 

comput that be function equival to u would necessarili also experi the world a we do—that 

is, it would also be conscious. but be thi assumpt warranted? To answer such a question, we need a 

principled, quantit theori of what conscious be and what it take for a physic system to have it. 

function 

mental 

illustration: chad hagen 

such a theori of conscious 

wasn’t available. true, neuroscientist like u have 

be engag in the difficult search for the “ 

,” 

carri out increasingli elabor experi on 

peopl and relat speci such a monkey and 

mice. these experi have identifi region in 

the 

, the outer surfac of the brain 

just underneath the skull, that be critic 

involv in conscious see and hear things. 

yet have be directli involv in thi empir 

research program, we know that even if such a 

quest prof reason successful, identifi 

some particular brain structur or mode of 

neural activ necessari for conscious in 

peopl or close relat anim will not be 

suffici to establish whether creatur with veri 

differ nervou systems—such a an octopu or a 

bee— conscious, by how much, or of what. and 

ani such discoveri in neurosci will be insuffici to establish whether or not machin can be 

conscious. 

until recently, 

neural 

correl of conscious 

(https://en.wikipedia.org 

/wiki/neural_correlates_of_consciousness) 

neocortex (https://en.wikipedia.org 

/wiki/neocortex) 

be 

there is, however, a fundament theori of conscious that offer hope for a principl answer to the 

question of conscious in entiti vastli differ from us, includ machines. that theori do not 

start from behavior or from the brain. instead, it begin from conscious itself—from our own 

experience, the onli one we be absolut certain of. thi be the bedrock of certainti that rené descartes, 

father of modern philosophy, science, and analyt geometry, refer to in the most famou deduct in 

western thought: .I think, therefor I be 

thi theory, call integr inform theory, or iit, have be develop over the past two decades. 

can We quantifi machin consciousness? - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/can-we-quantify-machine-consci 

3 sur 8 07/08/2017 19:46 



It attempt to defin what conscious is, what it take for a physic system to have it, and how one 

can measure, at least in principle, both it quantiti and it quality, start from it physic substrate. 

iit be too involv for u to explain here; we can onli sketch it gener outlines. the theori identifi five 

essenti properti that be true of everi conceiv experi of consciousness: (1) everi experi 

exist intrins (for the subject of that experience, not for an extern observer); (2) each experi be 

structur (it be compos of part and the relat among them); (3) it be integr (it cannot be 

subdivid into independ components); (4) it be definit (it have borders, includ some content and 

exclud others); and (5) it be specif (everi experi be the way it is, and therebi differ from 

trillion of possibl others). 

“the theori can be use to 
ass the quantiti and 
qualiti of conscious 
for ani physic system, 
whether it be the brain of 
a human, an octopus, or a 
bee—or the circuit board of 
a digit computer” 

iit then translat these properti into 

requir that must be satisfi by ani 

physic substrat for it to support consciousness. 

these requir can be express 

mathemat and employ to ass the 

quantiti and qualiti of conscious for ani 

physic system, whether it be the brain of a 

human, an octopus, or a bee—or the circuit board 

of a digit computer. 

crucially, accord to iit, the overal degre of 

conscious do not depend on what the system 

does. rather, it depend on how it be built—how 

it’ physic put together. and onli certain kind 

of physic system have the right kind of intern 

architectur to support consciousness: those that 

have a maximum of intrins cause-effect power, the causal power to determin their own states. In 

essence, thi mean that the system must be compos of mani parts, each have specif causal power 

within the overal system (the “information” part of iit), and yet the system a a whole must not be 

reduc to those part (the “integrated” part of iit), make it far more power than the sum of it 

mani parts. 

iit do not use the word “information” in it contemporari sense, a in “messag that be be pass 

by a sender to a receiver.” conscious be not about inform sent from one part of the brain to 

another. instead, iit refer to “information” in it origin sense, with it root , mean “to give 

form to.” the power of ani one mechanism, such a a brain or a computer, to influenc it own next state, 

it causal power, give rise to a form, a high-dimension structure, that experience. 

inform 

be 

iit can explain in a principl manner mani puzzl featur of the neuroanatomi of consciousness— 

for instance, whi the , the littl brain underneath 

the much big and good know neocortex, do not contribut to conscious despit it have 

four time a mani neurons: it intern architecture, parallel sheet of feed-forward chain of neuron 

without much recurr excitation, be veri differ from the highli heterogeneous, rich, and dens 

connect of the neocortex, which support vast coalit of activ neuron that quickli assembl and 

disassemble. It also explain whi conscious fade dure certain stage of sleep even though 

neocort neuron continu to fire: part of the neocortex lose the abil to influenc one anoth 

effectively. 

cerebellum (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/cerebellum) 

can We quantifi machin consciousness? - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/can-we-quantify-machine-consci 

4 sur 8 07/08/2017 19:46 



iit make a number of counterintuit predict amen to empir tests. one predict be that a 

nearli silent neocortex, in which few neuron be activ firing, have consciou experiences. also, iit have 

allow tononi and , now a 

professor at the univers of milan, to develop a devic for assess conscious in humans, a 

combin of a magnet coil to stimul the brain and a high-dens net of eeg electrod to detect 

it response—a crude kind of 

. thi devic have alreadi be use to ascertain whether brain-damag or 

anesthet patient unabl to commun be consciou or not. 

marcello massimini (https://www.cifar.ca/profiles/marcello-massimini/) 

conscious meter (http://www.klab.caltech.edu/koch/cr/cr- 

consciousness-meter-13.pdf) 

be a formal, mathemat theory, iit can be appli to ani physic system, be it the brain—a 

structur that evolv by natur selection—or an electron circuit design by engineers. As ongo 

research shows, the physic architectur of certain part of the neocortex—especi in the back, the way 

the neuron be connected—i ideal for maxim the brain’ intrins cause-effect power, it abil to 

be affect by it recent state and to determin it futur state, which be whi it support consciousness. 

By contrast, the physic architectur of a typic digit comput be absolut inadequate, with veri low 

connect at the gate level of it central process unit and bottleneck that prevent even a modicum 

of the necessari integration. that is, a comput may implement comput and function judg to 

be intellig from the perspect of a user look at it output, but, give it wiring, it intrins causal 

power a a whole be minut compar with those of ani brain. and thi be true even if we treat the 

comput at a coarser level than transistor and resistors. 

and here’ the rub: that intrins power, the physic power to make a differ to oneself, cannot be 

comput or simulated. It have to be built into the physic of the system. A perfectli executed, 

biophys accur comput simul of the human brain, includ everi one of it 86 billion 

neuron and it matrix of trillion of synapses, wouldn’t be conscious. even if thi comput be hook 

up to a speech synthes and told you about it suppos experiences, it would be noth but behavior 

and function cleverli execut programming. the beat heart of conscious would be absent. 

have sober implic for those who hope that 

may make peopl immortal. 

their vision be that, within the next few decades, we will be abl to accur reconstruct the wire 

scheme, the so-cal connectome, of ani one individu human brain and simul it on appropri 

digit hardware. thi process would probabl be destruct becaus there may be no way to access the 

brain’ ultrastructur except by cut it into wafer-thin slivers. nevertheless, befor you succumb to 

some deadli disease, you would upload a high-resolut version of your brain to the cloud. As long a 

the cloud infrastructur be up and running, your digit simulacrum will live on and on, interact with 

other digit avatars. raptur for nerds! 

thi consequ of iit digit brain upload 

(http://spectrum.ieee.org/biomedical/imaging/can-machines-be-conscious) 

“although your digit 
simulacrum might speak 
and act a you would, it 
would be a complet 

yet, per iit, thi belief be a illusori a the belief in 

the hereaft of preced prophet and religions. 

although your digit simulacrum might speak and 

act a you would, it would be a complet zombie, 

experi nothing. ironically, though, to your 

friend and love one back in the real world, you 

would have success transit to a sublim 

form of exist and would entic other to join 

you in an afterlif that, in fact, doesn’t exist. 

can We quantifi machin consciousness? - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/can-we-quantify-machine-consci 

5 sur 8 07/08/2017 19:46 



zombie, experi 
nothing” 

whether or not iit be correct be not mere of 

academ interest. bar some global 

catastrophe, our societi will create, within 

decades, machin with human-level intellig 

and behaviors, abl to understand speech and talk 

in mani differ languages, rememb the past 

and anticip the future, imagin novel scenarios, write books, compos music, direct films, conceiv 

new goals, a well a move, drive, fly, and, inevitably, fight. from there, thank to the avail of big 

data, the power of , and the speed of 

computing, it will be a short step to overcom human limits. the birth of true artifici intellig will 

profoundli affect mankind’ future, includ whether it have one. 

deep learn (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/deep_learning) 

whether you be among those who believ that the arriv of human-level AI signal the dawn of paradis 

or the sunset of the age of humans, you will still have to answer a fundament question: are these ai 

conscious? doe it like anyth to be them? Or be they immens more accomplish version of 

present-day garbag dispos units, wash machines, or cars—extraordinarili clever machines, yes, but 

without sentienc or feelings? 

feel 

the answer to thi question matter to the way we relat to futur machines. If you take a hammer to 

your shini , your friend might consid you crazi for destroy such a 

costli car; yet there be no question that you be free to do so. tri the same with your dog, though, and the 

polic would right arrest you. that’ becaus a car be just a mean to an end—a conveni way to get 

around town—whil a dog be an end in itself, with some minim rights, becaus it share with u the gift 

of consciousness. 

tesla (https://www.tesla.com/) 

“we need a fundament 
theori that specifi the 
exact condit under 
which a particular system 
be capabl of consciou 
experience” 

find the correct answer, however, cannot be 

left to our intuition. that might work temporarili 

for theodor twombl fall in love with 

samantha, but give the graviti of the situation, 

we need guidance. We need a fundament theori 

that specifi the exact condit under which a 

particular system be capabl of consciou 

experience. 

iit predict that convent digit comput 

run softwar will experi noth like the 

movi we see and hear insid our heads. becaus 

smart digit assist and lifelik futur robot 

be incap of experience, a iit insists, their 

softwar can be safe copied, edited, sold, pirated, or deleted. and they can be turn off, modified, 

destroyed, and replac at will. 

but the same need not be true for unconvent architectures. special-purpos machin built 

follow some of the same design principl a the brain, contain what’ call neuromorph 

hardwar [see “neuromorph chip are destin for deep learning—or obscurity,” in thi issue], could 

in principl be capabl of substanti consciou experience. the key be that the logic and memori gate 

be heavili interconnect with a high degre of partial overlap fan-in and fan-out between gates. 

(compartment compon with highli specif function do not contribut to intrins causal 

can We quantifi machin consciousness? - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/can-we-quantify-machine-consci 

6 sur 8 07/08/2017 19:46 



power.) the way the “brain” of the system be actual wire up, it (bio)physics, make all the difference, 

not it input-output behavior. 

such a neuromorph machine, if highli conscious, would then have intrins rights, in particular the 

right to it own life and well-being. In that case, societi would have to learn to share the world with it 

own creations. 

be presid and chief scientif offic of the allen institut for brain science, in seattle. 

hold the david P. 

white chair in sleep medicine, a well a a distinguish chair in conscious science, at 

the univers of wisconsin. 

christof koch (https://alleninstitute.org/what-we-do/brain-science/about/team/staff-profiles/christof- 

koch/) giulio 

tononi (http://centerforsleepandconsciousness.med.wisc.edu/people/tononi.html) 

advertis 

special report: can WE copi the brain? 
(/static/special-report-can-we-copy-the-brain) 

previou 
whi rat- 
brain robot 
are So good at 
navig 
unfamiliar 
terrain 

(/robotics/robotics-software/why- 

ratbrained-robots-are-so-good-at- 

navigating-unfamiliar-terrain) 

next 
human-level 

AI Is right 
around the 
corner—or 

hundr of 
year away 

(/computing/software/humanlevel-ai-is- 

right-around-the-corner-or-hundreds-of- 

years-away) 

can We quantifi machin consciousness? - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/can-we-quantify-machine-consci 

7 sur 8 07/08/2017 19:46 



(/comput 

/software/music-to- 

your-ears-new- 

transducers-meet- 

electrostatic- 

headphones) 

(/aerospace/satellit 

/is-there-a-giant- 

planet-lurking- 

beyond-pluto) 

(/transportation/self- 

driving/the-big- 

problem-with- 

selfdriving-cars-is- 

people) 

(/energy/the- 

smarter-grid/the- 

transformers- 

superheroes-of- 

electrical-inventions) 

(/biomedical/devic 

/smart-contact- 

lenses-and-eye- 

implants-will-give- 

doctors-medical- 

insights) 

(/geek-life/hands- 

on/the-turtlebot3- 

teacher) 

can We quantifi machin consciousness? - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/hardware/can-we-quantify-machine-consci 

8 sur 8 07/08/2017 19:46 


