






































cmu research creat self-fold origami, tri for pasta that shape a it cook 


cmu research creat self-fold origami, tri for pasta 
that shape a it cook 

aaron aupperle 

research at carnegi mellon univers have creat origami that fold itself. 

but they aren't stop with flowers, rabbit or small boats. 

the research insid the morph matter lab , insid cmu' human-comput interact institute, see a 
futur where flat pasta take shape when it boils, flat satellit unfold in space and furniture, ship flat, self- 
assembl in your home or office. 

goodby ikea direct and that littl tool. 

thi flower fold itself when place in hot water. source: carnegi mellon univers 

the lab creat the self-fold shape use a common 3D printer and encount a common problem with 
these printers, warpage. As the melted, thermoplast use by the 3D printer cools, edg and surfac warp. 

"peopl hate warpage," line yao, director of the morph matter lab, say in a statement. "but we'v take 
thi disadvantag and turn it to our advantage." 

yao' team includ research and student studi materi scienc and engineering, mechan 
engineering, comput scienc and costum design. 

yao and her team control the printer' speed and combin the warp-pron materi with rubber-lik materi 
that don't warp. the print object be flat, but when place in hot water, some of the materi warp and some 
doesn't, give the once-flat object a 3D shape. 

the process be elegant. the result be beautiful. It take seconds. 

"it' hard to imagin thi be do manually," yao said. 

thermorph from morph matter lab on vimeo . 

yao join the human-comput interact institut in june. she be work with barilla on creat flat pasta 
that take it characterist shape when boiled, accord to cmu . yao start her work on pasta while finish 
her ph.d. at the massachusett institut of technology' media lab. there, yao and her team use gelatin a a 
base. now, barilla be ship it semolina flour from itali so yao and the team can creat flat pasta that actual 
tast like pasta. 

cmu research creat self-fold origami, tri for pasta that shape a i... http://triblive.com/business/technology/13572270-74/cmu-researchers-cr... 

1 sur 2 04-05-18 à 12:23 



ship flat pasta could save nearli 60 percent of the packag cost compar to tradit pasta and cut 
back on packag waste, yao said. 

her team be also work with upmc to develop fabric that respond to sweat and temperature. It could lead to 
hospit gown that can more effici keep patient warm or cool or shirt sleev that roll up automat 
and jacket that puff up when the temperatur changes. 

yao present her group' research thi week at the confer on human factor in comput system in 
montreal. 

aaron aupperle be a tribune-review staff writer. reach him at aaupperlee@tribweb.com, 412-336-8448 or via 
twitter @tinynotebook. 

cmu research creat self-fold origami, tri for pasta that shape a i... http://triblive.com/business/technology/13572270-74/cmu-researchers-cr... 

2 sur 2 04-05-18 à 12:23 


