






































comput algorithm link facial masculin to autism | univers new : the univers of western australia 


relat area 

intern 

research scienc 

follow @uwanew 

stori 

autism research award 
prestigi eureka award 
Do pheromon exist in humans? 
uwa research a finalist for 
2017 eureka prize 
pterygium a red flag for 
melanoma, major new studi 
show 
2016/2017 payment summari 
(group certificates) 

friday, 25 august 2017 

A link between masculin facial featur and autism have be 
discov by research from the univers of western 
australia, telethon kid institut and princess margaret hospit 
for children. 

the first-of-its-kind studi use 3D photogrammetri to examin 
whether pre-pubesc boy and girl with an autism spectrum 
disord (asd) display more masculin featur compar to 
those without the condition. the research have be publish 
today in scientif report by the natur publish group. 

genet factor be know to play a major role in asd howev 
there be grow evid that hormon factor also influenc develop of the condition. 

A comput algorithm design by uwa research be use to gener a gender score for a sampl 
of 3D facial imag to creat a scale rang from veri masculin to veri feminine. the gender score 
be base on an analysi for 11 facial featur such a breadth of a person' nose, distanc between 
the outer corner of the eyes, upper lip height and width of the mouth and be compar between an 
autist group and a control group. A total 113 girl and 102 boy who be not autist and 20 girl and 
54 boy who be autist be involv in the study. for each sex, increas facial masculin be 
observ in the asd group compar to the control group. 

further analysi reveal that increas facial masculin in the group with autism correl with more 
social commun difficulti a measur on the autism diagnost observ scale. 

uwa research associ sy zulqarnain gilani, from uwa’ school of comput scienc and 
softwar engin say the extent of facial masculinity/feminin vari from one individu to 
another. 

“we have develop an algorithm to measur thi variat use 3D imag of people, which 
calcul a metric for each face, which we refer to a the gender score,” Mr gilani said. 

“when we appli thi algorithm to 3D face of child diagnos with an asd, the result and trend 
be fascinating.” 

the studi be the first to report that the face of boy and girl with asd be more masculinis than the 
face of typic develop children, accord to research associ diana tan, from uwa’ school of 
psycholog science. 

“in our previou research, we found that a more masculinis facial profil be associ with 
increas exposur to prenat testosterone,” Ms tan said. 

“the current find highlight a possibl connect between prenat testosteron and asd. 

“A facial characterist that be uniqu to asd provid potenti biolog marker for thi condition. In 
the long run, we hope to further explor the possibl for 3D facial imag to be use a a 
complementari diagnost tool to aid in the earli identif of asd.” 

media refer 

jess reid (uwa media and PR adviser) (+61 4) 13 105 200 
sy zulqarnain gilani (uwa school of comput scienc and softwar engineering) (+61 8) 6488 
1200 

univers new 

comput algorithm link facial masculin to 
autism 

comput algorithm link facial masculin to autism | univers new ... http://www.news.uwa.edu.au/201708259876/international/computer-algo... 

1 sur 1 16-07-18 à 19:27 


