






































european commiss : cordi : new and event : comput secur flaw reveal faster isnâ•žt necessarili good 


comput secur flaw reveal faster isn’t necessarili good 

research discov 20-year-old secur bug in cpu chips, highlight the need for safer computers. 

In the drive for good perform computers, manufacturers’ tradit focu on speed have 

come at the expens of security. highlight just how vulner today’ comput realli 

are, two fundament secur flaw be recent discov in comput processors. 

call meltdown and spectre, the flaw could allow user unauthoris access to person 

data store in the most protect part of your comput system. 

the two bug be independ found by four differ research groups, one of which 

be a team of research from graz univers of technology, austria. support with 

eu-fund for the project sophia, the graz team play a key role in the discoveri of 

meltdown and spectre. 

A meltdown in the work 

both bug allow access to unauthoris information, but they achiev thi in differ ways. meltdown do thi by overcom memori isolation, 

which allow malici programm to read ordinarili non-access part of a computer’ memory. thi be make possibl by a perform 

featur call ‘out-of-ord execution’. To speed up a process, “modern processor run oper out-of-ord i.e., they look ahead and schedul 

subsequ oper to idl execut unit of the processor,” the graz team and other research explain in a paper post on the cornel 

univers librari website. 

“the root caus of meltdown,” the author report, “i the hardware. the attack be independ of the oper system, and it do not reli on ani 

softwar vulnerabilities.” all intel processor that implement out-of-ord execut be affected. fortunately, the research have develop 

softwar patch against meltdown. 

the spectr in the system 

processor conduct an out-of-ord execut may reach a branch where the futur direct depend on instruct that have yet to be 

executed. To maximis performance, processor then predict the path a programm be like to follow and prematur execut the instruct in 

them. it’ the vulner inher in thi process that make spectr attack possible. spectr allow data to be steal from the memori of other 

applic run on a machin by break the isol between them. 

In a separ studi to which the graz research also contributed, the author describ how thi class of attack works: “at a high level, spectr 

attack trick the processor into specul execut instruct sequenc that should not have execut dure correct program execution.” 

these specul oper result in confidenti inform be leaked. 

spectr pose a more seriou problem for the industry, sinc it’ harder to fix and affect not onli intel, but amd and arm processors, too. 

although onli recent discovered, the flaw have exist sinc the mid-1990s. A worri thought, sinc these vulner may potenti 

have be exploit for decad by some without anyon knowing. stefan mangard, lead research for sophia, highlight the need for more 

secur comput in an interview post on the european research council website: “in today' environ of increas attack on comput 

system […], we need to accept secur a a major design criterion. I hope the discoveri of the meltdown and spectr flaw will trigger a new 

way of think about comput design.” 

sophia (secur softwar against physic attacks) be continu it research into way to execut softwar secur and effici in the 

presenc of physic attack on all kind of comput devices. 

for more information, pleas see: 

cordi project webpag 

source: base on project inform and medium report 

© product perig, shutterstock 

european commiss : cordi : new and event : comput security... https://www.cordis.europa.eu/news/rcn/129337_en.html 

1 sur 2 07-05-18 à 19:18 



relat inform 

project 

programm 

countri 

subject 

inform process and inform system 

last updat on 2018-05-04 

sophia - secur softwar against physic attack 

h2020-eu.1.1. 

austria 

european commiss : cordi : new and event : comput security... https://www.cordis.europa.eu/news/rcn/129337_en.html 

2 sur 2 07-05-18 à 19:18 


