






































cooler comput through statist physics? 


cooler comput through statist 
physics? 

In the space insid a comput chip, where electr becom 
information, there’ a scientif frontier. the same frontier can be 
found insid a cell, where inform instead take the form of 
chemic concentrations. recent breakthrough in the field of 
nonequilibrium statist physic have reveal vast area of research 
lie hidden within the “thermodynam of computation.” advanc in 
thi field, which involv element of statist physics, comput 
science, cellular biology, and possibl even neurobiology, could have 
far-reach consequ for how we understand, and engineer, our 
computers. To kick-start thi line research, santa Fe institut scientist 
and their collabor have launch an onlin wiki for collaboration. 
thi week they also publish a paper that neatli summar recent 
advanc and open question that pertain to thermodynam and 
computation. 

“the thermodynam restrict on all system that perform 
comput provid major challeng to the modern design of 
computers,” the research write in the open paragraph of the wiki, 
design to “serv a a hub and a gather place for all who be 
interested.” they go on to outlin the magnitud of energi consum 
by comput and the engin challeng that result when a portion 
of that energi be lose a wast heat. the wiki also compar natur 
computations, perform by cell or human brains, to artifici 
computations, which be markedli less efficient. 

the research pick up on work by rolf landauer, who in 1961 
postul that in order to eras a singl bit of inform — a 1 or a 0 
— a certain amount of energi must be lose a heat. landauer’ insight be 
well know to comput scientist and have lead to an inform maxim to 
avoid bit erasur whenev possible. 

go beyond landauer’ cost, the new paper tri to convey that 
“there’ more to the thermodynam of comput than just bit 
erasure,” say co-author joshua grochow of the univers of colorado 
boulder. the paper, publish in the comput scienc newslett 
sigact news, present addit factor that could affect how energi 
flow in and out of atom dure a computation. 

To reach other scientist who might be interest in pursu a 
thermodynam of computation, grochow and co-author david 
wolpert of the santa Fe institut catalog some of the new tool from 
statist physic that appli to nonequilibrium system — like 
computers. 

cooler comput through statist physics? https://santafe.edu/news-center/news/cooler-computing-through-statistica... 

1 sur 2 27-06-18 à 13:57 



“part of what we be tri to do with thi paper be packag up the 
lesson from nonequilibrium statist [physics] over the past 20 year 
in a way that make clear what the new comput question are,” 
grochow explains. He hope that by present what be now know 
about the relationship between thermodynam and the microscop 
process that occur dure computation, the paper will “entic 
comput scientist to work on a new gener of questions.” 

one of these question involv how to thermodynam “tune” 
comput to the input they be most like to encounter. grochow 
give the exampl of a calcul that be thermodynam optim 
for random 32-bit string input (equival to a decim valu of 10 
digits). the major of human user don’t enter input that requir ani 
of the high bits. If the calcul be re-engin to “expect” few 
than 32 bits, would it wast less energi in the form of heat? 

beyond the accuraci of a computation, grochow say the amount of 
memori a comput requir and how long the comput take 
be other aspect that could affect it thermodynam efficiency. 

wolpert hope their research will expand to incorpor other recent 
breakthrough from statist physics, like the jarzynski equation. 
thi equat provid a probabilist bridg between the macro-scal 
world, where entropi can onli increase, and the micro-scal world, 
where it do not. some comput transistor be tini enough to exist 
between these macro and micro scales. 

“we’r extend comput scienc theory, which be origin 
motiv by real-world systems, to other aspect of those system that 
it never even knew to think about before,” say wolpert. 

the theori could lead to engin advanc that would enabl 
cooler, more power machines, like exascal comput and even tini 
swarm robots. It could also impact the sustain of comput 
technology. 

“comput now use a non-trivi fraction of energi in first world 
countries,” say grochow. “given that comput be go to continu 
to grow, reduc the energi they consum be huge import to 
reduc our overal energi footprint.” 

read “beyond number of bit erasures: new complex 
question rais by recent discov thermodynam cost 
of computation” in sigact news. (june 21, 2018) 

visit the thermodynam of comput wiki for refer 
materials, upcom events, job openings, and discuss 
forum. 

cooler comput through statist physics? https://santafe.edu/news-center/news/cooler-computing-through-statistica... 

2 sur 2 27-06-18 à 13:57 


