


















































critic learn period in deep neural network 
ucla-tr-170017 

alessandro achillea,1,2, matteo rovereb,1, and stefano soattoa 

adepart of comput science, univers of california, lo angeles, 405 hilgard ave, lo angeles, 90095, ca, usa; bann romney center for neurolog diseases, 
brigham and women’ hospit and harvard medic school, boston, ma, usa 

thi manuscript be compil on may 16, 2018 

critic period be phase in the earli develop of human and 
anim dure which experi can irrevers affect the architec- 
ture of neuron networks. In thi work, we studi the effect of visual 
stimulu deficit on the train of artifici neural network (anns). 
introduc well-character visual deficits, such a cataract-lik 
blurring, in the earli train phase of a standard deep neural net- 
work caus a perman perform loss that close mimic crit- 
ical period behavior in human and anim models. deficit that do 
not affect low-level imag statistics, such a vertic flip of the 
images, have no last effect on the anns’ perform and can be 
rapidli overcom with further training. In addition, the deeper the 
ann is, the more pronounc the critic period. To good under- 
stand thi phenomenon, we use fisher inform a a measur of 
the strength of the network’ connect dure the training. our 
information-theoret analysi suggest that the first few epoch be 
critic for the creation of strong connect across differ layers, 
optim for process the input data distribution. onc such strong 
connect be created, they do not appear to chang dure addi- 
tional training. these find suggest that the initi rapid learn 
phase of ann training, under-scrutin compar to it asymptot 
behavior, play a key role in defin the final perform of net- 
works. our result also show how critic period be not restrict 
to biolog systems, but can emerg natur in learn systems, 
whether biolog or artificial, due to fundament constrain aris 
from learn dynam and inform processing. 

critic period | deep learn | inform theori | artifici neuro- 
scienc | inform plastic 

the term “critic period” refer to a phase in brain devel-op dure which the effect of experi lead to deep 
and irrevers remodel of neural circuit (1). similarly, 
the express “sensit period” be use to describ a time of 
heightened, yet reversible, plastic in respons to experi 
(2). the concept be introduc by hubel and wiesel in the 
1960s, a part of their semin work on the architectur and 
develop of the visual system (3). In their classic experi- 
ment use monocularli depriv kittens, they studi the 
effect of the deficit on ocular domin in the primari visual 
cortex (v1). they found that kitten monocularli blind by 
lid sutur in the first 3 month after birth remain blind in 
the depriv eye, while no effect be observ in adult cat 
subject to analog or more sever deficit (4, 5). critic 
period be late report for a varieti of anim species, 
includ human (6, 7), and be not limit to visual or, for 
that matter, to sensori systems. either “critical” or “sensitive” 
period have be observed, among others, in auditori space 
process (8), filial imprint (9), song learn in songbird 
(10), languag profici (11), and behavior develop 
(12). the evolutionari advantag of all these phenomenon have 
be attribut to the delic balanc between adapt 
and robust that have to be struck in order to maxim 

fit in a mutabl environment, use earli experi a a 
guid (2, 13). 

the biolog mechan underli the regul of 
critic period be manifold and depend on the speci be 
studied, the brain region involv and the natur of the expe- 
rienc (14). In thi work we show that, by introduc visual 
deficit dure the initi train epoch (i.e., iter over 
the train data) of common artifici deep neural networks, 
we observ trend that close mimic those of human and ani- 
mal models. thi may come a a surprise, sinc contemporari 
artifici neural network (anns) be onli loos inspir by 
biolog system (15). 

most studi to date have focu either on the behavior 
of network at converg (represent learning) or on 
the asymptot properti of the numer scheme use to get 
there (optimization). the role of the initi transient, espe- 
cialli it effect in bias the network toward “good” region 
of the complex and high-dimension optim problem, be 
rare addressed. To studi thi initi learn phase of anns, 
we replic experi perform in anim model and find 
that the respons to earli deficit be remark similar, de- 
spite the larg underli differ between the two systems. 
In particular, we show that the qualiti of the solut depend 
onli minim on the final, rel well-understood, phase 
of the train process or on it veri first epochs; instead, it 
depend critic on the period prior to initi convergence. 

In animals, sensori deficit introduc dure critic peri- 
od induc chang in the architectur of the correspond 
area (3, 7, 16). To determin whether a similar phenomenon 
exist in anns, we comput the fisher inform of the 
weight of the network a a proxi to measur it “effect 
connectivity”, that is, the densiti of connect that be ef- 
fectiv use by the network in order to solv the task. like 

signific statement 

similar to human and animals, we find that artifici neural 
network (anns) exhibit critic period dure which a tempo- 
rari stimulu deficit can impair the develop of a skill. the 
extent of the impair depend on the incept and length 
of the deficit window, a in anim models, and on the size of 
the neural network. our work show how layer-wis chang 
in the effect connectivity, measur use the fisher infor- 
mation of the connections’ weights, underpin critic period 
in anns, and could be one of the mechan underli bio- 
logic critic period a well. We refer to thi phenomenon in 
deep network a “inform plasticity”. 

1alessandro achil and matteo rover contribut equal to thi work and be list in alphabet- 
ical order. 

2to whom correspond should be addressed. e-mail: achille@cs.ucla.edu 

ar 
X 

iv 
:1 

71 
1. 

08 
85 

6v 
2 

[ 
c 

.L 
G 

] 
1 

5 
M 

ay 
2 

01 
8 



other befor u (17), we observ two distinct phase dure 
the training, first a “learn phase” in which the fisher infor- 
mation of the weight increas a the network learn from the 
data, follow by a “consolidation” or “compression” phase in 
which the fisher inform decreas and stabilizes. sensi- 
tiviti to critical-period-induc deficit be maxim exactli 
when the fisher inform peaks. 

A layer-wis analysi of the network’ effect connect 
show that, in the task and deficit we consider, the hierarchi 
of low-level and high-level featur in the train data be a 
key aspect behind the observ phenomena. In particular, our 
experi suggest that the exist of critic period in 
deep neural network depend on the inabl of the network 
to chang it effect connect pattern in order to process 
differ inform (in respons to deficit removal). We 
call thi phenomenon, which be not mediat by ani extern 
factors, a loss of the “inform plasticity” of the network. 

result 

deep artifici neural network exhibit critic periods. stud- 
y of the critic period for monocular depriv in human 
reli on cohort of patient affect by stimulus-depriv 
amblyopia (reduc visual acuiti in one eye), either in their 
infanc or childhood, caus by spontan or traumat 
unilater cataract (18, 19). after surgic correct of the 
cataracts, the abil of the patient to regain normal acuiti 
in the affect eye depend both on the durat of the deficit 
and on it age of onset. earlier and longer deficits, a in anim 
studi of monocular depriv (5, 20), lead to increasingli 
sever effects. 

In order to replic thi experiment setup in anns, we 
train a standard convolut network (cnn) to classifi ob- 
ject in small 32× 32 rgb imag from the cifar-10 dataset 
(21) in 10 classes. recognit perform in the imag 
classif task be akin to optotyp symbol identification, 
employ in optometr acuiti testing. To simul the effect 
of cataracts, for the first t0 epoch the imag in the dataset 
be downsampl to 8× 8 and then upsampl back to 32× 32 
use bilinear interpolation, in practic blur the imag 
and destroy small-scal details.∗ after that, the train 
continu for 300 more epochs, give the network enough time 
to converg and ensur it be expos to the same number of 
uncorrupt imag a in the control (t0 = 0) experiment. 

In figur 1, we graph the final perform of the network 
(describ in materi and methods) a a function of the 
epoch at which the deficit be correct (t0). We clearli observ 
the exist of a critic period for thi deficit in the ann: 
if the blur be not remov within the first 60 epochs, the 
final perform be sever decreas when compar to the 
baselin (from a test error of ∼ 6.4%, in the absenc of a 
deficit, to more than 18% when the blur be present over 140 
epochs, a ∼ 300% increase). onc rescal to account for the 
arbitrari time unit (train epoch vs. days), the profil 
of the curv be also strikingli similar to the one obtain in 
kitten monocularli depriv from near birth and whose visual 
acuiti upon eye-open be test and plot against the 
length of the deficit window (23). just like in human and 
anim model (where critic period be characterist of 
earli development), the critic period in the dnn also aris 

∗we employ thi method, instead of a simpler gaussian blur, sinc it have a veri similar effect and 
make the quantif of inform loss clearer. 

0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 
deficit remov (epoch) 

82% 

84% 

86% 

88% 

90% 

T 
e 

t a 
cc 

ur 
ac 

y 

convolut network 

0 100 200 
age (days) 

2 

4 

6 

A 
cu 

iti 

kitten 

0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 
window onset (epoch) 

0% 

1% 

2% 

D 
ec 

re 
a 

e 
in 

T 
e 

t A 
cc 

ur 
ac 

y 

sensit of learn phase 

25 50 75 100 
window onset (days) 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

S 
en 

si 
tiv 

iti 

sensit of learn phase (kitten) 

fig. 1. (top left) final test accuraci (solid line) achiev by a cnn train in the 
presenc of a deficit (imag blur) plot against the epoch at which the deficit be 
removed. the perform of the network be impair if the blur be not remov 
earli enough in the training. the critic period be center in the earli rapid learn 
phase of the network (the dash line show the rapid increas of test accuraci a 
a function of the train epoch, when train the cnn in the absenc of deficit). 
(top right) develop of visual acuiti in the cat a a function of age (dash 
line), compar with the critic period for monocular depriv (solid line; the visual 
acuiti valu plot be those of kitten monocularli depriv sinc birth and test 
at the time of eye-opening, while the green triangl mark the acuiti of non-depriv 
kittens). adapt from (22) and (23). despit the profound differ between the 
two systems, the trend observ in anim model be remark similar to the one 
obtain from a cnn. (bottom left) here the deficit be introduc in a short window 
of 40 epochs, vari the epoch of onset, and the final test accuraci of the network be 
plot a a function of the onset. the decreas in the cnn’ perform can be 
use to probe the sensit of each epoch to the deficit: the most affect epoch 
be in the middl of the earli rapid learn phase, befor the test error (dash line) 
begin to plateau. after the test error plateaus, the network be larg unaffect by 
the deficit. (bottom right) degre of function disconnect (normal number 
of V1 monocular cell disconnect from the contralater eye, 0 in a non-depriv 
kitten) plot against the kittens’ age at the onset of the monocular depriv 
deficit window of 10-12 day (solid line). adapt from (20). overlaid on the critic 
period profil be the the plot of the percentag miss visual acuiti at each age, 
normal to the valu attain by a matur cat (dash line, data from (22)). again, 
a similar experi perform on anim model show result analog to the 
ann’ performance. 

dure the initi rapid learn phase. At thi stage, the 
network be quickli learn a solut befor the test error 
plateau and the longer asymptot converg phase begins. 

To quantifi more accur the sensit of the ann 
to imag blur throughout it earli learn phase, we 
introduc the deficit in a short constant window (40 epochs), 
start at differ epochs, and then measur the decreas 
in the ann’ final perform compar to the baseline. In 
figur 1, we plot the final test error of the network against 
the epoch of onset of the deficit. We observ that the network’ 
sensit to blur peak in the central part of the earli 
rapid learn phase (around 30 epochs), while late deficit 
produc littl or no effect. A similar experi be also 
perform on kitten by olson and freeman, use a window 
of 10-12 day dure which the anim be monocularli 
depriv and use it to “scan” the first 4 month after birth 
to obtain a sensit profil (20). the result obtain on the 
dnn are, again, in accord with the trend observ in anim 



0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 
deficit remov (epoch) 

82% 

84% 

86% 

88% 

90% 

92% 

T 
e 

t a 
cc 

ur 
ac 

y 
vertic flip 

0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 
deficit remov (epoch) 

82% 

84% 

86% 

88% 

90% 

92% 

label permut 

0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 
deficit remov (epoch) 

82% 

84% 

86% 

88% 

90% 

92% 

T 
e 

t a 
cc 

ur 
ac 

y 

nois a input 

fig. 2. high-level perturb do not induc a critic period. (left) final perfor- 
manc of a cnn train on vertic flip imag for the first t0 epochs, plot 
against t0 and (right) the same experi perform when use permut of 
the label a the deficit. the solid blue curv be the test error at the end of the 
train a a function of the epoch of deficit removal, wherea the green dash 
curv be the test error dure train of a network in the absenc of deficit. when 
the deficit onli affect high-level featur (a in the vertic flip) or the last layer of 
the cnn (label permutation), the network do not present a critic period (test 
accuraci remain larg flat). high-level featur have also be show to remain 
plastic well into adulthood in human and anim model (24, 25). these find 
suggest that the critic period in dnn be close relat to the depth of the network 
and the hierarchi of imag features. (bottom) sensori depriv caus a less 
sever deficit respons dure the critic period. We simul sensori depriv 
by replac the input imag with gaussian noise; remarkably, a critic period still 
exists, but it be longer and less pronounc than the one obtain in the case of imag 
blur (figur 1). A similar phenomenon have be report in human and anim 
models, where earli sensori depriv prolong the plastic of neuron network 
(26, 27). 

model (figur 1).† 

high-level deficit be not associ with a critic period. 
critic period of neuron network deal with high-level 
aspect of sensori process end late than their lower-level 
counterparts, with some nucleu remain plastic even in adult- 
hood (7). although the invers of the visual field have not 
be systemat test on young anim (or humans), it 
be well-report that adult human can quickli adapt to it 
(24, 30), suggest the absenc of a critic period. In addit 
to the behavior recoveri from the deficit, the anatom plas- 
ticiti in the adult have also be confirm in anim model 
(25). 

We observ a similar behavior in anns: in figur 2 we 
perform the same experi a before, thi time use vertic 
flip of the train imag a the deficit, instead of blurring. 
We observ that the ann be larg unaffect by vertic 
flip and that the network quickli recov it baselin 
perform after deficit correction. An analog result be 
also obtain when the high-level deficit be a permut 
of the task label (figur 2). these find suggest that 

†olson and freeman here employ a neuroanatom readout to measur the impact of monocular 
depriv on visual development. while excel correl between anatomy, physiolog and 
behavior be gener observ (7, 16, 28, 29), direct comparison with the ann’ perform 
in the imag classif task be less warrant in thi case. We late return to thi aspect and 
character the “connectivity” of ann dure train in information, synapt strength, critic 
periods. 

0 20 40 60 80 100120140160180 
deficit remov (epoch) 

82% 

85% 

88% 

90% 

92% 

95% 

T 
e 

t a 
cc 

ur 
ac 

y 

resnet 

0 80 160 240 320 400 480 
deficit remov (epoch) 

98.6% 

98.8% 

99.0% 

99.2% 

fulli connect 

0 80 160 240 320 400 
deficit remov (epoch) 

86% 

87% 

88% 

89% 

T 
e 

t a 
cc 

ur 
ac 

y 

fix learn rate 

0 80 160 240 
deficit remov (epoch) 

­6% 

­4% 

­2% 

0% 

R 
el 

at 
iv 

e 
te 

st 
a 

cc 
ur 

ac 
y 

depend on deep 

n=1 
n=2 
n=3 

fig. 3. critic period for an imag blur deficit (top left) in a resnet architectur 
train on cifar-10 with learn rate anneal and (top right) in a deep fully- 
connect network train on mnist with a fix learn rate. differ architectures, 
use differ optim method and train on vastli differ datasets, still 
exhibit similar critic period behavior. (bottom left) same experi a in figur 1, 
but in thi case the network be train with a fix learn rate instead of use 
an anneal scheme. although the time scale of the critic period be longer, the 
qualit trend be the same. thi find support the notion that have a critic 
period be an intrins properti of deep network and cannot be explain sole in 
term of the loss landscap and energi functions, without take into account the 
network’ architecture. (bottom right) depend of the critic period profil on 
the network’ depth: add more convolut block to the network increas the 
effect of the deficit dure it critic period. 

the exist of a critic period depend on the structur 
of the input data and the natur of the deficit applied, and, 
a such, cannot be interpret sole a an artifact of the 
optim process or the network’ architecture. We have 
further explor these aspect in late experiments. 

sensori depriv caus a less sever critic period. It 
have be observ in anim models, and recent indirectli 
confirm in human (26), that a period of earli sensori 
depriv (dark-rearing) can lengthen the critic period and 
thu caus less sever effect (at the same age) than those 
document in light-rear anim (27). similarly, both in 
human and anim models, the effect of binocular cataract 
have be character a being, somewhat counter-intuitively, 
less sever than those report in patient and anim suffer 
from monocular deficit (31, 32). these findings, though, 
can be explain consid that, sinc visual experi be 
necessari to shape neuron circuits, lack of experi can be, 
under certain circumstances, less damag to the develop 
of visual skill than defect experi (2). 

simul complet visual depriv in a neural network 
be not a simpl a feed a constant stimulus: a network 
present with a constant blank input will rapidli becom 
trivial and thu unabl to train on new data. thi be to be 
expected, sinc a blank input be a perfectli predict stimulu 
and thu the network can quickli learn the (trivial) solut to 
the task. We instead want to model an uninform stimulus, 
akin to noise. moreover, even when the eye be sutur or 
maintain in the darkness, there will be background excit 
of photoreceptor that be best model a noise. To account for 



this, we simul sensori depriv by replac the input 
imag with a dataset compos of (uninformative) random 
gaussian noise. thi way the network be train on solv the 
highli non-trivi task of memor the associ between 
the finitely-mani nois pattern and their correspond labels. 

figur 2 show that thi extrem form of deficit have a 
much less sever effect, dure it critic period, than the 
one obtain by onli blur images. use gaussian nois 
dure the earli train phase of the ann do not provid 
ani inform on the natur images. yet it effect be 
milder than those caus by a deficit (e.g., imag blur), which 
instead convey some information, but lead the network to 
(incorrectly) learn that no fine structur be present in the 
images. It be also interest to note how a network train 
to memor nois patterns, while train on a complet 
differ array of featur than those need to classifi natur 
images, can still learn to identifi imag correctli with rel 
eas (figur 2). 

depend on the optim algorithm and architecture. 
deep network be commonli train use stochast gradient 
descent (sgd) with an anneal scheme decreas the learn- 
ing rate over the durat of the training, in order to obtain 
converg despit the nois introduc by the stochast 
gradients. one possibl explan for the exist of critic 
period in dnn would thu be that, onc the network enter 
a sub-optim local minimum becaus of the deficit introduced, 
it cannot then (when the deficit be removed) escap due to the 
decreas learn rate. In figur 2 we have alreadi observ 
that in the case of sever deficit the network manag to es- 
cape such a hypothet local extremum despit the decreas 
learn rate. In figur 3, we confirm that a critic period 
exist even when the learn rate, which can be thought of a 
regul the temperatur of the system undergo gradient 
descent (34), be kept constant. 

figur 3 also show that deep fully-connect networks, 
train on the mnist digit classif dataset, present a 
critic period for the imag blur deficit; therefor the convo- 
lution structur be not necessary, nor be the use of natur 
images. similarly, a resnet-18 train on cifar-10 also have 
a critic period, sharper than the one found in a standard 
convolut network (figur 1). thi be especi interesting, 
sinc resnet allow for easi backpropag of gradient to 
the low layers, thu suggest that the critic period be not 
caus by vanish gradients. 

information, synapt strength, critic period 

deficit that result in critic period reflect in chang of 
the brain architectur in the associ area (7). thi be 
inevit differ in artifici networks, a their connect 
be formal fix at all time dure training. however, not 
all the connect have the same import for the final 
output of the network: thi fact be captured, for example, 
by the fisher inform matrix (fim) (35), which may be 
consid the artifici network equival of population-level 
measur of synapt strength and connect in neuron 
network (36) (but see also (37) for altern metrics). In 
thi section, we briefli recal some properti of the fim, 
and appli it to the studi of the connections’ strength of an 
artifici neural network train in the presenc and absenc 
of deficits. use thi approach we aim to determin whether 

the (global) respons of the ann to deficit correl with 
(local) chang in connectivity, similarli to how behavior and 
physiolog featur correl in experience-depriv anim 
model (3, 16, 28, 29). 

the fisher inform matrix. generally, an artifici neural 
network encod a distribut pw(y|x) — parametr by 
the weight w — of the task variabl y (e.g., an imag label 
in cifar-10), give an input imag x. intuitively, the impor- 
tanc of a specif connect can be estim by perturb 
the correspond weight and look at the magnitud of 
the chang in the final distribution. let u consid then a 
perturb w′ = w + δw of the weights, which result in a 
perturb distribut pw′ (y|x). the discrep between the 
origin distribut and the perturb one can be measur 
by their kullback-leibl divergence, which, to second-ord 
approximation, be give by: 

Ex kl( pw′ (y|x) ‖ pw(y|x) ) = δw · fδw + o(δw2), 

where the expect over x be comput use the em- 
piric data distribut q̂(x) give by the dataset, and 
F := ex∼q̂(x)ey∼pw(y|x)[∇w log pw(y|x)∇w log pw(y|x) 

T ] be 
the fisher inform matrix (fim). the fim can thu 
be consid a local metric measur how much the pertur- 
bation of a singl weight (or a combin of weights) affect 
the output of the the network (38). In particular, weight 
with low fisher inform can be remov (pruned) without 
affect the network’ performance, which suggest that the 
fisher inform can be used, in an artifici network, a a 
measur of the effect connect or, more generally, of the 
strength of a connect (36). for these reasons, especi 
when draw comparison with neuron networks, we will 
sometim use “connect strength” and fisher inform 
interchangeably. As it name suggests, the fim can also be 
consid a a measur of the quantiti of inform that 
the model contain about the train data (35). indeed, we 
expect the strength of the connect to increas a we learn 
more inform from experience. finally, the fim be also a 
semi-definit approxim of the hessian of the loss function 
(39) and henc of the curvatur of the loss landscap at a par- 
ticular point w dure training, which provid a connect 
between the fim and the optim procedur (38). 

We will employ the trace of the fisher inform matrix 
to measur the global or layer-wis connect strength, sinc 
it can be calcul effici despit the larg size of our 
networks. We also consid comput the log-determin 
of the matrix use the kronecker-factor approxim 
(40, 41) in order to captur the behavior of off-diagon terms, 
but we observ the same qualit trend a the trace. We 
use resnet to comput the fim because, be a local mea- 
sure, it be veri sensit to the irregular of the loss land- 
scape and resnet have a rel smooth landscap (42). 
for other network architectur we use a more stabl estim 
of the fim base on the inject of nois in the weight (43) 
(also see materi and methods). 

inform chang dure training. In figur 4 we estim 
the global chang to the connections’ strength in a resnet by 
plot the trace of the fim dure the network training. We 
observ that dure an initi phase the network acquir infor- 
mation about the data, which result in a larg increas in the 
strength of the connections. however, onc the perform 



0 50 100 150 200 
epoch 

100 

200 

300 

400 

500 

600 
F 

be 
he 

r 
In 

fo 
rm 

at 
io 

n 
tr 

ac 
e 

fisher inform vs. deficit sensit 

tr(f) 
exp( s40) 
exp( s60) 

102 103 104 

concept age (days) 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

S 
yn 

ap 
tic 

d 
en 

si 
ty 

birth 

synapt densiti in monkey V1 vs. age 

0 50 100 150 200 
epoch 

0 

500 

1000 

1500 

F 
be 

he 
r 

In 
fo 

rm 
at 

io 
n 

tr 
ac 

e 

fisher inform vs. deficit end 

No deficit 
deficit until 220 
deficit until 30 
deficit until 50 
deficit until 70 
deficit until 100 
deficit until 220 

fig. 4. (left) plot of the trace of the fisher inform matrix (fim) of the network weight a a function of the train epoch (solid blue line). We observ two distinct 
phase dure the training: first, the network employ increasingli more connect in order to solv the task (and consequ inform grows). onc a good solut be 
found, the network start to consolid the connect (and inform decreases), so that few resourc (information, or connect if the weak one be pruned) be 
need to solv the task. thi follow the same trend a the network’ sensit to critic periods, a comput in figur 1 and fit to the fisher inform use a simpl 
exponenti (see materi and methods), suggest that the two quantiti be linked. We show the result use both a window size of 40 and 60 to comput the sensit 
curve. (center) the fim can be interpret a a measur of the densiti of the effect network connections. synapt densiti dure develop (here show for the visual 
cortex of macaques; the green dash line mark birth and the green stripe be the averag synapt densiti in a healthi adult, adapt from (33)) follow a similar trend where, 
after a sharp increas and a peak dure earli development, progress elimin of synapsi (pruning) occur and continu throughout life. anns, though, appear to 
have both a differ timescal and a more abrupt decreas in the effect connect after peaking. (right) effect of deficit (imag blur) on the fim. In the presenc of a 
critical-period-induc deficit, the ann employ a much larg set of connect to solv the task. thi can be explain by the fact that the network, unabl to find a gener 
rule to classifi the corrupt images, be forc to memor them in order to solv the task. thi reflect in increas use of the network’ resources, correctli captur by the 
fim, it be a measur of the ann’ inform content. 

in the task begin to plateau, the network start reduc 
the overal strength of it connect while keep it per- 
formanc unchanged. thi can be see a a “consolidation” 
or “compression” phase, dure which redund connect 
be elimin and non-relev memor inform be dis- 
carded. It must be note how a relat observ on the 
train procedur consist of two phase have be suggest 
by (17), who, however, focu on the compress of the ac- 
tivat of the network, rather than on the inform in 
the weight and their connectivity. there be a fundament 
differ between these two analyses: the relat between 
the inform in the weight and the activ be non- 
trivial and articul in (43). In particular, compress of 
the weight can impli compress of the activations, under 
suitabl non-gener assumptions. 

interestingly, thi chang in the connect strength be 
close relat to the sensit to critical-period-induc 
deficit a imag blur, comput use the slide window 
method a in figur 1. In figur 4 we see that the sensitiv- 
iti be maxim precis when the fisher inform peaks. 
moreover, we observ that the exponenti of the sensit 
close fit the fisher information, which be remark sinc 
the fim be a local quantiti comput at a singl point dure 
the train of a network without deficit, while the sensit 
dure a critic period be comput use the test data at the 
end of the train of a network in the presenc of a deficit. 
It be also interest to see the effect of deficit introduct 
on the fisher information. from figur 4 (right), we see 
that the fim trace grow much more in the presenc of the 
deficit (imag blur) and remain substanti high even 
after it be removed. when the data be so corrupt a to be 
classifi incorrectly, the network be forc to memor the 
labels, therefor increas the quantiti of inform need 
to perform the same task. 

notic that a similar phenomenon be observ in the devel- 
opment of neuron network (figur 4, center), where the 
densiti of synapt connect rapidli peak dure earli 
develop and slowli decreas afterward a a result of 
synapt prune (44, 45). however, while deficit have be 

show to affect the synapt densiti in anim model (45), an 
increas in the overal number of connect be not observed. 
thi differ can be partli attribut to the fact that in our 
experi ann be train use a finit dataset, make 
pure memor a viabl strategi to solv the task and 
therefor encourag the storag of unnecessari information. 

layer-wis effect of deficits. We can gain addit insight 
on what be happen in an ann affect by a deficit by 
look at the layer-wis chang of the fisher information. 
In order to do so, we use the all-cnn architecture, which 
have a clearer subdivis in layer than a resnet. when 
the network be train without deficit (figur 5, left), the 
strong (most important) connect be in the intermedi 
layers. thi reflect the fact that most of the inform in 
cifar-10 imag be present at an “intermediate” scale, with 
low level inform (e.g., edges) alon be insuffici 
for identification, and global/contextu inform (e.g., 
background, posit of objects) provid onli limit benefit 
to the task performance. therefore, we expect the network 
to focu it resourc on the intermedi layers, sinc their 
recept field be optim for thi task. 

On the other hand, if the network be initi train on 
blur data (figur 5, top center and top right), the 
strength of the connect be domin by the top layer 
(layer 6). thi be to be expected, sinc the low-level and 
mid-level structur of the imag be destroy and all of the 
remain inform be contain in the global featur of 
the image, which can be process by layer 6, but not by 
the low-level layer with their small recept fields. when 
the deficit be remov earli in the train (figur 5, top 
center), the network manag to “re-organize”, reduc the 
inform contain in the last layer, and, at the same time, 
increas the fisher inform in the intermedi layers, in 
order to process the new featur available. We refer to these 
chang in the fisher inform a “inform plasticity”. 
however, if the deficit be remov after the begin of the 
“consolidation” phase, the quantiti of inform contain 
in the mid-level layer do not chang significantli becaus 
of the network’ loss of inform plasticity. 



0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

Im 
a 

g 
e 

B 
lu 

r 

N 
or 

m 
al 

iz 
ed 

In 
fo 

. 
in 

W 
ei 

gh 
t 

No deficit deficit until epoch 40 deficit until epoch 100 

layer 0 

layer 1 

layer 2 

layer 3 

layer 4 

layer 5 

layer 6 

layer 7 

0 50 100 150 

epoch 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

V 
er 

ti 
ca 

l 
F 

lip 

N 
or 

m 
al 

iz 
ed 

In 
fo 

. 
in 

W 
ei 

gh 
t 

0 25 50 75 100 125 150 

epoch 

0 25 50 75 100 125 150 

epoch 

layer 0 

layer 1 

layer 2 

layer 3 

layer 4 

layer 5 

layer 6 

layer 7 

fig. 5. normal quantiti of inform contain in the weight of each layer a a function of the train epoch. (top left) In the absenc of deficit, the network initi 
acquir a larg amount of information, store in the connect (weights), and us it to quickli learn the new task (the train error also decreas rapidly, with possibl 
overfitting). As train progresses, the network explor more effici solut to the task, requir less resourc (the “compress phase” to optim the inform 
regular describ in (43)). It must be note that most of the resourc of the network (i.e., inform in the weights) be alloc to the middl layer (layer 3-4-5). (top 
right) In the presenc of an imag blur deficit until epoch 100, the task be significantli more difficult, and the network alloc more resourc in order to solv it (see also 
figur 4). most importantly, more resourc be alloc to the high layer (layer 6) rather than to the middl layer (a it be the case in the absenc of deficit). thi can be 
explain by the fact that the deficit destroy the low- and mid-level featur that could be process by those layer and leaf onli the global featur of the image, which can 
onli be process by the high layers. when the deficit be removed, after a small transient, the layer maintain the same content of inform instead of alloc more 
resourc to the middl layers. (top center) On the other hand, when the deficit be remov at an earli epoch, the layer are, at least partially, reconfigur (layer 6 rapidli 
lose information, rel to other layers), without long-term consequences. the most sensit period for learn a task appear to coincid with the start of a “consolid 
phase”, after the initi fast-chang transient. (bottom left, center, right) the layer-wis normal quantiti of inform be show for an ann train in the presenc of 
a vertic flip deficit, which do not induc a critic period (from left to right: no deficit, vertic flip until epoch 40, vertic flip until epoch 100). As expected, the rel 
quantiti of inform in the layer be not affected. 

discuss 

ann and neuron network be vastli differ systems, 
nonetheless both exhibit critic period dure their earli 
learn phase and these share a number of common features. 
In particular, we have show that while cataract-lik deficits, 
such a sever imag blurring, present a critic period, high- 
level impairments, like imag flipping, have littl or no effect on 
the dnns’ performance. these find be in agreement with 
the character of critic period respons to deficit in 
human and anim models. In addition, we use the fisher 
inform to studi the develop of the dnns’ effect 
connect dure train and recogn an earli phase where 
the fisher inform increas sharply, follow by a decrease. 
the maximum sensit to critical-period-induc deficit 
correspond to the maximum of the fisher information. 

It must be note that critic period depend on the task 
explored, the deficit applied, and the readout used: due to the 
fundament differ between neuron network and anns, 
it be challeng to perfectli match experi to anim 
models. sinc visual pathway be extens studi in the 
neurobiolog of critic period and dnn be particularli 
suit for imag classification, we chose to focu our analysi 
on thi task. 

“behavioral” readout upon deficit removal, both in ann 
and neuron networks, can potenti be confound by 
deficit-cop chang at differ level of the visual pathway 
(2, 7). sinc deficit in depriv anim be mirror by ab- 
normal in the circuitri of the visual pathways, we chose to 
also character their effect on network connections. while 
the connect of an ann be fix by design, it “effect 
connectivity”, i.e., the connect that be actual employ 

by the network to solv the task, be not: We quantifi it from the 
fisher inform matrix of the network’ weights. sensitiv- 
iti to critic period and the trace of the fisher inform 
peak at the same epoch, in accord with the evid that 
skill develop and critic period in neuron network 
be modul by chang (gener experience-dependent) 
in synapt plastic (2, 14). our layer-wis analysi of the 
fisher inform (figur 5) also show that, while in a non- 
depriv network connect be strong in the intermedi 
layers, upon introduct of an imag blur deficit, the 
ann reinforc high layer to the detriment of intermedi 
layers, leav low-level layer virtual untouched. If the 
deficit be remov after the ann’ critic period ends, the 
network be not abl to revers these effect. although the two 
system be radic different, it be worth note how simi- 
lariti to such respons to the introduct of visual deficit 
can be found in the visual pathway of anim model (and, in 
part, in humans). lower level (e.g., retina, later genicul 
nucleus) be littl (or not at all) affect by deficit (4, 16, 46). 
higher-level visual area e.g., V2 and post-v2) also show littl 
remodel upon depriv (47–49), possibl becaus their 
plastic be maintain into adulthood (7) and thu most of 
the neuroanatom and physiolog chang due to depriva- 
tion cluster, with vari severity, in the differ layer of V1 
(which we can compar to an intermediate-process level) 
(3, 16). 

In anns, the fisher inform can be interpret a an 
approxim of the local curvatur of the loss landscap (39). 
accord to thi view, figur 4 (left) suggest that sgd 
encount two differ phase dure the network training: 
At first, the network move toward high curvatur region of 



the loss landscape, while in the second phase the curvatur 
decreas and the network eventu converg to a flat mini- 
mum (a also observ in (50)). We could interpret these a 
the network cross a narrow bottleneck dure it train 
befor enter a flat region of the loss surface. when combin- 
ing thi assumpt with our deficit sensit analysis, we 
can hypothes that the critic period occur precis upon 
cross of thi bottleneck. A differ two-phas interpreta- 
tion of sgd have also be propos in (17): In the authors’ 
analysis, the network first learn to encod the task in the 
network’ activations, while in a second phase it minim the 
quantiti of information, while keep enough of it to maintain 
good task performance. the relationship between the bipha- 
sic behavior we observ in the weights, and those observ 
by (17) in the activations, be non-trivial, a describ in (43) 
and even defin inform quantiti for the activ 
present a number of technic challenges. 

there be evid that converg to flat minimum (minima 
with low curvature) in a dnn correl with a good gener- 
aliz perform (42, 50–52). indeed, by recal the 
link between the fisher inform and curvature, we can 
deduc from figur 4 (right) that network impair by the 
deficit converg to sharper minimum than unaffect networks. 
however, we have found that the perform of the network be 
determin by an earli sensit phase, dure which the net- 
work cross high-curvatur region of the loss landscape. thi 
suggest that the final sharp at converg may be an 
epiphenomenon rather than the caus of good generalization. 

appli a deficit at the begin of the train may be 
compar to the common practic of pre-train and fine- 
tune an ann, wherebi the network be initi train on a 
similar task, for which data be plentiful, and then fine-tun 
to solv a specif task. thi be gener found to improv the 
perform of the network. In (53) a similar practic be ana- 
lyzed, but in the differ set of layer-wis unsupervis 
pretraining, seldom use in current practice, and suggest that 
the pre-train may act a a regular by move the weight 
of the network toward an area of the loss landscap closer to 
the attractor for good solutions. the author observ that 
the initi exampl have a strong effect in steer the net- 
work toward particular solutions. here, we have show that 
pre-train on blur data can have the opposit effect; i.e., 
it can sever decreas the final perform of the network. 
follow the loss landscap interpretation, thi would suggest 
that, surprisingly, a configur of paramet abl to classifi 
blur imag be farther apart from a configur abl to 
correctli classifi real images. On the other hand, a config- 
urat abl to memor nois pattern can access a good 
solut to the origin task. however, it must be rememb 
that the interpret of the deficit’ effect a move the 
network close to a bad attractor be difficult to reconcil with 
the smooth transit observ in the critic periods, sinc 
the network would either converg to thi attractor, and thu 
have low accuracy, or not. A richer theoret framework may 
therefor be need to studi critic period pure in term 
of the geometri of the loss landscape. 

A peculiar interpret of critic period in human and 
anim model be propos in (2). knudsen claim that the 
initi connect profil of neuron network be unstabl and 
easili chang by earli experi (highli plastic). As more 
“samples” be observed, the connect chang and reach a 

more stabl configuration, which be not a easili modifi by 
addit experience. learn can, however, still happen 
within the newli creat connect pattern. thi be larg 
compat with our findings: sensit to critical-period- 
induc deficit peak when the remodel of connect 
be at it maximum (figur 4, left) and differ connect 
profil be observ in network train with and without a 
deficit (figur 5). thi also agre with the fact that high-level 
deficit such a image-flip and label permutation, which 
do not requir restructur of the network’ connect in 
order to be corrected, do not exhibit a critic period. 

finally, we want to emphas how our goal here be not 
so much to investig the human (or animal) brain through 
anns, a to understand fundament inform process 
phenomena, both in their biolog or artifici implementa- 
tions. It be also not our goal to suggest that, sinc they both 
exhibit critic periods, ann be necessarili a valid model of 
neurobiolog inform processing, although recent work 
have emphas thi aspect (15, 54, 55). We engag in an “arti- 
ficial neuroscience” exercis in part to address a technolog 
need to develop “explainable” artifici intellig system 
whose behavior can be understood and predicted. while tra- 
dition well-understood mathemat model be use 
by neuroscientist to studi biolog phenomena, informa- 
tion process in modern artifici network be just a poorli 
understood a in biology, so we chose to exploit well-known bi- 
olog phenomenon a probe to studi inform process 
in artifici networks. We have show how our approach can 
help unveil how inform be represented, acquir and trans- 
form in complex network of rel simpl components, 
whether biolog or artificial. 

materi and method 

In all of the experiments, unless otherwis stated, we use the 
follow architecture, adapt from (56): 

conv 96 - conv 96 - conv 192 s2 - conv 192 - conv 192 - 
conv 192 s2 - conv 192 - conv1 192 - conv1 10 - 

avg. pool - softmax 

where each conv block consist of a 3× 3 convolution, batch normal- 
izat and relu activations. conv1 denot a 1× 1 convolution. 
the network be train with sgd, with a batch size of 128, learn 
rate start from 0.05 and decay smoothli by a factor of .97 
at each epoch. We also use weight decay with coeffici 0.001. 
In the experi with a fix learn rate, we fix the learn 
rate to 0.001, which we find to allow converg without excess 
overfitting. for the resnet experiments, we use the resnet-18 
architectur from (57) with initi learn rate 0.1, learn rate 
decay .97 per epoch, and weight decay 0.0005. when experi 
with vari network depths, we use the follow architecture: 
conv 96 - [conv 96 · 2i−1 - conv 96 · 2i s2]ni=1 - conv 96 · 2 

n 

- conv1 96 · 2n - conv1 10 
In order to avoid interfer between the anneal scheme and the 
architecture, in these experi we fix the learn rate to 0.001. 
the fulli connect network use for the mnist experi have 
hidden layer of size [2500, 2000, 1500, 1000, 500]. all hidden layer 
use batch normal follow by relu activations. We fix the 
learn rate to 0.005. weight decay be not used. We use data 
augment with random translat up to 4 pixel and random 
horizont flipping. for mnist, we pad the imag with zero to 
bring them to size 32× 32. 

To comput the trace of the fisher inform matrix, we use 
the follow express deriv directli from the definition: 
tr(f ) = ex∼q̂(x)ey∼pw(y|x)[tr(∇w log pw(y|x)∇w log pw(y|x) 

T )] 

= ex∼q̂(x)ey∼pw(y|x)[‖∇w log pw(y|x)‖ 
2], 



where the input imag x be sampl from the dataset, while the 
label y be sampl from the output posterior. expect be 
approxim by monte-carlo sampling. notice, however, that 
thi express depend onli on the local gradient of the loss with 
respect to the weight at a point w = w0, so it can be noisi when the 
loss landscap be highli irregular. thi be not a problem for resnet 
(42), but for other architectur we use instead a differ technique, 
propos in (43). more in detail, let l(w) be the standard cross- 
entropi loss. given the current weight w0 of the network, we find 
the diagon matrix Σ that minimizes: 

L′ = ew∼n(w0,σ)[l(w)]− β log |σ|, 

where β be a paramet that control the smooth of the ap- 
proximation. notic that L′ can be minim effici use the 
method in (58). To see how thi relat to the fisher inform 
matrix, assum that l(w) can be approxim local in w0 a 
l(w) = L0 + a · w + w ·hw. We can then rewrit L′ a 

L′ = L0 + tr(σh)− β log |σ|. 

take the deriv with respect to Σ, and set it to zero, we 
obtain σii = β/hii. We can then use Σ to estim the trace of 
the hessian, and henc of the fisher information. 

fit of sensit curv and synapt densiti profil from 
the literatur be perform use graphpad prism 7 (graphpad 
software, La jolla, ca), using: 

f(t) = e−(t−d)/τ1 − ke−(t−d)/τ2 

a the fit equation. t be the age at the time of sampl and τ1, 
τ2, k and d be unconstrain paramet (59). 

the exponenti fit of the sensit to the fisher inform 
trace us the express F (t) = a exp(csk(t)) + b, where a, b and c 
be unconstrain parameters, F (t) be the fisher inform trace 
at epoch t of the train of a network without deficit and Sk be 
the sensit comput use a window of size k. that is, sk(t) be 
the increas in the final test error over a baselin when the network 
be train in the presenc of a deficit between epoch t and t+ k. 

acknowledgments. support by onr n00014-17-1-2072, 
aro w911nf-17-1-0304, afosr fa9550-15-1-0229 and fa8650- 
11-1-7156. 

1. kandel er, schwartz jh, jessel tm, siegelbaum sa, hudspeth AJ (2013) principl of 
neural science. (mcgraw-hill, new york, ny), 5th edition. 

2. knudsen EI (2004) sensit period in the develop of the brain and behavior. journal 
of cognit neurosci 16(8):1412–25. 

3. wiesel tn, hubel DH (1963) single-cel respons in striat cortex of kitten depriv of 
vision in one eye. journal of neurophysiolog 26:1003–17. 

4. wiesel tn, hubel DH (1963) effect of visual depriv on morpholog and physiolog of 
cell in the cat’ later genicul body. journal of neurophysiolog 26(6):978–993. 

5. wiesel TN (1982) postnat develop of the visual cortex and the influenc of environ- 
ment. natur 299(5884):583–91. 

6. berardi N, pizzorusso T, maffei L (2000) critic period dure sensori development. current 
opinion in neurobiolog 10(1):138–145. 

7. daw NW (2014) visual development. (springer, new york, ny), 3rd edition. 
8. knudsen EI (2002) instruct learn in the auditori local pathway of the barn owl. 

natur 417(6886):322–8. 
9. hess E (1973) imprinting: earli experi and the development psychobiolog of attach- 

ment, behavior scienc series. (van nostrand reinhold co., new york, ny). 
10. konishi M (1985) birdsong: from behavior to neuron. annual review of neurosci 

8(1):125–70. 
11. newport el, baveli D, nevil HJ (2001) critic think about critic periods: perspect 

on a critic period for languag acquisition. in language, brain and cognit development: 
essay in honor of jacqu mehler, ed. doupoux E. (mit press, cambridge, ma), pp. 481– 
502. 

12. fox se, levitt P, nelson CA (2010) how the time and qualiti of earli experi influenc 
the develop of brain architecture. child develop 81(1):28–40. 

13. bateson P, gluckman P (2011) plasticity, robustness, develop and evolution. (cam- 
bridg univers press, cambridge, uk). 

14. hensch TK (2004) critic period regulation. annual review of neurosci 27(1):549–79. 
15. hassabi D, kumaran D, summerfield C, botvinick M (2017) neuroscience-inspir artifici 

intelligence. neuron 95(2):245–258. 
16. hendrickson ae, et al. (1987) effect of earli unilater blur on the macaque’ visual system. 

ii. anatom observations. the journal of neurosci 7(5):1327–39. 
17. shwartz-ziv R, tishbi N (2017) open the black box of deep neural network via informa- 

tion. arxiv preprint arxiv:1703.00810. 
18. vaegan, taylor D (1979) critic period for depriv amblyopia in children. transact of 

the ophthalmolog societi of the unit kingdom 99(3):432–9. 
19. von noorden GK (1981) new clinic aspect of stimulu depriv amblyopia. american 

journal of ophthalmolog 92(3):416–21. 

20. olson cr, freeman RD (1980) profil of the sensit period for monocular depriv in 
kittens. experiment brain research 39(1):17–21. 

21. krizhevski A, hinton G (2009) learn multipl layer of featur from tini images, (univer- 
siti of toronto), technic report. 

22. giffin F, mitchel DE (1978) the rate of recoveri of vision after earli monocular depriv in 
kittens. the journal of physiolog 274(1978):511–37. 

23. mitchel DE (1988) the extent of visual recoveri from earli monocular or binocular visual 
depriv in kittens. the journal of physiolog 395:639–60. 

24. kohler I (1964) the format and transform of the perceptu world, psycholog is- 
sue monographs. (intern univers press, new york, ny). 

25. sugita Y (1996) global plastic in adult visual cortex follow revers of visual input. natur 
380(6574):523–6. 

26. kalia A, et al. (2014) develop of pattern vision follow earli and extend blindness. 
proceed of the nation academi of scienc 111(5):2035–2039. 

27. mower GD (1991) the effect of dark rear on the time cours of the critic period in cat 
visual cortex. brain research. development brain research 58(2):151–8. 

28. kiorp L, et al. (1987) effect of earli unilater blur on the macaque’ visual system. I. 
behavior observations. the journal of neurosci 7(5):1318–26. 

29. movshon ja, et al. (1987) effect of earli unilater blur on the macaque’ visual system. iii. 
physiolog observations. the journal of neurosci 7(5):1340–51. 

30. stratton GM (1896) some preliminari experi on vision without invers of the retin 
image. psycholog review 3(6):611–617. 

31. maurer D, lewi TL (1993) visual outcom after infantil cataract. in earli visual develop- 
ment, normal and abnormal., ed. simon K. (oxford univers press, new york, ny), p. 
454–484. 

32. wiesel tn, hubel DH (1965) comparison of the effect of unilater and bilater eye closur 
on cortic unit respons in kittens. journal of neurophysiolog 28(6):1029–40. 

33. rakic P, bourgeoi jp, eckenhoff mf, zecev N, goldman-rak PS (1986) concurr 
overproduct of synapsi in divers region of the primat cerebr cortex. scienc 
232(4747):232–5. 

34. well M, teh YW (2011) bayesian learn via stochast gradient langevin dynam in 
proceed of the 28th intern confer on machin learn (icml-11). pp. 681– 
688. 

35. fisher RA (1925) theori of statist estim in mathemat proceed of the cam- 
bridg philosoph society. (cambridg univers press), vol. 22, pp. 700–725. 

36. kirkpatrick J, et al. (2017) overcom catastroph forget in neural networks. proceed- 
ing of the nation academi of scienc 114(13):3521–3526. 

37. zenk F, pool B, ganguli S (2017) continu learn through synapt intellig in inter- 
nation confer on machin learning. pp. 3987–3995. 

38. amari si, nagaoka H (2007) method of inform geometry. (american mathemat 
soc.) vol. 191. 

39. marten J (2014) new insight and perspect on the natur gradient method. arxiv 
preprint arxiv:1412.1193. 

40. marten J, gross R (2015) optim neural network with kronecker-factor approxim 
curvatur in intern confer on machin learning. pp. 2408–2417. 

41. gross R, marten J (2016) A kronecker-factor approxim fisher matrix for convolut 
layer in intern confer on machin learning. pp. 573–582. 

42. Li H, Xu Z, taylor G, goldstein T (2017) visual the loss landscap of neural nets. arxiv 
preprint arxiv:1712.09913. 

43. achil A, soatto S (2017) emerg of invari and disentangl in deep representa- 
tions. arxiv e-prints. 

44. huttenloch pr, de courten C, garey lj, van der loo H (1982) synaptogenesi in human 
visual cortex – evid for synaps elimin dure normal development. neurosci 
letter 33(3):247–52. 

45. huttenloch PR (2002) neural plasticity: the effect of environ on the develop of 
the cerebr cortex. (harvard univers press, cambridge, ma). 

46. sherman sm, stone J (1973) physiolog normal of the retin in visual depriv cats. 
(1):224–30. 

47. sincich lc, jocson cm, horton JC (2012) neuron project from V1 to V2 in amblyopia. 
the journal of neurosci : the offici journal of the societi for neurosci 32(8):2648– 
56. 

48. gandhi T, kalia A, ganesh S, sinha P (2015) immedi suscept to visual illus after 
sight onset. current biolog 25(9):r358–r359. 

49. gandhi tk, singh ak, swami P, ganesh S, sinha P (2017) emerg of categor face 
percept after extend early-onset blindness. proceed of the nation academi of 
scienc of the unit state of america 114(23):6139–6143. 

50. keskar ns, mudiger D, noced J, smelyanskiy M, tang ptp (2017) On large-batch train 
for deep learning: gener gap and sharp minima. 

51. hochreit S, schmidhub J (1997) flat minima. neural comput 9(1):1–42. 
52. chaudhari P, choromanska A, soatto S, lecun Y (2016) entropy-sgd: bias gradient de- 

scent into wide valleys. arxiv preprint arxiv:1611.01838. 
53. erhan D, et al. (2010) whi do unsupervis pre-train help deep learning? journal of 

machin learn research 11(feb):625–660. 
54. yamin dl, dicarlo JJ (2016) use goal-driven deep learn model to understand sensori 

cortex. natur neurosci 19(3):356. 
55. kriegeskort N (2015) deep neural networks: a new framework for model biolog vision 

and brain inform processing. annual review of vision scienc 1:417–446. 
56. springenberg jt, dosovitskiy A, brox T, riedmil M (2014) strive for simplicity: the all 

convolut net. arxiv preprint arxiv:1412.6806. 
57. He K, zhang X, ren S, sun J (2016) deep residu learn for imag recognit in pro- 

ceed of the ieee confer on comput vision and pattern recognition. pp. 770–778. 
58. kingma dp, saliman T, well M (2015) variat dropout and the local reparameteriza- 

tion trick in proceed of the 28th intern confer on neural inform process- 
ing systems, nips’15. pp. 2575–2583. 



59. bank ms, aslin rn, letson RD (1975) sensit period for the develop of human binoc- ular vision. scienc 190(4215):675–7. 


1 materi and method 

