






































decept detect in video | dare 


decept detect in video | dare 

We present a system for covert autom decept detect use 

inform avail in a video. We studi the import of differ 

modal like vision, audio and text for thi task. On the vision side, 

our system us classifi train on low level video featur which 

predict human micro-expressions. We show that predict of high- 

level micro-express can be use a featur for decept 

prediction. surprisingly, idt (improv dens trajectory) featur 

which have be wide use for action recognition, be also veri good 

at predict decept in videos. We fuse the score of classifi train 

on idt featur and high-level micro-express to improv 

performance. mfcc (mel-frequ cepstral coefficients) featur 

from the audio domain also provid a signific boost in performance, 

while inform from transcript be not veri benefici for our system. 

use variou classifiers, our autom system obtain an auc of 

0.877 (10-fold cross-validation) when evalu on subject which be 

not part of the train set. even though state-of-the-art method use 

human annot of micro-express for decept detection, our 

fulli autom approach outperform them by 5%. when combin 

with human annot of micro-expressions, our auc improv to 

0.922. We also present result of a user-studi to analyz how well do 

averag human perform on thi task, what modal they use for 

decept detect and how they perform if onli one modal be 

accessible. 

paper 

zhe wu, bharat singh, larri S. davis, V. S. subrahmanian 

decept detect in video 

in aaai 2018 

demo 

tri our demo! you can select a video and click load to see our 

prediction. also check the predict under differ modalities! We 

decept detect in video | dare https://doubaibai.github.io/dare/ 

1 sur 3 11-01-18 à 10:55 



also show score for other video in the same valid split. 

predict of differ micro-express be also presented. thank 

for maksim bolonkin’ help! 

framework 

experiment result 

We evalu our autom decept detect approach on a real-lif 

decept detect databas (perez-rosa et al. 2015). 

decept detect result 

user studi 

To test human perform on thi task, we perform two user studi 

use amt (amazon mechan turk). In one user study, subject be 

show onli one modal (i.e. image, audio, transcripts) without access 

decept detect in video | dare https://doubaibai.github.io/dare/ 

2 sur 3 11-01-18 à 10:55 



to other modalities. In the other study, subject be ask to make a 

predict for the whole video with access to all modalities. We also ask 

which modal contribut the most in their decision. 

the import of modal in make decis (what human think). 

human perform in decept detect use differ modal 

be compar with our autom system and our system with ground 

truth micro-expressions. 

decept detect in video | dare https://doubaibai.github.io/dare/ 

3 sur 3 11-01-18 à 10:55 


