


































































data scienc and analytics: a new era 


int J data sci anal (2016) 1:1–2 
doi 10.1007/s41060-016-0006-1 

editori 

data scienc and analytics: a new era 

longb cao1 

publish online: 30 march 2016 
© springer intern publish switzerland 2016 

the twenty-first centuri have usher in a new age of data 
scienc and analytics. 

“data science” a a scientif term be initi propos 
about 15 year ago, and have sinc increasingli attract 
attent and debat within statistics, analytics, computing, 
social science, and other scientif domain and disciplines. 
although argument have emerg from differ communi- 
tie such as, “how and whi be data scienc differ from 
statistics?” and “whi do we need data scienc when for 
decadesw have have inform science?”, it be undoubtedli 
a fact that data scienc be drive a new era of data-driven 
thinking, research, practic and educ which go far 
beyond the breadth and depth of previou efforts. 

In thi data-intens universe, data be a critic asset, and 
data scienc be the interdisciplinari core that drive new 
research, educ and economi in mani divers areas. 
although differ definit and interpret exist, data 
science, a a scientif field, develop relev method- 
ologies, theories, technolog and applic for data, 
rang from data capture, creation, representation, stor- 
age, search, sharing, privacy, security, modeling, analysis, 
learning, present and visualization, to integr across 
heterogeneous, interdepend complex resourc for real- 
time decision-making, collaboration, valu creation, and 
decision-support. the field encompass the larg area of 
statistics, data analytics, machin learning, big data man- 
agement, and other disciplines, includ complex systems, 
communications, social science, decis science, and man- 
agement science. 

B longb cao 
longbing.cao@uts.edu.au 

1 faculti of engin and it, univers of technology, 
sydney, australia 

data analyt and scienc have emerg a an impor- 
tant paradigm for drive the new economi and domain 
such a the internet of things, social and mobil networks, 
and cloud computing, and reform classic disciplin such 
a telecommunications, biology, health and social science, 
a well a upgrad core busi and econom activ- 
ity. data-driven scientif discovery, innov and practic 
have becom essenti for glean understand from larg 
data set and convert data into action intelligence, 
whether it be data avail to enterpris and governments, 
or on the web. 

In recent years, variou initi have be creat by 
government, busi and profession organ to pro- 
mote the develop of big data, data scienc and analytics, 
such a the provis of fund support from nation sci- 
enc foundat for big data research, the ieee task forc 
on data scienc and advanc analytics, the ieee con- 
ferenc on data scienc and advanc analytics, and new 
cours on data scienc and analytics. 

the journal of data scienc and analyt (jdsa) be 
launch to specif strengthen scientif innov and 
practic develop in thi new era of data and analytics. 
jdsa aim to be a prestigi publish venu in the data 
scienc and analyt field for the exchang of new theoreti- 
cal and experiment designs, solid find and insights, best 
practic and applic to real-lif situations, and review 
of new opportun and framework for data scienc and 
analytics. jdsa be the ideal venu for synerg import 
innovations, major impacts, and signific contribut in 
data scienc and advanc analyt from divers domain 
and disciplin for the advanc of interpretation, man- 
agement, and usag of data intelligence. 

As the first scientif journal dedic to data scienc and 
analyt science, jdsa will publish original, fundament 
and appli research outcom in data and analyt theories, 

123 

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1007/s41060-016-0006-1&domain=pdf 


2 int J data sci anal (2016) 1:1–2 

technolog and applications, and will promot new scien- 
tific and technolog approach to strateg valu creation 
in data-rich applications. topic of relev will includ 
all aspect of the scientif foundations, techniques, and 
applic of data and analytics, especi new statist 
and mathemat theori and techniques, data characteris- 
tic and complex understanding, a well a theori on, 
and mean to achieve, the synthesi and meta-synthesi of 
ubiquit intelligence, includ data intelligence, domain 

intelligence, busi intelligence, organiz intelli- 
gence, social intelligence, behaviour intelligence, human 
intelligence, and network intelligence. jdsa particularli 
welcom comprehens survey and review of all aspect 
of data scienc and analytics, togeth with posit paper 
on the trend and controversi within data scienc and ana- 
lytic science. 

In the evolut of data scienc and analytics, jdsa will 
be a core contributor and enabler. 

123 


data scienc and analytics: a new era 



