












































csur5003-43 


43 

data science: A comprehens overview 

longb cao, univers of technolog sydney, australia 

the 21st centuri have usher in the age of big data and data economy, in which data dna, which carri im- 
portant knowledge, insights, and potential, have becom an intrins constitu of all data-bas organisms. 
An appropri understand of data dna and it organ reli on the new field of data scienc and it 
keystone, analytics. although it be wide debat whether big data be onli hype and buzz, and data scienc 
be still in a veri earli phase, signific challeng and opportun be emerg or have be inspir 
by the research, innovation, business, profession, and educ of data science. thi articl provid a com- 
prehens survey and tutori of the fundament aspect of data science: the evolut from data analysi 
to data science, the data scienc concepts, a big pictur of the era of data science, the major challeng and 
direct in data innovation, the natur of data analytics, new industri and servic opportun 
in the data economy, the profess and compet of data education, and the futur of data science. thi 
articl be the first in the field to draw a comprehens big picture, in addit to offer rich observations, 
lessons, and think about data scienc and analytics. 

cc concepts: � gener and refer → survey and overviews; 
addit key word and phrases: big data, data analysis, data analytics, advanc analytics, big data 
analytics, data science, data engineering, data scientist, statistics, computing, informatics, data dna, data 
innovation, data economy, data industry, data service, data profession, data educ 

acm refer format: 
longb cao. 2017. data science: A comprehens overview. acm comput. surv. 50, 3, articl 43 (june 
2017), 42 pages. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3076253 

1. introduct 

We be live in the age of big data, advanc analytics, and data science. the trend 
of “big data growth” [laney 2001; csc 2012; beyer and laney 2012; mckinsey 2011; 
vesset et al. 2012], or “data deluge” [hey and trefethen 2003], have not onli trigger 
tremend hype and buzz, but more importantli present enorm challeng that 
in turn bring incred innov and econom opportunities. big data have attract 
intens and grow attention, initi from giant privat data-ori enterpris 
and late from major government organ and academ institutions. typic 
exampl includ larg data-centr project in google, facebook, and ibm, and strate- 
gic initi in the unit nation [un 2010; usnsf 2012], EU [commiss 2014], 
and china [govern 2015]. 

from the disciplinari develop perspective, recognit of the signific chal- 
lenges, opportunities, and valu of big data be fundament reshap the tradit 

thi work be partial support by the australian research council discoveri grant, under grant 
no. dp130102691. 
author’ address: L. cao, faculti of engin and it, ut advanc analyt institute, univers of 
technolog sydney, PO box 123 broadway, new south wale 2007, australia. 
permiss to make digit or hard copi of all or part of thi work for person or classroom use be grant 
without fee provid that copi be not make or distribut for profit or commerci advantag and that 
copi bear thi notic and the full citat on the first page. copyright for compon of thi work own 
by other than the author(s) must be honored. abstract with credit be permitted. To copi otherwise, or 
republish, to post on server or to redistribut to lists, requir prior specif permiss and/or a fee. request 
permiss from permissions@acm.org. 
2017 copyright be held by the owner/author(s). public right licens to acm. 
acm 0360-0300/2017/06-art43 $15.00 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3076253 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3076253 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3076253 


43:2 L. cao 

data-ori scientif and engin fields. It be also reshap those nontradit 
data engin domain such a social science, business, and manag [yiu 2012; 
labrinidi and jagadish 2012; chen et al. 2012; khan et al. 2014]. thi reshap and 
paradigm shift be driven not just by data itself but all other aspect that could 
be created, transformed, and/or adjust by understanding, exploring, and util 
data. 

the preced trend and it potenti have trigger new debat about data-intens 
scientif discoveri a a new paradigm, the so-cal “fourth scienc paradigm,” which 
unifi experiment, theory, and comput (correspond to “empirical” or “experi- 
mental,” “theoretical,” and “computational” science) [gray 2007; hey et al. 2009]. data 
be regard a the new intel insid [o’reilli 2005], or the new oil and strateg as- 
set, and drive or even determin the futur of science, technology, the economy, and 
possibl everyth in our world today and tomorrow. 

In 2005 in sydney, we be ask a critic question at a brainstorm meet 
about data scienc and data analyt by sever local industri repres from 
major analyt softwar vendors: “inform scienc have be there for so long, 
whi do we need data science?” relat fundament question often discuss in the 
commun includ “what be data science?” [loukid 2012], and “i data scienc old 
wine in new bottles?” [agarw and dhar 2014]. data scienc and relev topic 
have becom the key concern in panel discuss at confer in statistics, data 
mining, and machin learning, and more recent in big data, advanc analytics, and 
data science. typic topic such a “grand challeng in data science,” “data-driven 
discovery,” and “data-driven science” have frequent be visit and continu to 
attract wide and increas attent and debate. these question be mainli post 
from research and disciplinari develop perspectives; while there be mani other 
import questions, such a those relat to data economi and competency, these 
perspect be less well consid in the confer refer to previously. 

A fundament trigger for the preced question and mani other not mention 
here be the explor of new or more complex challeng and opportun [jagadish 
et al. 2014; cao 2010a, 2016b; khan et al. 2014] in data scienc and engineering. 
such challeng and opportun appli to exist fields, includ statist and 
mathematics, artifici intelligence, and other relev disciplin and domain that 
have never be addressed, or have not be adequ addressed, in the classic 
methodologies, theories, systems, tools, applications, and economi of relev areas. 
such challeng and opportun cannot be effect accommod by the exist 
bodi of knowledg and capabl set without the develop of a new discipline. On 
the other hand, data scienc be at a veri earli stage and be engend enorm hype 
and even bewilderment; issu and possibl that be uniqu to data scienc and 
big data analyt be not clear, specific, or certain. differ views, observations, and 
explanations—som of them controversial—hav thu emerg from a wide rang of 
perspectives. 

there be no doubt, nevertheless, that the potenti of data scienc and analyt to 
enabl data-driven theory, economy, and profession develop be increasingli be 
recognized. thi involv not onli core disciplin such a computing, informatics, and 
statistics, but also the broad-bas field of business, social science, and health/med 
science. although veri few peopl today would ask the question we be ask 10 year 
ago, a comprehens and in-depth understand of what data scienc is, and what 
can be achiev with data scienc and analyt research, education, and economi [cao 
2017], have yet to be commonli agreed. 

motiv by the preced concern and observations, thi articl share the find 
from a comprehens survey of the journey from statist and data analysi to data 
science. It construct an overview of data scienc a a field in term of it research, 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



data science: A comprehens overview 43:3 

innovation, economy, profession, and education.1 thi be built on (1) our observ 
and experi in provid real-lif data innov and practic to larg govern 
and industri organizations; (2) the educ and train opportun that have be 
creat for profession at variou levels; and (3) reflect on our view on critic 
issues, futur directions, and strateg opportun in data scienc and analytics. 

focus on data scienc (rather than big data), it be clear that onli a few articl 
and refer have discuss it histori and contents, such a in press [2013], donoho 
[2015], and galetto [2016]. A comprehens review of data scienc be provid in 
donoho [2015], which focu on the evolut of data scienc from statistics. To the best 
of our knowledge, thi articl be the first in the field to present such a comprehens 
and in-depth survey and overview. unlik studi that focu on evolut and specif 
disciplinari perspectives, thi articl provid an introduct to the major aspect 
and domain of data scienc research, economy, profession, disciplinari development, 
and education. thi overview complement our other contribut on specif data 
scienc issu and perspectives, that is, the realiti and pitfal in cao [2016c], the 
challeng and disciplinari direct in cao and fayyad [cao 2016b], the profess 
and educ of data scienc in cao [2016d], and the book on understand data 
scienc in cao [2017]. 

there be sever key terms, such a data analysis, data analytics, advanc analyt- 
ics, big data, data science, deep analytics, descript analytics, predict analytics, 
and prescript analytics, which be highli connect and easili confusing. tabl I 
list and explain them, which be also the key term wide use in thi review. A list 
of data scienc terminolog be avail at www.datasciences.org. 

the articl be organ a follows. section 2 track the progress from data anal- 
ysi to data science, and address the fundament question: what be data science? In 
section 3, the main features, initiatives, activities, and statu of the era of data sci- 
enc be summarized. the evolution, state-of-the-art, paradigm shift, and major task 
of deep analytics, a the keyston of data science, be discuss in section 4. major 
challeng and direct of data-driven innov be present in section 5. sec- 
tion 6 summar new data-driven industri and servic opportunities. the 
data scienc profession, competency, role of data scientists, and cours framework be 
summar in section 7. the futur of data scienc be briefli discuss in section 8, 
follow by the conclus of thi work. 

2. from data analysi TO data scienc 

thi section summar the find of a comprehens survey, includ our in 
cao [2016c], cao and fayyad [cao 2016b, 2016d] and other such a in press [2013], 
donoho [2015], and galetto [2016]), of the journey from data analysi to data scienc 
and the evolut of the interest in data science. subsequently, the question “what be 
data science?” be addressed. 

2.1. the data scienc journey 

It be like that the first appear of “data science” a a term in literatur be in the 
prefac to naur’ book “concis survey of comput methods” [naur 1974] in 1974. 
In that preface, data scienc be defin a “the scienc of deal with data, onc 
they have be established, while the relat of the data to what they repres be 
deleg to other field and sciences.” anoth term, “datalogy,” have previous be 
introduc in 1968 a “the scienc of data and of data processes” [naur 1968]. these 
definit be clearli more specif than those we discu today. however, they have 

1interest reader may refer to a monograph: L. cao, understand data science, soon to be publish by 
springer, for comprehens discuss about data science. 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 

file:www.datasciences.org 


43:4 L. cao 

tabl I. some key term in data scienc 

key term descript 
advanc analyt refer to theories, technologies, tools, and process that enabl an 

in-depth understand and discoveri of action insight in big data, 
which cannot be achiev by tradit data analysi and process 
theories, technologies, tools, and processes. 

big data refer to data that be too larg and/or complex to be effect and/or 
effici handl by tradit data-rel theories, technologies, and 
tools. 

data analysi refer to the process of data by tradit (e.g., classic statistical, 
mathematical, or logical) theories, technologies, and tool for obtain 
use inform and for practic purposes. 

data analyt refer to the theories, technologies, tools, and process that enabl an 
in-depth understand and discoveri of action insight into data. data 
analyt consist of descript analytics, predict analytics, and 
prescript analytics. 

data scienc Is the scienc of data. 
data scientist refer to those peopl whose role veri much center on data. 
descript analyt refer to the type of data analyt that typic us statist to describ 

the data use to gain information, or for other use purposes. 
predict analyt refer to the type of data analyt that make predict about unknown 

futur event and disclos the reason behind them, typic by 
advanc analytics. 

prescript analyt refer to the type of data analyt that optim indic and 
recommend action for smart decision-making. 

explicit analyt focus on descript analyt typic by reporting, descript 
analysis, alerting, and forecasting. 

implicit analyt focus on deep analytics, typic by predict modeling, optimization, 
prescript analytics, and action knowledg delivery. 

deep analyt refer to data analyt that can acquir an in-depth understand of 
whi and how thing have happened, be happening, or will happen, which 
cannot be address by descript analytics. 

inspir today’ signific move to the comprehens explor of scientif content 
and development. 

the evolutionari journey from data analysi [huber 2011] to data scienc start in 
the statist and mathemat commun in 1962. It be state that “data analysi be 
intrins an empir science” [tukey 1962].2 typic origin work on promot 
data process includ inform process [morrel 1968] and exploratori data 
analysi [tukey 1977]. It be suggest that more emphasi need to be place on 
use data to suggest suitabl hypothesi to test. thi contribut to the late term of 
“data-driven discovery” in 1989 [kdd89 1989]. In 2001, an action plan be suggest 
in cleveland [2001] that would expand the technic area of statist toward data 
science. 

play a major role in statistics, descript analyt (also call descript statis- 
tic in the statist community) [stewart and mcmillan 1987] quantit summa- 
rize or describ the characterist and measur of a data sampl or set. today, 
descript analyt form the foundat for the default analyt and report 
task and tool in typic data analysi and busi intellig project and systems. 

our understand of the role of data analysi in those earli year extend beyond 
data explor and process to the aspir to “convert data into inform and 
knowledge” in 1977 [iasc 1977]. more than 20 year later, thi desir foster the 

2on thi basis, david donoho argu that data scienc have exist for 50 year and question how/wheth 
data scienc realli differ from statist [donoho 2015]. 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



data science: A comprehens overview 43:5 

origin of the current popular commun of the acm sigkdd conference, specifi- 
calli the first workshop on knowledg discoveri in databas (kdd for short) with 
ijcai’1989 [kdd89 1989]. In kdd and other data mine conferences, “data-driven 
discovery” be adopt a one of the key theme of these events. sinc then, key term 
such a “data mining,” “knowledg discovery” [fayyad et al. 1996], and data analyt 
[rena 2011] have be increasingli recogn not onli in comput scienc but also 
in other area and disciplines. data mine and knowledg discoveri be the process 
of discov hidden and interest knowledg from data. today, in addit to the 
well-recogn event kdd, icml, nips, and jsm, mani region and intern 
confer and workshop on data analysi and learn have be created. the late 
develop be the creation of global and region confer on data science, espe- 
cialli the ieee intern confer on data scienc and advanc analyt 
[dsaa 2014]. dsaa have receiv joint support from ieee, acm, and the american 
statist association, in addit to industri sponsorship. the preced effort have 
ostens make data scienc the fast grow and most popular computing, statis- 
tics, and interdisciplinari communities. 

the develop of data mining, knowledg discovery, and machin learning, to- 
gether with the origin data analysi and descript analyt from the statist 
perspective, form the gener concept of “data analytics.” the initi data analysi 
focu on process data. data analyt be the multidisciplinari scienc of quanti- 
tativ and qualit examin data for the purpos of draw new conclus 
or insight (exploratori or predictive), or for extract and prove (confirmatori or 
fact-based) hypothesi about that inform for decision-mak and action. 

analyt have also becom more busi orient [kohavi et al. 2002]. It now extend 
to a varieti of data and domain-specif analyt tasks, such a busi analytics, 
risk analytics, behavior analyt [cao et al. 2012], social analytics, and web analyt 
(also gener term “x-analytics”). domain-specif analyt fundament drive 
the innov and applic of data science. both domain-specif and data-specif 
analyt and theoret data analyt have togeth form the keyston of data 
science. 

figur 1 summar the data scienc journey. It present the evolut in term 
of repres moments, event and major aspect of disciplinari development, 
govern initiatives, scientif agendas, typic socioeconom events, and education. 

2.2. onlin search interest trend 

accord to googl trend [googl 2016d], the onlin search interest over time in 
“data science” be similar to the interest in “data analytics,” but be 50%–100% less than 
the interest in “big data.” however, the histor search interest in data scienc and 
analyt be roughli doubl the interest show in big data about 10 year ago. compar 
to the smooth growth of interest in data scienc and analytics, the interest in big data 
have experienc a more rapid increas sinc 2012. when we googl “data science,” 
83.8m record be returned, compar to 365m on “big data,” and 81.8m on “data 
analytics.” 

although they do not reflect the full picture, the googl search result in the last 
10 years, show in figur 2, indic the following: (1) data science, data analysis, and 
data analyt have much richer histori and strong disciplinari foundat than 
big data. (2) the signific boom in big data have be fundament busi related, 
while data scienc have be highli link with research and innovation. (3) data 
analysi have alway be a top concern, although search interest have be flatten 
and diversifi into other hot topics, includ big data, data science, and data analytics. 
(4) interestingly, the word “advanc analytics” have receiv much less attent than 
all other terms, reflect the fact that knowledg of, and interest in, more gener 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



43:6 L. cao 

fig. 1. data scienc journey (with respect to typic events). 

fig. 2. onlin search interest trend on data science-rel keyword by google. 
note: the data be collect on 15 novemb 2016. 

term like data analyt be great than it be for more specif term such a advanc 
analytics. (5) compar to 10 year ago, scrutini of the search trend in the past 4 year 
would find that big data have see significantli increas interest from 2012 to 2015 
and then less movement; however, the interest in data scienc and data analyt have 
consist increased, although it have grown at a much low rate (some one-third 
of big data). data analysi have maintain a rel stabl attract to searcher 
dure these 10 years. 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



data science: A comprehens overview 43:7 

2.3. what Is data scienc 

the art of data scienc [graham 2012] have attract increas interest from a wide 
rang of domain and disciplines. accordingly, commun or propos from divers 
backgrounds, with contrast aspirations, have present veri differ view or foci. 
some exampl be that data scienc be the new gener of statistics, be a consolida- 
tion of sever interdisciplinari fields, or be a new bodi of knowledge. data scienc also 
have implic for provid capabl and practic for the data profession, or for 
gener busi strategies. 

statistician have have much to say about data science, sinc it be they who actual 
creat the term “data science” and promot the upgrad of statist to data scienc 
a a broader discipline. thi be reflect in a seri of earli actions, such a the 
following. 

—jeff Wu question in 1997 whether “statist = data science?” and suggest 
that statist should be renam “data science” and statistician should be know 
a “data scientists” [wu 1997]. the intent be to shift the focu of statist 
from “data collection, modeling, analysis, problem understanding/resolving, decis 
making” to futur direct on “large/complex data, empirical-phys approach, 
represent and exploit of knowledge.” 

—william S. cleveland suggest in 2001 that it would be appropri to alter the 
statist field to data scienc and “to enlarg the major area of technic work 
of the field of statistics” by look to comput and partner with comput 
scientist [cleveland 2001]. 

—leo breiman suggest in 2001 that it be necessari to “move away from exclus 
depend on data model (in statistics) and adopt a more divers set of tools” such 
a algorithm modeling, which treat the data mechan a unknown [breiman 
2001]. 

—in 2015, a statement about the role of statist in data scienc be releas by a 
number of asa leader [van dyk et al. 2015], say that “statist and machin 
learn play a central role in data science.” mani other relev discuss be 
avail in amstatnew [asa 2015] and im [yu 2014]. 

A larg proport of the conceptu argument be deriv from the data-centr 
view. for example, data-driven scienc be mainli interpret in term of the reus of 
open data [murray-rust 2007; oecd 2007]; data scienc compris the number of 
our life [miller 2013]; or data scienc enabl the creation of data product [loukid 
2011, 2012]. In jagadish [2015], six myth be discussed: (1) size be all that matters, 
(2) the central challeng of big data be that of devis new comput architectur 
and algorithms, (3) analyt be the central problem of big data, (4) data reus be low 
hang fruit, (5) data scienc be the same a big data, and (6) big data be all hype. thi 
illustr the constitu of the ecosystem, but also show the divid view within 
the communities. 

intens discuss have take place within the research and academ commun 
about creat data scienc a an academ disciplin [smith 2006]. thi involv not 
onli statistics, but also a multidisciplinari bodi of knowledg that includ computing, 
communication, management, and decision. the concept of data scienc be correspond- 
ingli defin from the perspect of disciplinari and cours development: for example, 
treat data scienc a a mixtur of statistics, mathematics, comput science, graphic 
design, data mining, human-comput interaction, and inform visual [yau 
2009]. 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



43:8 L. cao 

next, we present sever definit of data scienc from high-level and disciplinari 
perspectives, build on the observ and insight we have gain from thi review 
and relev experience.3 

definit 2.1 (data science1). A high-level statement is: “data scienc be the scienc 
of data” or “data scienc be the studi of data.” 

definit 2.2 (data science2). from the disciplinari perspective, data scienc be 
a new interdisciplinari field that synthes and build on statistics, informatics, 
computing, communication, management, and sociolog to studi data and it environ- 
ment (includ domain and other contextu aspects, such a organiz and 
social aspects) in order to transform data to insight and decis by follow a 
data-to-knowledge-to-wisdom think and methodology. 

accordingly, a discipline-bas data scienc formula be give a follows: 

data scienc = statist + informat + comput + commun 
+ sociolog + manag | data + environ + thinking, (1) 

where “|” mean “condit on.” 
the output of data scienc be data product [loukid 2011, 2012]. We defin data 

product next. 

definit 2.3 (data products). A data product be a deliver from data, or be 
enabl or driven by data, and can be a discovery, prediction, service, recommenda- 
tion, decision-mak insight, thinking, model, mode, paradigm, tool, or system. the 
ultim data product of valu be knowledge, intelligence, wisdom, and decision. 

the preced definit of data product go beyond technic product-bas type 
and form in the busi and econom domain, such a social network platform 
like facebook, recommend system like netflix, and mobil app like uber. data 
scienc enabl u to explor new data-driven or data-en personalized, organiza- 
tional, educational, ethical, societal, cultural, economic, political, cyber-phys forms, 
modes, paradigms, innovations, directions, and ecosystems, or even thinking, strate- 
gies, and policies. for example, there be a good possibl that large-scal data will 
enabl and enhanc the transfer of subject autonomi to object autonomy, benef- 
icence, and justic in the social scienc [fairfielda and shteina 2014]. It can enabl 
the discoveri of indic like googl flu [lazer et al. 2014] that may not be readili 
predict by domain-driven hypothesi and professionals. 

these platform deliv data product in variou forms, ways, channels, and domain 
that be fundament transform our academic, industrial, governmental, and so- 
cioeconom life and world. with the develop of data scienc and engin 
theori and technologies, new data product will be created. thi creation be like to 
take place at a speed and to an extent that greatli exce our imagin and think- 
ing, a show in the evolut of internet-bas product and artifici intellig 
systems. 

3. the era OF data scienc 

In thi section, we summar the main characterist of data science-rel govern- 
ment initiatives, disciplinari development, economy, and profession, a well a activi- 
tie in these fields, and the progress make to date. dataf [ayankoya et al. 2014], 
the quantifi self (qs) [swan 2013; clay 2013; wolf 2012; duncan 2009; smarr 2012; 

3interest reader may refer to cao [2016c] for anoth definit from the process perspective. 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



data science: A comprehens overview 43:9 

fawcett 2016], initi by govern and research institutions, and open data be 
discuss a the key driver of the era of big data and data science. 

3.1. dataf and data quantif 

data be ubiquit becaus dataf [ayankoya et al. 2014] and data quantifica- 
tion be ubiquitous. In addit to the commonli see data transact acquir from 
busi and oper inform systems, increasingli popular and widespread 
dataf and data quantif system and servic be significantli strength- 
ene the data delug and big data realm. such system and servic includ but be 
not limit to wearables, internet of thing (iot), mobile, and social applications. 

As we have see and can predict, dataf and data quantif take place at 
ani time and ani place by anybodi in ani form in ani way in a nontradit manner, 
extent, depth, variety, and speed. 

—quantif timing: anytim quantification, from work to studying, day-to-day 
living, relaxing, enjoy entertainment, and socializing; 

—quantif places: anyplac quantification, from biolog system to physical, 
behavioral, emotional, cognitive, cyber, environmental, cultural, economic, sociolog- 
ical, and polit system and environments; 

—quantif bodies: anybodi quantification, from self to others, connect 
selves, exoselv [kelli 2012] and the world, and from individu to groups, or- 
ganizations, and societies; 

—quantif forms: anyform quantification, from observ to drivers, from ob- 
jectiv to subjective, from physic to philosophical, from explicit to implicit, and 
from qualit to quantit form and aspects; 

—quantif ways: anysourc quantification, such a sourc and tool that includ 
inform systems, digitalization, sensors, surveil and track systems, the 
iot, mobil devic and applications, social servic and network platforms, and 
wearabl [viseu and suchman 2010] and quantifi self (qs) devic and services; 
and 

—quantif speed: anyspe quantification, from static to dynamic, from finit 
to infinite, and from increment to exponenti gener of data objects, sets, 
warehouses, lakes, and clouds. 

exampl of fast develop quantif area be the health and medic do- 
mains. We be datafi both tradit medic and health care data and “omics” 
data (genomics, proteomics, microbiomics, metabolomics, etc.) and increasingli over- 
whelm qs-base track data [swan 2013] on personal, family, group, community, 
and/or cohort levels. 

3.2. data initi by govern 

To effect understand and util everywher data, data dna, and it potential, 
increas number of region and global govern initi [secur 2015] be 
be introduc at differ level and on differ scale in thi age of big data 
and data scienc to promot data scienc research, innovation, fund support, polici 
making, industrialization, and economy. tabl II summar the major initi of 
sever countri and regions. 

—the australian public servic big data strategi [un 2010] aim to “provid an op- 
portun to consid the rang of opportun present to agenc in relat to 
the use of big data, and the emerg tool that allow u to good appreci what it 
tell us, in the context of the potenti concern that thi might raise.” It address the 
identifi big data strategi issu [agimo 2013]. australia’ whole-of-govern 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



43:10 L. cao 

tabl ii. govern initi in big data and data scienc 

govern repres initi 
australia public servic big data strategi [un 2010], whole-of-govern centr of 

excel on data analyt [au 2016] 
canada capit on big data [ca 2016] 
china big data guidelin [govern 2015], china comput feder task forc on 

big data [ccf-bdtf 2013], china nation scienc foundat big data program 
[cnsf 2015] 

EU data-driven economi [eu 2014], european commiss horizon 2020 
big data privat public partnership [horizon 2014] 

UK uk’ big data and energi effici comput [uk 2016] 
UN UN global puls project [un 2010] 
US US big data research initi [usnsf 2012], interag work group on 

digit data [csnstc 2009], darpa’ xdata program [darpa 2016], usa nsf 
big data research fund [usnsf 2012] 

centr of excel in data analyt [au 2016] coordin relev govern 
activities. the australian research council have grant approv to the australian 
research council (arc) centr of excel for mathemat and statist fron- 
tier [acem 2014] to conduct research on big data-bas mathemat and statis- 
tical foundations. anoth recent effort make by the australian govern be the 
establish of data61 [2016], which consolid the relev data-rel human 
resourc in the origin nation ict australia (nicta) [nicta 2016] and csiro 
and aim for a unifi platform for data research and innovation, engag with 
industri and govern and academia, and softwar development. 

—canada’ polici framework capit on big data [ca 2016] aim at “establish 
a cultur of stewardship . . . coordin of stakehold engag . . . develop 
capac and futur fund parameters.” 

—china’ guidelin [govern 2015] be aim at boost the develop of big 
data research and applications, to “set up an overal coordin mechan for 
big data develop and application, speed up the establish of relev rules, 
and encourag cooper between the government, enterpris and institutions.” 
china have also set up a nation strateg plan for the iot and big data [govern 
2015]. mani state and citi in china have launch nation big data strategi 
and action plan for big data and cloud comput [cbdio 2016; agenc 2016], 
such a in beij [govern 2016]. probably, a veri earli exampl in china 
be the luoyang city-sponsor consult project in 2011, for which we develop 
a strateg plan for the city’ industri transform to a “data industry” [cao 
2011]. 

—the european union’ commun toward a thrive data-driven economi 
[eu 2014] be “an action plan to bring about the data-driven economi of the future.” 
It outlin “a new strategi on big data, support and acceler the transit 
toward a data-driven economi in europe. the data-driven economi will stimul 
research and innov on data while lead to more busi opportun and 
an increas avail of knowledg and capital, in particular for smes, across 
europe.” In 2015, the european data scienc academy, edsa [eu-dsa 2016] be 
formed. 

—the unit kingdom’ big data and energi effici comput initi fund 
by the research council [uk 2016] aim to “creat a foundat where researchers, 
user and industri can work togeth to creat enhanc opportun for scientif 
discoveri and development.” 

—the unit nation (un) global puls project be “a flagship innov initi of 
the unit nation secretary-gener on big data. it vision be a futur in which big 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



data science: A comprehens overview 43:11 

data be har safe and respons a a public good. it mission be to acceler 
the discovery, develop and scale adopt of big data innov for sustain 
develop and humanitarian action.” [un 2010] 

—the unit state (us) big data research initi [usnsf 2012] be direct to- 
ward “support the fundament scienc and underli infrastructur enabl 
the big data revolution.” In 2005, the US nation scienc board set the goal that it 
“should act to develop and matur the career path for data scientists” in it report 
“long-liv digit data collections: enabl research and educ in the 21st 
century” [nsb 2005]. In 2009, the committe on scienc of the nation scienc 
and technolog council form an interag work group on digit data. It 
publish a report [csnstc 2009] outlin the strategi to “creat a comprehen- 
sive framework of transparent, evolvable, extens polici and manag and 
organiz structur that provid reliable, effect access to the full spectrum 
of public digit scientif data,” which “will serv a a drive forc for american 
leadership in scienc and in a competitive, global inform society.” In addition, 
the defenc advanc research project agenc (darpa) launch it xdata pro- 
gram [darpa 2016], which aim to develop comput techniqu and softwar 
tool for process and analyz large, imperfect, and incomplet data. In 2012, 
the nation institut of standard and technolog (nist) introduc a new data 
scienc initi [dorr et al. 2015], and in 2013, the US nation consortium for 
data scienc be establish [usd2d 2016]. 

3.3. the scientif agenda of data scienc 

An increas number of new scientif initiatives, activities, and program have be 
creat by governments, research institutions, and educ institut to promot 
data scienc a a new field of science. 

the origin scientif agenda of data scienc have be driven by both govern 
initi and academ recommendations. thi be built on the strong promot of 
convert statist to data science, and blend statist with comput scienc in 
the statist commun [wu 1997; cleveland 2001; iwata 2008; hardin et al. 2015; 
hand 2015; diggl 2015; graham 2012; finzer 2013]. today, mani region and global 
initi have be take in data scienc research, disciplinari development, and 
education, a strateg matter and agenda in the digit era. sever exampl be 
give a follows. 

—in australia, a go8 report [brown 2009] suggest the incorpor of data a 
a keyston in k-12 educ through statist and scienc by such method a 
creat data game for children. 

—in china, the ministri of scienc and technolog veri recent announc the es- 
tablish of nation key lab in big data research a part of a strateg nation 
agenda [cmist 2016]. 

—in the eu, the hlsg report “ride the wave” [hlsg 2010] and “the data harvest” 
[hlsg 2014] urg the european commiss to implement the vision of creat 
“scientif e-infrastructur that support seamless access, use, re=use, and trust of 
data” and foster the develop of data scienc univers program and discipline. 

—in the unit states, a nation scienc board report [nsb 2005] recommend 
that the nation scienc foundat (nsf) “should evalu in an integr way 
the impact of the full portfolio of program of outreach to student and citizen of all 
age that be ‘or could be’ implement through digit data collections.” differ 
role and respons be discuss for individu and institutions, includ 
data authors, users, managers, and scientist a well a fund agencies. the re- 
port [csnstc 2009] from the US committe on scienc of the nation scienc and 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



43:12 L. cao 

technolog council suggest the develop of necessari knowledg and skill set 
by initi new educ program and curricula, such a “some new specializa- 
tion in data tools, infrastructures, sciences, and management.” 

An increas number of research streams, strengths, and focu project have be 
announc in major countri and regions, includ 

—the US nsf big data research fund [usnsf 2012], 
—the european commiss horizon 2020 big data privat public partnership 

[horizon 2014; EU 2014], and 
—the china nsf big data special fund [cnsf 2015]. 

each of these support theoretical, basic, and appli data scienc research and 
develop in big data and analyt through respect scientif foundations, high- 
tech programs, and domain-specif fund such a heath and medic funds. signific 
invest have be make to creat even faster high-perform computers. 

mani univers and institut have either establish or be creat research 
center or institut in data science, analytics, big data, cloud computing, and iot. for 
example, in australia, the author creat the first data scienc lab: the data scienc 
and knowledg discoveri lab at ut in 2007 [dskd 2007], and the first australian 
institute: the advanc analyt institut [utsaai 2011; agimo 2013] in 2011 that 
implement the red model of research, educ and develop (red) of big 
data analyt for mani major govern and busi organizations. In the unit 
states, top univers have work on build data scienc initiatives, such a the 
institut for advanc analyt at north carolina state univers in 2007 [ncsu 
2007a], the stanford data scienc initi in 2014 [stanford 2014], and the data 
scienc initi at univers of michigan in 2015 [umichi 2015]. 

3.4. data scienc disciplinari develop 

In contrast to big data that have be driven by data-ori busi and privat en- 
terprise, research and scientist also play a drive role in the data scienc agenda. 
migrat from the origin push in the statist communities, variou disciplin 
have be involv in promot the disciplinari develop of data science. thi 
involv the disciplinari structure, intrins challeng and directions, cours struc- 
ture and curriculum design, and qualif for next-gener data scientist [cao 
2016b, 2016c, 2016d]. 

In born et al. [2010], the author highlight the need to train the next gener of 
specialist and nonspecialist to deriv intellig understand from the increas 
vast of data from the universe, “with data scienc a an essenti competency” 
in astronomi educ “within two contexts: formal educ and lifelong learners.” 
the aim be to manag “a grow gap between our awar of that inform and 
our understand of it.” In sever research [fox and hendler 2014; bailer et al. 
2012; rudin et al. 2014; anderson et al. 2014; baumer 2015; bussaban and waraporn 
2015], discuss focu on the needs, variations, and addendum of data science-ori 
subject for undergradu and postgradu student major in mathemat and 
computing. case studi of relev subject at seven institut be introduc in 
hardin et al. [2015], with the syllabu collect in hardin [2016]. 

In addit to the promot activ in core analyt disciplin such a statis- 
tics, mathematics, computing, and artifici intelligence, the extend recognit and 
undertak of domain-specif data scienc seem to repeat the evolutionari histori 
of the comput and computer-bas applications. data scienc be warmli embrac 
by more and more disciplin and domain in which it be tradit irrelevant, 
such a law, history, and even nurs [clanci et al. 2014]. it core drive forc come 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



data science: A comprehens overview 43:13 

from data-intens and data-rich area such a astronomi [born et al. 2010], neu- 
robiolog [dierick and gabbiani 2015], climat chang [faghmou and kumar 2014], 
research assess [siart et al. 2015], medium and entertain [gold et al. 2013], 
suppli chain manag (scm) [hazena et al. 2014] and scm predict ana- 
lytic [schoenherr and speier-pero 2015], advanc hierarchical/multiscal materi 
[kalidindi 2015; gupta et al. 2015], and cyberinfrastructur [nsf 2007]. the era of data 
scienc present signific interdisciplinari opportun [rudin et al. 2014], a ev- 
idenc by the transform from tradit statist and computing-independ 
research to cross-disciplinari data-driven discoveri combin statistics, mathemat- 
ics, computing, informatics, sociology, and management. data scienc drive the dis- 
ciplinari shift of artifici intellig (ai) from it origin in logics, reasoning, and 
planning-driven machin intellig to metasynthes ubiquit x-intelligence- 
enabl complex intellig system and servic [qian 1991; qian et al. 1993; cao 
et al. 2009; cao 2015b]. 

A veri typic inter-, multi-, and cross-disciplinari evolutionari trend be the adop- 
tion and adapt of data-driven discoveri and scienc in classic disciplin from 
an informat perspective. thi have result in the phenomenon of x-informat 
for transform and reform the bodi of knowledge. typic exampl includ as- 
troinformatics, behavior informat [cao 2010b; cao and Yu 2012], bioinformatics, 
biostatistics, brain informatics, health informatics, medic informatics, and social in- 
formatics, to name a few [wikipedia 2016b]. hence, it be not surpris to see cours 
and subject be offer in specif area such a biomed informatics, healthcar 
informatics, and even urban informatics. 

follow the creation of the world’ first coursework master of scienc in analyt 
[ncsu 2007b] creat at north carolina state univers in 2007, and the world’ 
first master of analyt by research and phd in analyt launch at the univers 
of technolog sydney in 2011 [ut 2011; wire 2014], more than 150 univers 
and institut have now either creat or be plan cours in data science, big 
data, and analyt [silk 2016]. the major of these cours initi focu on train 
postgradu specialist and certificate-bas traine in busi disciplines, follow 
by the disciplin of comput scienc and statistics. 

sever repositori [silk 2016; dsc 2016a; github 2016a; classcentr 2016; us- 
dsc 2016] collect inform about cours and subject relat to analytics, data 
science, inform system and management, statistics, and decis science. for 
example, accord to dsc [2016a] and github [2016a], there be current about 500 
gener or specif subject or cours that relat to data analytics, inform pro- 
cessing, data mining, and machin learning, of which 78% be offer in the unit 
states. seventy-two percent be offer at master’ level, with onli 7% at bachelor 
level, and 3.6% at doctor level. about 30% be onlin courses. from the disciplinari 
perspective, some 43% of cours specif encompass “analytics,” compar to 18% 
on “data science” and onli 9% on “statistics,” approxim 40% focu on busi 
and social scienc aspects. In classcentr [2016], 138 cours and subject be avail- 
able. A number of US program be list in usdsc [2016], most be creat in 
busi and manag disciplines. 

more than 85% of cours [dsc 2016a] cover a broad scope of big data, analytics, and 
data scienc and engineering. some cours onli offer train in veri specif technic 
skills, capabilities, and technologies, such a artifici intelligence, data mining, pre- 
dictiv analytics, machin learning, visualization, busi intelligence, comput 
modeling, cloud computing, inform quality, and analyt practices. It be veri rare 
to find cours that be dedic to analyt project manag and communica- 
tion skill train [fari et al. 2011], although sever cours on decis scienc be 
offered. 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



43:14 L. cao 

onlin data scienc cours significantli complement tradit educ and typ- 
ical offer a success internet-bas data busi model. the corpor train 
market have see increas competit a vendor and univers invest more re- 
sourc in thi area: the sa train cours be one such example. onlin cours 
such a those offer a a massiv open onlin cours (mooc) and by open universi- 
tie be quickli feed the market. 

today, an increas number of cours be offer in the mooc mode [fox et al. 
2015; boyer et al. 2015], such a through class central [classcentr 2016; coursera 
2016], edx [edx 2016; udac 2016] and udemi [udemi 2016]. the mooc model be 
fundament chang the way cours be offer by util online, distributed, 
and open data, curriculum develop resourc and expertise, and deliveri channel 
and services. cours develop technolog such a googl cours builder [googl 
2016c] and open edx [openedx 2016] be use to creat onlin cours and their 
operations. 

most of the avail cours focu on classic subjects; in particular, statistics, data 
mining, machin learning, prediction, busi intelligence, inform management, 
and databas management. new program languag includ R and python, 
and cloud infrastructur mapreduc and hadoop be highlight in these courses. 
techniqu relat to off-the-shelf softwar and tool be often emphasized. veri few 
subject be specifi for advanc analytics, real-lif analyt practices, communica- 
tion, project management, and decis support. An increas number of cours be 
creat to address domain-specif demands, such a incorpor statistics, busi 
analytics, web, and social network analyt into scm predict analyt [schoenherr 
and speier-pero 2015]. 

3.5. new data economi and industri transform 

the recognit of the valu and potenti of data scienc and analyt and it rapid 
growth have also be driven and promot by the evolut of a new data economi 
and industri transformation, such a larg privat data enterprise. the advanc 
of data scienc and big data analyt be convers significantli influenc and driv- 
ing the develop of a new data economy, industri transformation, and increas in 
productivity. thi wave of data economi upgrad and industri transform fea- 
ture the revolut of advanc artifici intelligence-en technolog and busi- 
nesses, and the complementari advanc in AI and the ai-driven data economi be 
larg propel by data scienc and analytics. they includ inventing, commercializ- 
ing, and appli infrastructures, tools, systems, services, applications, and consulta- 
tion for managing, discovering, and util deep data intellig and synthes 
x-intellig and x-complex [cao 2016b]. 

A typic indic be the 2010 ibm global ceo study, from which the result 
report [ibm 2010] draw the follow conclusions: “yet the emerg of advanc 
technolog like busi analyt can help uncov previous hidden correl 
and patterns, and provid great clariti and certainti when make mani busi 
decisions.” To manag the increas complexity, the ceo in thi studi believ that 
“a good handl on inform and masteri of analyt to predict consequ of 
decis could go a long way in reduc uncertainti and in forg answer that be 
both swift and right.” thi lead to their desir to “translat data into insight into action 
that creat busi results” and to “take advantag of the benefit of analytics.” 

today, it can safe be say that data scienc have enabl the so-cal “new economy” 
a evid by larg privat enterpris such a facebook, google, and alibaba. thi 
new data economi be data product-bas and data technology-driven. An increas 
number of organ recogn the valu of data a a strateg asset and invest in 
build infrastructure, resources, talent, and team to support enterpris innovation, 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



data science: A comprehens overview 43:15 

and to creat differenti that will lift competit and productivity. lead 
internet-bas data-driven busi [dhar 2013], such a google, facebook, sas, 
alibaba, baidu, and tencent, have overtaken tradit enterpris giants. 

classic manufacturing-focus and core business-ori companies, includ 
ibm, intel [stonebrak et al. 2013], and huawei, have also all launch correspond- 
ing initi and strateg action for big data, iot, and/or cloud computing, and 
be pursu the strategi of data product-bas transformation, product growth, 
and innovation. data scienc have be their new innov engin for productiv- 
iti and competit upgrade. core businesses, includ banks, capit market firms, 
telecommun servic providers, and insur companies, be lead the way 
in datafying, quantifying, analyzing, and use data. It be encourag to see that 
other tradit busi sectors, such a agriculture, tourism, retail, property, and 
education, be also invest in data analyt to transform their product and 
competit advantage. 

mani new start-up and spin-off have emerg rapidli in recent year and have fo- 
cuse on data-bas business, products, and services. thi be reflect in a fast-evolv 
big data landscap [bdl 2016a], which cover data sourc and api, infrastructure, an- 
alytics, cross-infrastructure/analytics, open sourc initiatives, and applications. everi 
year, thi chang landscap see significant, swift growth. As a result of dataf 
and data quantification, new platforms, products, applications, services, and econom 
model such a spark and cloudera have quickli emerg in analyt and big data. 

3.6. data profession commun format 

the growth and recognit of an emerg field can be effect measur in term 
of the format width, depth, and speed of it profession communities. the data 
scienc and analyt commun be grow incred quickly. 

the first indic be the emerg of dedic public venu in thi area. 
sever journal on data scienc have be established. these includ the journal 
of data scienc [jd 2002], launch in 2002, which be devot to applic of 
statist method at large; the electron data scienc journal [dsj 2014] relaunch 
by codata in 2014; the epj data scienc [epjd 2012] launch in 2012; the 
intern journal of data scienc and analyt (jdsa) [jdsa 2015] in 2015 by 
springer; ieee transact on big data [tobd 2015] in 2015; and the springer 
seri on data scienc [ssd 2015] and the data analyt book seri [dab 2016]. 

other public be in develop by variou region and domain-specif pub- 
lisher and groups. some exampl be the intern journal of data scienc 
[ijd 2016], data scienc and engin [dse 2015] publish on behalf of the 
china comput feder (ccf) [dse 2015], the intern journal of research 
on data scienc [ijrd 2017], and the journal of financ and data scienc [jfd 
2016]. 

the second indic can be found in the creation of a data scienc commun 
that be significantli enhanc by conferences, workshops, and forum dedic to the 
promot of data scienc and analytics. there be also mani well-establish venu 
that either focu on specif aspect such a kdd and icml or have adjust their 
previou nondata and/or analyt focus, such a the tradit AI confer ijcai 
and aaai. 

—the first confer to adopt “data science” a a topic be the 1996 ifc confer 
on data science, classification, and relat method [ifsc-96 1996], which includ 
paper on gener data analysi issues. 

—the ieee intern confer on data scienc and advanc analyt (dsaa) 
[dsaa 2014] launch in 2014, be probabl the first confer seri dedic 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



43:16 L. cao 

to both data scienc and analyt research and practice. cosponsor by acm 
sigkdd, ieee cis, and the american statist associ (asa), it attract 
wide and signific interest from statistics, industry, business, it, and profession 
bodies. the ieee confer on big data be an event dedic to broad area of big 
data. 

—sever other domain-specif and region initi have emerged, such a the 
three initi in india, that is, the indian confer on data sciences, the in- 
ternat confer on big data analytics, and the intern confer on 
data scienc and engineering. 

—sever other confer seri have be renam and reposit from their orig- 
inal focu on topic such a softwar engin and service-bas comput to 
connect with big data and data science, draw mainli on key topic of interest and 
particip from their origin areas. 

—data analytics, machin learning, and big data have eclips the origin topic of 
interest in mani tradit nondata and/or analyt conferences, such a ijcai, 
aaai, vldb, sigmod, and icde. not surprisingly, some of these venu now 
frequent incorpor more than 50% of paper on data scienc matters. 

the third indic be the growth and develop of profession (online) communi- 
tie and organ establish publicli or privat to promot big data, analyt 
and data scienc research, practic and education, and interdisciplinari communica- 
tions. for example: 

—the ieee big data initi [ieeebd 2014] aim to “provid a framework for 
collabor throughout ieee,” and state that “plan be under way to captur all 
the differ perspect via in depth discussions, and to drive to a set of result 
which will defin the scope and the direct for the initiative.” 

—the ieee task forc on data scienc and advanc analyt (tf-dsaa) [tfdsaa 
2013] be launch in 2013 to promot relev activ and commun building, 
includ the annual ieee confer on data scienc and advanc analytics. 

—the intern institut of data & analyt [ida 2014] aim to bridg the gap 
between academia and industri through the promot of data and analyt re- 
search, education, and development. 

—the china comput feder task forc on big data [ccf-bdtf 2013] con- 
sist of a network of repres from academia, industry, and government, 
and organ it annual big data confer with particip from industri and 
government. 

—sever group and initi promot dedic activ of analyt and data 
science. for instance, datasciences.org [2005] collect relev inform about 
data scienc research, courses, fund opportunities, profession activities, and 
platform for collabor and partnership. the data scienc commun [dsc 
2016b] claim to be the european knowledg hub for bigdata and datascience. 
data scienc central [dscentral 2016] aim to be the industry’ onlin resourc for 
big data practitioners. the data scienc associ [dsa 2016] aim to be a “profes- 
sional group offer education, profession certification, confer and meetups” 
[galetto 2016], and even offer a “data scienc code of profession conduct.” 

—mani exist consult and servic organ have adjust their scope to 
cover analytics, where they previous focu on other disciplinari matters. inter- 
disciplinari effort have be make to promot cross-domain and cross-disciplinari 
activ and growth opportunities. exampl includ [inform 2016], gartner, 
mckinsey, deloitte, pricewaterhousecoopers, kpmg, and bloomberg. 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



data science: A comprehens overview 43:17 

lastly, multin vendors, onlin and new economi giants, and servic provid 
play a critic drive role in commun outreach. each of these have launch relev 
initiatives, such a those by sa [2016], ibm [2016a], googl [2016a], and facebook 
[2016]. mani profession interest group have be set up in social media, includ 
googl groups, linkedin, facebook, and twitter, and be among the most attract 
and popular venu for big data, data science, and analyt profession to share and 
network. 

3.7. the open model and open data 

A key featur differenti the data scienc era from the previou era lie in the 
overwhelm adopt and accept of the open model rather than a close one. 
the open model enabl free, distributed, and collabor mode in everi aspect of 
economy, society, research, and living. It support the innov of social medium like 
facebook and linkedin, the migrat of mobil to smart phone-embed applications, 
and industri transform such a the migrat of physic shop center-bas 
commerc to onlin busi like taobao. 

typically, open data and data share program have be announc in mani coun- 
tri and domains, such a the US govern open data site [us-od 2016], the UK 
open data project [uk-od 2016; uk-hm 2012], the australian govern open gov- 
ernment data site [au 2010, 2013] and data match program [au 1990], and the 
european union open data portal [eu-od 2016] and data share project [hlsg 
2014]. In addition, mani open access scheme be increasingli be accept by 
academ journals. 

effort have also be make in divers societi to creat sharabl data repositories, 
especi for scienc and research. exampl of open repositori be the global climat 
data [tutiempo 2016], the global terror databas [gtd 2016], the yahoo financ 
data [yahoo 2016], the gene express omnibu [geo 2016], mobil data [googl 
2016e], the uci repositori for machin learn [uci 2016], the linguist data 
consortium data for natur languag process [ldc 2016], the trec data for text 
retriev [nist 2015], kaggl competit data [kaggl 2016], and the vast challeng 
[vast 2016] for visual analytics, to name a few. 

4. data analytics: A keyston OF data scienc 

In the age of analytics, what be to be analyzed, what constitut the analyt spectrum 
for understand data, and what form the paradigm shift of analyt take be critic 
question to be answered. We address these issu in thi section. 

data and analyt form a comprehens map that cover 

—the whole lifecycl of the data from the past to the present and the future, 
—the analyt from explicit (known) analyt and reactiv understand to implicit 

(unknown) analyt and proactiv earli predict and intervention, and 
—the journey from data explor (bi descript and predict analytics) to the 

deliveri of action insight and decis through prescript analyt and ac- 
tionabl knowledg deliveri [cao et al. 2010]. 

4.1. data-to-insight-to-decis whole-of-lif analyt 

As show in figur 3, the data-to-insight-to-decis transfer at differ time period 
and analyt stage be embodi along the whole-of-lif analytics. thi can be further 
repres in term of a varieti of analyt goal (g) and approach (a) to achiev 
the data-to-decis goal. 

—past data: the main focu of histor analyt be to explor “what happened” in 
the data and business, and to gain insight into “how and whi it happened” through 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



43:18 L. cao 

fig. 3. data-to-insight-to-decis whole-of-lif analytics. 

model and experiment design, etc. thi stage focu on “we know what we 
know” to conduct a reactiv understand of what take place. 

—present data: detect at thi stage be mainli focu on explor “what be hap- 
pening,” to gener insight about “how and whi it happens.” thi stage address 
“we know what we do not know” with alert gener about suspici events, 
or interest group or pattern present in the data and business. the insight 
be extract for decision-mak purposes, such a real-tim risk manag and 
intervention, to address the question “what be the key drive factors?” 

—futur data: predict analyt be undertaken to investig “what will happen” in 
the future, and to achiev insight into “how and whi it will happen” by estim 
the occurr of futur events, grouping, and patterns. the aim of thi stage be to 
solv the problem that “we do not know what we do not know” by achiev proactiv 
understanding, forecast and prediction, and earli prevention. 

—action decision: prescript analyt and action knowledg deliveri be 
undertaken to investig “what best action to take” to interpret find from the 
past, present, or futur data. thi achiev insight into “what be the next best 
action” and enabl the correspond optim action and recommend to be 
undertaken base on the findings. the aim of thi stage be to solv the problem of 
“how to activ and optim manag the problem identified” by make optim 
recommend and action interventions. 

4.2. explicit-to-implicit analyt evolut 

As discuss in section 2, the last four decad have see the transfer of data analysi 
on small and simpl data, along with hypothesi testing, to data analyt on larg 
and complex data for hypothesis-fre knowledg and insight discovery. today, the sig- 
nific and innov of analyt be good recogn than at ani previou time. 
correspondingly, a critic question to ask be what be the conceptu map and evolut 
of data analytics? figur 4 show a high-level conceptu view of the spectrum and 
evolut of analyt compon and task in term of two major dimensions. 

—dimens 1: level of visibility, automation, and state-of-the-art capabilities: that 
is, the level of data and analyt complex that be visibl to users, the level of 
autom data analytics, and the level of avail capabl to handl the com- 
plexiti and support the automation. with the upgrad of analytics, the visibl 
of data and analyt becom low and the level of autom data analyt be 
low too. As data complex increases, the avail capabl be weakened. the 
goal of analyt be to increas the visibility, automation, and capabl level of data 
understanding, production, and application. 

—dimens 2: degre of x-complexities, x-intelligence, and value: that is, the degre 
of data complex and x-intellig involv in data and analyt be increas 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



data science: A comprehens overview 43:19 

fig. 4. explicit-to-implicit analyt spectrum and evolution. 

with the movement from lower-level analyt to higher-level analytics. dure thi 
process, the level of learn intellig and valu result from the correspond 
analyt be increased. 

As show in figur 4, there be mani typic analyt approach and compon 
that may be involv in execut analyt tasks. they includ reporting, statist 
analysis, alerting, forecasting, predict modeling, optimization, prescript analyt- 
ics, and action knowledg deliveri (deliv insights-bas action for busi 
decision-mak and operations) [cao et al. 2010]. the list approach may be use 
for nonanalyt purposes, and the correspond analyt task may be address 
by nonanalyt approaches. An exampl be optimization, which may be use for ana- 
lytic to select the best option a an analyt approach or may be achiev by find 
from analyt approach a an analyt objective. there may be differ focu and 
connect between the list analyt approaches. for example, forecast may be 
use a an approach for predict when it focu on probabilist estim of possibl 
futures, while predict may involv broad techniqu and object for estim 
outcomes. 

We also roughli categor the multipl compon and task in analyt evolut 
into two main era from the perspect of the disciplinari develop of analytics: 

—era 1: the era of explicit analytics: which focu on descript analytics. typ- 
ical analyt approach consist of reporting, statist analysis, alerting, and 
forecasting. 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



43:20 L. cao 

—era 2: the era of implicit analytics: which focu on deep analytics. typic ana- 
lytic approach be predict modeling, optimization, prescript analytics, and 
action knowledg delivery. 

note that figur 4 onli show an evolut path of the analyt family. It do not 
indic the path of analyt within a specif organ that conduct and util 
analytics. It do not indic a linear path of analyt evolut either. often, a back- 
and-forth iter approach be take in an analyt team, and multipl analyt 
compon may be involv in parallel for explor multifacet observ and 
understandings. 

4.2.1. the era of explicit analytics: descript analytics. typic element and task have 
in the past focu on explicit descript analysi and have the follow features: 

—goal: we know what we know, and therefor aim to identifi and describ the distri- 
bution, generation, and trend of data and busi problems; 

—natur of problem: similar to sight peopl recogn an elephant, we know what be 
to be analyz by hypothesis-bas approaches, and for what purposes; 

—approach: domain-driven analysi for which hypothesi be avail from domain- 
specif knowledg and experts; data analysi test such hypotheses, and the data 
verifi and explain the hypotheses; 

—outcome: focu method be avail from mathemat and statist a well a 
from computing. such method describ and present what have happened, be happen- 
ing, or will happen in usual small or highli manipul data. 

4.2.2. the era of implicit analytics: deep analytics. the limit of explicit analyt have 
recent be more wide recogn in the analyt community, such a in handl 
latent, uncertain, and non-iid data [cao 2014, 2015a]. As a result, the focu have 
recent shift to implicit analytics, and towar deep analytics. deep analyt gain 
an in-depth understand of whi and how thing have happened, be happening, or 
will happen. such whi and how cannot be address by descript analyt and 
can determin the next best or bad situation, a well a devis optim intervent 
strategies. 

—goal: we do not know what we do not know, and therefor aim to gain a latent but 
genuin understand of data and busi problem from visibl and invis 
sources; 

—natur of problem: similar to blind peopl recogn an elephant, we do not know 
what be to be analyzed, or even whi and what we can obtain; 

—approach: data-driven discoveri by which interest but hidden insight be learn 
from data; data creat a view invis to u and explain the unseen reason or 
indicators, to complement domain-driven hypothesi and observations; 

—outcome: the focu be on gain an in-depth, intrinsic, and complet understand 
of invis insights, knowledg and wisdom from data, behaviors, and environ 
about what have happened, be happening, or will happen in data and business. 

tabl iii summar the key categori and featur of explicit analyt versu 
implicit analytics. 

4.3. descriptive-to-predictive-to-prescript analyt paradigm shift 

the paradigm shift from data analysi to data scienc constitut the so-cal “new 
paradigm” [nelson 2009; hey et al. 2009], that is, data-driven discovery. the histori 
of analyt from the spectrum and dynam perspect span two main era of ana- 
lytics, a show in figur 3. analyt practic have see a signific paradigm shift 
across three major stages: (1) stage 1: descript analyt and reporting, (2) stage 2: 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



data science: A comprehens overview 43:21 

tabl iii. explicit-to-iumplicit analyt 

categori explicit analyt implicit analyt 
natur sight peopl recogn an eleph blind peopl do not recogn an eleph 
goal We know what we know We do not know what we do not know 
approach hypothesi + data data + environ (incl. domain) 
outcom descript of data in-depth represent of data 

predict analyt and busi analytics, and (3) stage 3: prescript analyt and 
decis making. 

We briefli discu these three stage a follows. 

—stage 1: descript analyt and busi reporting: the major effort be on explicit 
analytics, which focu on descript analyt and regular and ad hoc reporting. 
limit effort be make on implicit analyt for hidden knowledg discovery, which be 
mainli achiev by use off-the-shelf tool and built-in algorithms. busi report 
(often analyt reports) gener by dashboard and autom process be the 
mean for carri find from analyt to management. 

—stage 2: predict analyt and busi analytics: the major effort be on implicit 
analytics, which focu on predict model and busi analyt (here busi 
analyt refer to an in-depth understand of busi through deep analytics. 
note that thi mean differ from the broad mean wide adopt in busi 
and management), with more effort be make to appli forecasting, data mining, 
and machin learn tool for busi understand and prediction. patterns, 
scoring, and find be present through dashboard and analyt report to 
management. 

—stage 3: prescript analyt and decis making: the major effort be on the de- 
liveri of recommend optim (next best) action for busi decis by discov- 
ere invis knowledg and action insight from complex data, behavior, and 
environment. thi be achiev by develop innov and effect custom 
algorithm and tool to deepli and genuin understand domain-specif data and 
business. consequently, prescript decision-tak strategies, busi rules, ac- 
tions, and recommend be dissemin to decision-mak for the purpos of 
take correspond actions. By contrast, rel limit effort be make on explicit 
analyt sinc they be conduct through autom process and systems. 

dure the paradigm shift (a show in figur 5), a signific decreas be see in 
the effort make in routin explicit analytics, which be increasingli undertaken by auto- 
mat analyt services. By contrast, a signific increas in effort be see in implicit 
analyt and action knowledg deliveri [cao et al. 2010]. the shift from a low 
stage to a high stage accommod an increasingli high degre of knowledge, 
intelligence, and valu to an organization. 

5. data innovation: challeng and opportun 

In thi section, we summar the major challeng and opportun relat to data 
scienc in the relev communities. 

there be two way of explor major research challenges: one be to summar the 
concern of the relev communities, and the other be to scrutin the issu from the 
perspect of the intrins complex and natur of data scienc problem a complex 
system [cao and dai 2008; cao 2015b]. the first approach summar the main 
topic and issu identifi in the statist [chamber 1993; Wu 1997; van dyk et al. 
2015], informatics, and comput [rudin et al. 2014; cao 2016b] communities, vendor 
[stonebrak et al. 2013], govern initi [usnsf 2012; UN 2010; govern 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



43:22 L. cao 

fig. 5. descriptive-to-predictive-to-prescript analyt paradigm shift. 

2015; commiss 2014; UK 2016], and research institut [utsaai 2011; ncsu 
2007a] that focu on data scienc and analytics. thi can result in a pictur of the main 
research challenges. the second approach be much more challenging. It requir u to 
explor the natur of complex data scienc problems, and the unknown space of the 
complex and comprehens intellig in complex data systems. 

figur 6 present a comprehens conceptu map of data scienc a a complex sys- 
tem. It summar some of the main challeng face by the data scienc commun 
in address big data complex [cao 2016b]. We categor the challeng face 
domain-specif data applic and problem in term of five major areas: 

—challeng in data/busi understanding: the challeng here be to identify, spec- 
ify, represent, and quantifi comprehens complexities, know a x-complex 
[cao 2015b, 2016b]) and intelligence, know a x-intellig [cao 2015b, 2016b]). 
such x-complex and x-intellig cannot be manag well by exist theo- 
rie and techniques. however, they nonetheless exist and be emb in domain- 
specif data and busi problems. the issu be to understand in what form, at 
what level, and to what extent they exist, and to understand how the respect 
complex and intellig interact and integr with one another. An in-depth 
understand of x-complex and x-intellig would subsequ result in 
devis effect methodolog and technolog for incorpor them into data 
scienc task and processes. 

—challeng in mathemat and statist foundations: the challeng here be 
to discov and explor whether, how, and whi exist theoret foundat 
be insufficient, missing, and problemat in disclosing, describing, representing, 
and captur the preced complex and intellig and obtain action 
insights. 

—challeng in x-analyt and data/knowledg engineering: the challeng be to de- 
velop domain-specif analyt theories, tools, and system that be not yet avail 
in the bodi of knowledge. they will represent, discover, implement, and manag the 
relev and result data, knowledge, and intelligence, and support the engineer- 
ing of big data storag and management, behavior, and event processing. 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



data science: A comprehens overview 43:23 

fig. 6. data scienc conceptu map. 

—challeng in social issues: thi challeng be to identify, specify, and respect social 
issu relat to the domain-specif data and busi understand and data 
scienc processes, includ process and protect privacy, security, and trust 
and enabl social issues-bas data scienc tasks, which have not, so far, be 
handl well. 

—challeng in data value, impact, and usability: thi challeng be to identify, specify, 
quantify, and evalu the value, impact, utility, and usabl of domain-specif data 
that cannot be address by exist theori and systems, from technical, business, 
subjective, and object perspectives. 

—challeng in data-to-decis and actions: the challeng recogn here be the 
need to develop decision-support theori and system that will enabl data-driven 
decis generation, insight-to-decis transformation, a well a decision-mak 
action generation, and data-driven decis manag and governance. these 
cannot be manag by exist technologies. 

the challeng in x-analyt and data/knowledg engin involv mani specif 
research issu that have not be properli addressed; for example: 

—behavior and event processing: how to capture, store, model, match, query, visualize, 
and manag behavior and event and their properties, behavior sequences/streams, 
and the impact and evolut of behavior and event of individu and group in 
the physic world. 

—data storag and manag systems: how to design effect and effici storag 
and manag system that can handl big data with high volume, velocity, and 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



43:24 L. cao 

variety, and support real-time, online, and on-the-fli process and analytics; and 
how to hous such data in an internet-bas (includ cloud) environment. 

—data qualiti enhancement: how to handl both exist data qualiti issues, such 
a noise, uncertainty, miss values, and imbal that may be present at veri 
differ level due to the significantli increas scale, extent, and complex of 
data. At the same time, how to handl new data qualiti issu emerg in the big 
data and internet-bas data/busi environment, such a cross-organizational, 
cross-media, cross-cultural, and cross-econom mechan data scienc problems. 

—data modeling, learning, and mining: how to model, learn, analyze, and mine data 
that be emb with comprehens complex and intelligence. 

—deep analytics, learning, and discovery: how to discov unknown knowledg and 
intellig hidden in the space D in figur 1 (unknown complexities, knowledge, 
and intelligence; see can and fayyad [cao 2016b]) through invent new theo- 
rie and algorithm for implicit and deep analyt that cannot be handl by ex- 
ist latent learn and descript and predict analytics. also, how to inte- 
grate data-driven and model-bas problem-solv that balanc common learn 
models/framework and domain-specif data complex and intelligence-driven ev- 
idenc learning. 

—simul and experiment design: how to simul the complex and intelli- 
gence, work mechanisms, processes, dynamics, and evolut in data and busi- 
ness, and how to design experi and explor the subsequ impact if certain 
data-driven decis and action be undertaken in a business. 

—high-perform process and analytics: how to support large-scale, real-time, 
online, high-frequency, internet-bas (includ cloud-based) cross-organiz 
data process and analyt while balanc local and global resourc involv 
and objectives. thi requir new batch, array, memory, disk storage, and process 
technolog and systems, and massiv parallel process and distributed/parallel 
and high-perform process infrastructure, a well a cloud-bas process 
and storage. It also requir larg and complex matrix calculation, mix data struc- 
ture and manag systems, and data-to-knowledg management. 

—analyt and comput architectur and infrastructure: how to facilit the pre- 
cede task and process by invent effici analyt and comput architec- 
ture and infrastructur base on memory, disk, cloud, and internet-bas resourc 
and facilities. 

—networking, communication, and interoperation: how to support the networking, 
communication, and interoper between differ data scienc role in a dis- 
tribut data scienc team and dure the whole-of-cycl of data scienc problem- 
solving. thi requir the distribut cooper manag of projects, data, 
goals, tasks, models, outcomes, workflows, task scheduling, version control, report- 
ing, and governance. 

systemat and interdisciplinari approach and methodolog be requir to ad- 
dress the preced issu in data scienc and analytics. these may involv develop 
a synergi of sever research disciplin and areas, includ data representation, pre- 
process and preparation, inform processing, parallel processing, distribut 
systems, high-perform computing, data management, data warehousing, cloud 
computing, evolutionari computation, neural networks, fuzzi systems, enterpris in- 
frastructure, system architecture, commun and networking, integr and 
interoperation, machin learning, data modeling, analyt and mining, servic com- 
puting, system simulation, experiment design, and evaluation. It may also involv 
busi and social aspects, includ industri transformation, enterpris inform 
systems, busi intelligence, busi process management, project management, 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



data science: A comprehens overview 43:25 

inform security, trust and reputation, privaci processing, busi impact model- 
ing, busi value, and util evalu [dsaa 2014; cao 2016a]. interdisciplinari 
initi be necessari to bridg the gap between the respect disciplines, and to 
creat new opportun for the invent and develop of new technologies, the- 
ories, and tool to address critic complex in complex data scienc problem that 
cannot be address by singular disciplinari efforts. 

6. data economy: data industri and servic 

data scienc and big data analyt have lead to next-gener economi innovation, 
competition, and product [mckinsey 2011], a show by the rapidli updat big 
data landscap [bdl 2016b]. signific new busi opportun and previous 
imposs prospect have becom possibl through the creation of data products, data 
economy, and data industri and servic [yiu 2012; csc 2012; ibm 2016a; 
loukid 2012]. In thi section, we discu such opportunities. 

6.1. data industri 

If data be view in the same way a oil, a the new intern currency, then 
clearli the global economi be experi a revolutionari chang from data poor to 
data rich and data-driven. On one hand, data industri creat new business, 
where companies, organizations, and even countri compet over how to best use 
data to creat new data products. On the other hand, core businesses, includ retail 
busi and manufacturing, be give way to a new economi that be center on the 
data industri and digit economy. thi be evid by the domin of data-en 
compani list in the top 10 global companies, especi the larg data company, 
google, and the larg initi public offer alibaba. 

the data industri be take shape and gain signific a a drive forc in the 
new global economy. without loss of generality, figur 7 illustr those aspect in 
which new data busi and the result area of data busi may grow. the main 
drive forc of the data industri come from the follow six core areas: data/analyt 
design, data/analyt content, data/analyt software, data/analyt infrastructure, 
data/analyt services, and data/analyt education. 

—data/analyt design includ the invent of new method and way of design 
and produc digit and data products, services, busi models, engag 
models, commun models, price modeling, econom forms, value-ad data 
products/services, decis support systems, autom systems, and tools; 

—data/analyt content includ acquiring, producing, maintaining, publicizing, dis- 
seminating, recommending, and present data-cent content through online, 
mobile, social medium platforms, and other channels; 

—data/analyt softwar refer to the creation of software, platforms, architectures, 
services, tools, systems, and applic that acquire, organize, manage, analyze, 
visualize, use, and present data for specif busi and scientif purposes, and 
provid qualiti assur to support these aspects; 

—data/analyt infrastructur relat to creat infrastructur and devic for data 
storage, backup, server revenue, data centers, data manag and storage, cloud, 
distributed, and parallel comput infrastructure, high-perform comput in- 
frastructure, networking, communications, and security; 

—data/analyt servic focu on provid strateg and tactic think leadership, 
technic and practic consult services, problem-ori solut and applica- 
tions, outsourcing, and specif servic for data audit and qualiti enhancement, 
data collection, extraction, transform and loading, recommendation, data cen- 
ter/infrastructur hosting, data analytics, and more; 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



43:26 L. cao 

fig. 7. data and analytics-en industri and busi transformation. 

—data/analyt educ enabl the build of corpor compet and training, 
a well a offer online/offline/degree-bas courses, workshops, materials, and 
servic that will allow the gap in the suppli of qualifi data profession to be 
filled, thu contribut to build and enhanc the commun of thi discipline. 

the preced six core data/analyt area will see the growth of new data busi- 
ness in term of the follow core aspect and procedures: data storag and manage- 
ment, understanding, processing, optimization, value-ad opportunities, transport 
and communication, servicing, and decis support. 

the respect core data/analyt sector and core procedur can be develop 
in ani data-rel sectors, especi data-intens domain and sector such a 
telecommunication, government, finance, banking, capit markets, lifestyle, and edu- 
cation. core busi includ manufactur and live busi will see increas 
opportun for good collection, management, and use of data. analyt will be 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



data science: A comprehens overview 43:27 

undertaken to improv productivity, effectiveness, and efficiency, and creat new value- 
add growth in the economy. 

interestingly, a we have seen, the data economi occupi the top 10 larg capit 
entities. the data industri continu to creat new busi models, products, services, 
operation modes, and workforc models. data economi will further chang the 
way we live, work, learn, and be entertained, a new facil and environ be 
creat in which data play a critic role. 

6.2. data servic 

data servic form part of the whole landscap of data and analyt which, a note 
previously, be chang everi aspect of the way we live. data servic can be differ- 
entiat from tradit servic by the fact that they be not tradit physic 
material- or energy-ori services. 

—data servic act a the core busi rather than the auxiliari busi of an 
economy. 

—data-driven product and decision-mak emerg a the core function in larg or- 
ganiz for complex decision-mak and strateg planning, rather than adjunct 
facilities. 

—data servic be online, mobil ,and social based, emb in our activ and 
agenda. 

—data busi be global and 24/7, offer at ani place at ani time on demand or in a 
supply-driven mode. 

—the provis of data servic do not requir tradit product element such 
a intens workshops, factories, and offic facilities. 

—data-driven servic offer real-tim public servic data management, high- 
perform processing, analytics, and decision-making. 

—data-driven servic support full lifecycl analysis, from descriptive, predictive, and 
prescript analyt for the prediction, detection, and prevent of risk, to innova- 
tion and optimization. 

—data-analyt servic be intellig or can enhanc the intellig of gener 
data and inform services. 

—data servic enabl cross-media, cross-source, and cross-organ innov 
and practice. 

—data servic demonstr signific save and effici improv through 
the deliveri of action knowledge/insights. 

some typic data servic deliv through analyt for both core busi and 
new economi be list next a examples: 

—credit scoring: to establish the credit worthi of a custom request a loan. 
—fraud detection: to identifi fraudul transact and suspici behavior. 
—healthcare: to detect overservice, underservice, fraud, and event like epidemics; 
—insurance: to detect fraudul claim and ass risk. 
—manufactur process analysis: to identifi the caus of manufactur problem 

and to optim the processes. 
—market and sales: to identifi potenti custom and establish the effect 

of campaigns. 
—portfolio trading: to optim a portfolio of financi instrument by maxim 

return and minim risk. 
—surveillance: to detect intrusion, objects, persons, and linkag from multisensor 

data and remot sensing. 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



43:28 L. cao 

—understand custom behaviors: to model churn, affinities, propensities, and next 
best action on intervent behaviors. 

—web analytics: to model user prefer from data to devis and provid person 
and target services. 

A major challeng and increas need in the data industri be to provid global or 
internet-bas data servic for a collect of organizations, such a multin 
compani and whole-of-government. such servic need to 

—defin global data analyt object and benefits; 
—support good data governance, security, privacy, and account to enabl smarter 

data use and sharing; 
—support data match and share in the context of cross-organizational, cross- 

platform, cross-format, and cross-analyt goals; 
—prepar global and organization-specif local/department data; 
—foster global and local analyt capabilities, capacity, and competency; 
—enabl share and collabor in data and analyt skills, infrastructure, tools, 

techniques, and outcomes; 
—support crowdsourcing, collabor and parallel analyt tasks, and analyt work- 

flow management; 
—support analyt capabl and packag sharing; 
—support data and data softwar version manag and control [bhardwaj et al. 

2015] at a global and collabor level; and 
—support the visual and dissemin of outcom to target audienc and 

in person preferences. 

data-driven industri and servic be form new trend in data scienc for business; 
for instance: 

—advanc analyt be no longer just for analyst [ghodk 2015]; dummi analyt be 
becom the default set of manag and oper systems. 

—cloud data management, storage, and cloud-bas analyt be gain popular- 
iti [ghodk 2015] and be replac tradit manag inform systems, 
busi support systems, and oper support systems. 

—data scienc on scale from multipl sourc of data be becom feasible; internet- 
base servic be a strongli grow area of the new economy. 

—analyt a a servic be becom feasibl with appropri social issu management, 
a analyt becom a realiti everywher and be emb in business, mobile, 
social, and onlin services. 

—visual analyt be becom a common language. 
—data servic can be mix with virtual realiti and present in a way that combin 

physic and virtual worlds, resources, and intelligence. 
—servic on match and mix data be streamlin into a one-world process, with 

both local and global object addressed. 

7. data education: capabl and compet 

data innov and economi be depend on the correspond data and analyt 
capabl and compet and the abil to handl relat social issues. these 
be weak areas, and there be signific gap in the current bodi of knowledge, 
organiz matur [paulk et al. 1993; crowston and qin 2011], education, and 
training. the requir be to “think with data,” “manag data,” “comput with data,” 
“mine on data,” “commun with data,” “deliv with data,” and “take action on data” 
[cao 2016c]. thi section discu these import matters. 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



data science: A comprehens overview 43:29 

more and more industri and govern organ recogn the valu of data 
for decision-mak and have set up gener and specif data scientist role to support 
data scienc and engineering, for example, chief data officer, chief analyt officer, 
data model and data miners, in addit to data engin and busi analysts. 

7.1. data scientist in a sexi profess 

the role of the data scientist be recogn 10 year ago, and it have becom a sexi pro- 
fession in the job market. the next-gener data scientist will be mostli welcom 
in the increasingli import data economi and data-to-decision. 

In 2004, dr. usama fayyad be appoint a the chief data offic of yahoo, which 
open the door to a new career possibility: the data scienc profession [manieri et al. 
2015; harri et al. 2013] or more specifically, data scientist, for those peopl whose 
role veri much center on data. In 2015, the white hous appoint the first u.s. 
chief data scientist [whitehous 2015]. thi role “will shape polici and practic to 
help the u.s. remain a leader in technolog and innovation, foster partnership to help 
respons maxim the nation’ return on it invest in data, and help to recruit 
and retain the best mind in data scienc to join u in serv the public.” [whitehous 
2015]. 

today, the role of data scientist [patil 2011] be regard a “the sexiest job of the 
21st century” [davenport and patil 2012]. It be report that data scientist earn much 
high salari than those in other data-rel jobs, with a median salari of us$120k 
for data scientist and us$160k for managers, accord to the 2014 burtchwork sur- 
vey [burtch 2014]. thi be attribut to the fact that 88% of respond in thi survey 
have at least a master’ degree, while 46% also hold a doctor compar to onli 20% 
of other big data professionals. In the 2015 o’reilli survey [king and magoula 2015], 
23% be found to hold a doctorate, while anoth 44% have a master’s. the median 
annual base salari of thi survey sampl be us$91,000 globally, and among US re- 
spondent be us$104,000, compar to us$150k for “upper management” (higher 
than project and product managers). 

7.2. what doe a data scientist Do 

so, what be the role and respons of data scientists? here we summar the 
find from sever document on govern initiatives: 

—the US nation scienc board defin data scientist a “the inform and com- 
puter scientists, databas and softwar engin and programmers, disciplinari 
experts, curat and expert annotators, librarians, archivists, and others, who be 
crucial to the success manag of a digit data collection.” [nsb 2005] 

—in a report from the US committe on scienc of the nation scienc and technolog 
council, data scientist be defin a “scientist who come from inform or 
comput scienc background but learn a subject area and may becom scientif 
data curat in disciplin and advanc the art of data science. focu on all part of 
the data life cycle.” [csnstc 2009] 

—the joint inform system committe defin data scientist a “peopl who 
work where the research be carri out, or, in the case of data centr personnel, in 
close collabor with the creator of the data and may be involv in creativ 
inquiri and analysis, enabl other to work with digit data, and develop 
in data base technology.” [swan and brown 2008] 

In business, immens interest have be express by multin vendors, so- 
cial medium and onlin communities, and inform providers, such a ibm [2016b], 
linkedin [2016], kdnugget [2016], facebook [2016], and siam [2016] about the 
role and respons of data scientist and what make a good data scientist. 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



43:30 L. cao 

for instance, a data scientist metromap be creat in chandrasekaran [2013]. the 
metromap cover 10 area and domains: fundamentals, statistics, programming, ma- 
chine learning, text mining/natur languag processing, data visualization, big 
data, data ingestion, data munging, and toolbox. each area/domain be repres 
a a “metro line,” with the station depict the topic to be learn and understood 
in a progress fashion. In addition, inform summar the follow seven job 
task for data scientist [inform 2014]: busi problem (question) framing, an- 
alyt problem framing, data, methodolog (approach) selection, model building, 
deployment, and model lifecycl management. 

An increas number of academ and research institut be work on defin 
the certif and accredit of next-gener data scientists. thi be reflect in 
gener and domain-specif data scienc curriculum for master and phd qualifications, 
such a a phd in analyt [ut 2011] and a master’ degre in scm predict 
analyt [inform 2014]. 

without the loss of generality, typic domain-fre and problem-neutr responsibili- 
tie and requir for job announc in social medium channel (e.g., googl groups, 
facebook, and linkedin) and what we have experienc in the past 15 year in larg 
government and busi organ can be summar a follows: 

—learn the busi problem domain, talk to busi expert and decision-mak 
to understand the busi objectives, requir and preferences, issu and 
constraint face an organization; understand the organiz maturity; iden- 
tify, specify, and defin the problems, boundaries, and environment, a well a the 
challenges; gener busi understand reports. 

—identifi and specifi social and ethic issu such a privaci and security; develop 
ethic reason plan to address social and ethic issues. 

—understand data characterist and complexities; identifi the problem and con- 
straint of the data; develop a data understand report; specifi and scope analyti- 
cal goal and mileston by develop respect project plan to set up an agenda 
and creat govern and manag plans. 

—set up engin and analyt process correspond to analyt goal for 
turn busi and data into information, turn inform into insight, and 
turn insight into busi decision-mak action by develop technic plan 
for the discovery, upgrade, and deploy of relev data intelligence. 

—transform busi problem into analyt tasks, and conduct advanc analyt 
by develop correspond techniques, models, methods, algorithms, tool and sys- 
tems, experiment design and evalu of data science, gener good practic 
experience, perform descriptive, predictive, and prescript analytics, conduct 
survey research, and support visual and presentation. 

—base on the understand of data characterist and complexities, extract, an- 
alyze, construct, mine, and select discrimin features, constantli optim and 
innov new variabl for best possibl problem represent and modeling; when 
necessary, conduct data qualiti enhanc [hazena et al. 2014]. 

—combin analytical, statistical, algorithmic, engineering, and technic skill to mine 
relev data by involv contextu information; invent novel and effect models, 
and constantli improv model techniqu to optim and boost model perfor- 
manc and seek to achiev best practice. 

—maintain, manage, and refin project and milestones, and their processes, deliver- 
ables, evaluation, risk, and report to build active, lifecycl management. 

—develop correspond services, solutions, and product or modul to feed into a 
system packag on top of user-specifi program languages, frameworks, and 
infrastructure, or open sourc tool and frameworks. 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



data science: A comprehens overview 43:31 

—maintain the privacy, security, and verac of data and deliverables. 
—engag in frequent client interact dure the whole lifecycle; tell clear and con- 

cise stori and draw simpl conclus from complex data or algorithms; provid 
client with situat analysi and deep insight into area requir improve- 
ment; translat into busi improv action in the final deployment. 

—write coher report and make present to specialist and nonspecialists; 
present execut summari with precis and evidence-bas recommend and 
risk manag strategies, especi for decision-mak and busi owners. 

7.3. what make a good data scientist 

To satisfi the preced posit requirements, data scientist candid need to have 
certain qualif in addit to the analyt skill that be the foundat of thi 
role. these qualif and abil includ the following: 

—thinking, mindset, and abil to think analytically, creatively, critically, and 
inquisitively. 

—methodolog and knowledg of complex system and approach for conduct 
both top-down and bottom-up problem-solving. 

—master’ or phd degre in comput science, statistics, mathematics, analytics, data 
science, informatics, engineering, physics, oper research, pattern recognition, 
artifici intelligence, visualization, inform retrieval, or relat fields. 

—A deep understand of common statistics, data mining, and machin learn 
methodolog and models. 

—abil to implement, maintain, and troubleshoot big data infrastructure, such a 
cloud computing, high-perform comput infrastructure, distribut process 
paradigms, stream processing, and databases. 

—knowledg of human-comput interactions, visualization, and knowledg represen- 
tation and management; 

—background in softwar engin (includ system design and analysis), qualiti 
assurance. 

—experi work with larg datasets, and mix data type and sourc in a 
network and distribut environment. 

—experi in data extract and processing, featur understand and relat 
analysis. 

—activ interest and knowledg in multidisciplinari and trans-disciplinari studi 
and method in scientific, technical, and social and life sciences. 

—substanti experi with state-of-the-art analytics-ori scripting, data struc- 
tures, program languages, and develop platform in a linux, cloud, or 
distribut environment. 

—theoret background and domain knowledg for the evalu of the technic 
and busi merit of analyt findings. 

—excel write and verbal commun [matsudaira 2015] and organiz 
skills, abil to write and edit analyt materi and report for differ audi- 
ences, and capac to transform analyt concept and outcom into business- 
friendli interpretations; abil to commun action insight to nontechn 
audiences, and experi in data-driven decis making. 

while there be signific role overlap between data scientist and busi intel- 
ligenc (bi) profession [sa 2013], differ research work show that data sci- 
enc profession be gener much more data and technology-savvi rather than 
business-oriented, with most hold a master’ or phd degre in statist or com- 
puter science. 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



43:32 L. cao 

An emc data scienc commun survey [emc 2011] show that (1) data scien- 
tist can open up new possibilities; (2) compar to 37% of BI profession train 
in business, 24% of data scienc profession be in comput science, 17% be in 
engineering, and 11% be in hard science; (3) compar to BI toolkits, data scienc 
toolkit be more technic sophist and more diversified; (4) the number of 
data scientist undertak data experi be almost doubl that of BI profession- 
als; (5) data scienc profession more frequent interact with divers technic and 
busi role in an organ (such a data scientists, strateg planners, statisti- 
cians, market staff, sale people, graphic designers, busi manag and IT 
administration, programmers, and HR personnel) than BI professionals; (6) compar 
to work on normal data, big data manipul tend to tackl more sophist 
data complexities; and (7) data scienc profession spend almost doubl the time 
they spend on normal data on big data manipul (e.g., data parsing, organization, 
mining, algorithms, visualization, story-telling, dynamics, and decisions). 

As a data-centr expert, a good data scientist be also expect to know the underly- 
ing domain well. without an in-depth understand of the domain, the action 
of the data deliver and product by data scientist may be low. however, a data 
scientist be no substitut for domain expert in complex data scienc problem-solv 
[cao 2016b]. similar to ani other disciplinari specialists, data scientist work more 
effect by collabor with domain-specif specialist and subject matter expert 
to achiev broader impact. thi be similar to the requir of domain-driven, ac- 
tionabl knowledg discoveri [cao et al. 2010]. 

7.4. tool for data scientist 

In the previou sections, the respect respons and qualif of data sci- 
entist have be discussed. In section 5, relev research challeng and issu have 
be listed. To support the data servic list in section 6.2, the correspond role 
and qualif discuss in section 7.2 and 7.3 be necessary. 

In thi section, we discu tool that may be use by data scientist to address 
the preced aspects. tool be categor in term of cloud infrastructure, data 
and applic integration, data prepar and processing, analytics, visualization, 
programming, master data management, high-perform processing, busi intel- 
ligenc reporting, and project management. A data scientist may use one or more of 
these tool on demand for data scienc problem-solving. 

—cloud infrastructure: such a apach hadoop, spark, cloudera, amazon web ser- 
vices, unix shell/awk/gawk, 1010data, hortonworks, pivotal, and mapr. most tradi- 
tional IT vendor have migrat their servic and platform to support cloud. 

—data/appl integration: includ Ab initio, informatica, ibm infospher 
datastage, oracl data integrator, sap data integrator, apatar, cloveretl, infor- 
mation builders, jitterbit, adeptia integr suite, dmexpress syncsort, pentaho 
data integration, and talend [review 2016]. 

—master data management: typic softwar and platform includ ibm infospher 
master data manag server, informatica mdm, microsoft master data ser- 
vices, oracl master data manag suite, sapnetweav master data man- 
agement tool, teradata warehousing, tibco mdm, talend mdm, black watch 
data. 

—data prepar and processing: In today [2016], 29 data prepar tool and plat- 
form be listed, such a platfora, paxata, teradata loom, ibm spss, informatica 
rev, omniscope, alpin chorus, knime, and wrangler enterpris and wrangler. 

—analytics: In addit to well-recogn commerci tool includ sa enterpris 
miner, ibm spss model and spss statistics, matlab, and rapidmin [2016], 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



data science: A comprehens overview 43:33 

mani new tool have be created, such a datarobot [2016], bigml [2016], mlbase 
[lab 2016], and api includ googl cloud predict api [googl 2016b]. 

—visualization: mani free and commerci softwar be list in kdnugget [2015] 
for visualization, such a interact data language, iri explorer, miner3d, 
netmap, panopticon, sciencegl, quadrigram, and visumap. 

—programming: In addit to the main languag R, sas, sql, python, and java, 
mani other be use for analytics, includ scala, javascript, .net, nodejs, obj-c, 
php, ruby, and Go [davi 2016]. 

—high-perform processing: In wikipedia [2016a], about 40 comput cluster soft- 
ware be list and compar in term of their technic performance, such a stacki, 
kubernetes, moab cluster suite, and platform cluster manager. 

—busi intellig reporting: there be mani report tool avail [capterra 
2016b; wikipedia 2016c], typic of which be excel, ibm cognos, microstrategy, 
sa busi intelligence, and sap crystal reports. 

—project management: In capterra [2016a], more than 500 softwar and tool be 
list for project management, includ microsoft project, atlassian, podio, wrike, 
basecamp, and teamwork. 

—social network analysis: In desal [2015], 30 tool be list for sna and visualiza- 
tion, such a centrifuge, commetrix, cuttlefish, cytoscape, egonet, inflow, jung, 
keynetiq, netminer, network workbench, nodexl, and socnetv (social network 
visualizer). 

—other tools: increas number of tool have be develop and be under devel- 
opment for domain-specif and problem-specif data science, such a alteryx and 
tableau for tablets; suggestgrid and mortar recommend engin for recom- 
mender system [github 2016b]; optumhealth, verisk analytics, medeanalytics, 
mckesson and truven health analyt [technavio 2016] for healthcar analytics; 
blast, emboss, staden, threader, phd, and rasmol for bioinformatics. 

8. the futur OF data scienc 

there be continu debat about how data scienc will evolv in the next 50 year and 
what it will ultim look like. with the joint effort to be make by the entir scientif 
community, data scienc will build it systemat scientif foundations, disciplinari 
structure, theoret systems, technolog families, and engin tool set a an 
independ science. 

the last 50 year sinc the propos of the concept “data science” have contribut to 
the progress and now widespread accept of the need for a new scienc and it 
initi conceptu through it transit and transform from statist to 
the merger with exist disciplin and fields. the next 50 year of data scienc will 
extend beyond statist to identify, discover, explore, and defin specif foundat 
scientif problem and grand challenges. It will build a systemat famili of scientif 
methodolog and method and self-contain disciplinari system and curriculum that 
be not mere a relabel “salad” creat by mix exist disciplinari components. 

base on the understand of the intrins challeng and natur of data scienc 
[cao 2016b, 2016c], the develop of data scienc may seek to: 

—design and develop data brain that can autonom mimic human brain work 
mechan to recognize, understand, analyze, and learn data and environment, 
infer and reason about knowledg and insight, and correspondingli decid actions. 

—deepen our understand of data invis (i.e., invis data characteristics, com- 
plexities, intelligence, and value), in particular, to understand their x-complex 
and x-intellig (see cao and fayyad [cao 2016b]). the explor of what we 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



43:34 L. cao 

do not know about what we do not know will strengthen our understand of the 
capabilities, limitations, and futur direct of data science. 

—broaden conceptual, theoretical, and technolog system for data scienc by en- 
abl cross-disciplinari and trans-disciplinari research, innovation, and education. 
thi will address exist issu such a the variat in statist hypothesi and 
will discov and propos problem that be current invis to broad scienc or 
specif fields. 

—invent new data represent capabilities, includ designs, structures, schema 
and algorithm to make invis data complex and unknown characterist in 
complex data more visibl and explicit, and more easili understood or explored. 

—design new storage, access, and manag mechanisms, includ memory, disk, 
and cloud-bas mechanisms, to enabl the acquisition, storage, access, sampling, 
and manag of richer characterist and properti in the physic world that 
have be simplifi and filter by exist systems, and to support scalable, trans- 
parent, flexible, interpretable, and person data manipul and analyt in 
real time. 

—creat new analyt and learn capabilities, includ origin mathematical, 
statistical, and analyt theories, algorithms, and models, to disclos the unknown 
knowledg in unknown space. 

—build new intellig system and services, includ corpor and internet-bas 
collabor platform and services, to support the automated, or human-data- 
cooperative, collaborative, and collect explor of invis and unknown chal- 
leng in unknown space. 

—train the next-gener data scientist and data profession who be qualifi for 
data scienc problem-solving, with data literacy, thinking, competency, conscious- 
ness, curiosity, communication, and cognit intelligence, to work on the preced 
data scienc agenda. 

—assur cross-domain and trans-disciplinari cooperation, collaborations, and allianc 
in complex data scienc problem-solving. thi requir the educ of compet 
data scientist who be multidisciplinari experts, a well a collabor between 
data scientist and domain-specif experts. 

—discov and invent data power a yet unknown to current understand and imag- 
ination, such a new data economy, mobil applications, social applications, and 
data-driven business. 

9. conclus 

data science, big data, and advanc analyt have be increasingli recogn a 
major drive forc for next-gener innovation, economy, and education. although 
they be at an earli stage of development, strateg discuss about the big picture, 
trends, major challenges, futur directions, and prospect be critic for the healthi de- 
velop of the field and the community. the purpos of thi articl have be to share 
an overview of the conceptualization, development, observations, and think about 
the age of data scienc initiatives, research, innovation, industrialization, profession, 
competency, and education. 

We be wit a highli evolv data world that seamlessli connect to our daili 
life, work, learning, economy, and entertainment. new effort be increasingli be 
make by government, industry, academia, and even privat institut on way to 
convert data for decision-making, and promot the research and develop of data 
scienc and analytics. the next gener of data science, encompass a broad rang 
of disciplines, science, and economy, reli heavili on the strateg plan and vision- 
ari action that will be undertaken in priorit data research area and start-ups. 
without ani doubt, today’ question such a “whi do we need data science” will be 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 



data science: A comprehens overview 43:35 

replac by a famili of scientif theori and tool to address the visibl grand chal- 
leng and signific problem face tomorrow’ big data, science, business, society, 
and the economy. We will be greatli amaz by the surpris develop and po- 
tential chang that will take place in the next 50 years. 

refer 

acems. 2014. the australian research council (arc) centr of excel for mathemat and statist 
frontiers. retriev from acems.org.au/. 

ritu agarw and vasant dhar. 2014. editorial-big data, data science, and analytics: the opportun and 
challeng for IS research. inform system research 25, 3 (2014), 443–448. 

xinhua new agency. 2016. the 13th five-year plan for the nation econom and social develop- 
ment of the people’ republ of china. retriev from http://news.xinhuanet.com/politics/2016lh/ 
2016-03/17/c_1118366322.htm. 

agimo. 2013. agimo big data strategi - issu paper. retriev from www.finance.gov.au/files/ 
2013/03/big-data-strategy-issues-paper1.pdf. 

paul E. anderson, jame F. bowring, rene mccauley, georg pothering, and christoph W. starr. 2014. 
An undergradu degre in data science: curriculum and a decad of implement experience. 
In proceed of the 45th acm technic symposium on comput scienc educ (sigcse’14). 
145–150. 

asa. 2015. asa view on data science. retriev from http://magazine.amstat.org/?s=data+science&x=0& 
y=0. 

au. 1990. data-match program. retriev from http://www.comlaw.gov.au/series/c2004a04095. 
au. 2010. declar of open government. retriev from http://agimo.gov.au/2010/07/16/declaration-of- 

open-government/. 
au. 2013. attorney-general’ department. retriev from http://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/mediareleases/ 

pages/2013/seconder/22may2013-australiajoinsopengovernmentpartnership.aspx. 
au. 2016. australia big data. retriev from http://www.finance.gov.au/big-data/. 
kayod ayankoya, andré P. calitz, and jean greyling. 2014. intrins relat between data science, big 

data, busi analyt and datafication. acm intern confer proceed seri 28 (2014), 
192–198. 

john bailer, roger hoer, david madigan, jill montaquila, and tommi wright. 2012. report of the asa 
workgroup on master’ degrees. retriev from http://magazine.amstat.org/wp-content/uploads/2013an/ 
masterworkgroup.pdf. 

ben baumer. 2015. A data scienc cours for undergraduates: think with data. the american statistician 
69, 4 (2015), 334–342. 

bdl. 2016a. big data landscape. retriev from www.bigdatalandscape.com. 
bdl. 2016b. big data landscap 2016 (version 3.0). retriev from http://mattturck.com/2016/ 

02/01/big-data-landscape/. 
mark A. beyer and dougla laney. 2012. the import of ‘big data’: A definition. retriev from 

https://www.gartner.com/doc/2057415 gartner. 
anant bhardwaj, souvik bhattacherjee, amit chavan, amol deshp, aaron J. elmore, samuel madden, and 

aditya parameswaran. 2015. datahub: collabor data scienc & dataset version manag at 
scale. In cidr. 

bigml. 2016. bigml. retriev from https://bigml.com/. 
kirk D. borne, suzann jacoby, karen carney, andi connolly, timothi eastman, M. jordan raddick, J. 

A. tyson, and john wallin. 2010. the revolut in astronomi education: data scienc for the masses. 
retriev from http://arxiv.org/pdf/0909.3895v1.pdf. 

sebastien boyer, ben U. gelman, benjamin schreck, and kalyan veeramachaneni. 2015. data scienc 
foundri for moocs. In proceed of the ieee intern confer on data scienc and ad- 
vanc analyt (dsaa’15). 1–10. 

leo breiman. 2001. statist modeling: the two cultures. statist scienc 16, 3 (2001), 199–231. 
gavin brown. 2009. review of educ in mathematics, data scienc and quantit disci- 

plines: report to the group of eight universities. retriev from https://go8.edu.au/publication/ 
go8-review-education-mathematics-data-sci nce-and-quantitative-disciplines. 

linda burtch. 2014. the burtch work study: salari of data scientists. retriev from http://www. 
burtchworks.com/files/2014/07/burtch-works-study_ds_final.pdf. 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 

http://acems.org.au/ 
http://news.xinhuanet.com/politics/2016lh/2016-03/17/c1118366322.htm 
http://news.xinhuanet.com/politics/2016lh/2016-03/17/c1118366322.htm 
http://www.finance.gov.au/files/2013/03/big-data-strategy-issues-paper1.pdf 
http://www.finance.gov.au/files/2013/03/big-data-strategy-issues-paper1.pdf 
http://magazine.amstat.org/?s=data+scienceamp;x=0amp;y=0 
http://magazine.amstat.org/?s=data+scienceamp;x=0amp;y=0 
http://www.comlaw.gov.au/series/c2004a04095 
http://agimo.gov.au/2010/07/16/declaration-of-open-government/ 
http://agimo.gov.au/2010/07/16/declaration-of-open-government/ 
http://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/mediareleases/pages/2013/seconder/22may2013-australiajoinsopengovernmentpartnership.aspx 
http://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/mediareleases/pages/2013/seconder/22may2013-australiajoinsopengovernmentpartnership.aspx 
http://www.finance.gov.au/big-data/ 
http://magazine.amstat.org/wp-content/uploads/2013an/masterworkgroup.pdf 
http://magazine.amstat.org/wp-content/uploads/2013an/masterworkgroup.pdf 
file:www.bigdatalandscape.com 
http://mattturck.com/2016/02/01/big-data-landscape/ 
http://mattturck.com/2016/02/01/big-data-landscape/ 
https://www.gartner.com/doc/2057415 
https://bigml.com/ 
http://arxiv.org/pdf/0909.3895v1.pdf 
https://go8.edu.au/publication/go8-review-education-mathematics-data-sci nce-and-quantitative-disciplin 
https://go8.edu.au/publication/go8-review-education-mathematics-data-sci nce-and-quantitative-disciplin 
http://www.burtchworks.com/files/2014/07/burtch-works-studydsfinal.pdf 
http://www.burtchworks.com/files/2014/07/burtch-works-studydsfinal.pdf 


43:36 L. cao 

kanyarat bussaban and phanu waraporn. 2015. prepar undergradu student major in 
comput scienc and mathemat with data scienc perspect and awar in the age 
of big data. In proceed of the 7th world confer on educ sciences, vol. 197. 
1443–1446. 

ca. 2016. canada capit on big data. http://www.sshrc-crsh.gc.ca/news_room-salle_de_presse/latest_ 
news-nouvel es_recentes/big_data_consultation-donnees_massives_consultation-eng.aspx. 

longb cao. 2010a. domain driven data mining: challeng and prospects. ieee transact on knowl- 
edg and data engin 22, 6 (2010), 755–769. 

longb cao. 2010b. in-depth behavior understand and use: the behavior informat approach. infor- 
mation scienc 180, 17 (2010), 3067–3085. 

longb cao. 2011. strateg recommend on advanc data industri and servic for the yanhuang 
scienc and technolog park. 

longb cao. 2014. non-iid learn in behavior and social data. the comput journal 57, 9 (2014), 
1358–1370. 

longb cao. 2015a. coupl learn of complex interactions. journal of inform process and 
manag 51, 2 (2015), 167–186. 

longb cao. 2015b. metasynthet comput and engin of complex systems. springer. 
longb cao. 2016a. data scienc and analytics: A new era. intern journal of data scienc and 

analyt 1, 1 (2016), 1–2. 
longb cao. 2016b. data science: challeng and directions. technic report, ut advanc analyt 

institute. 
longb cao. 2016c. data science: natur and pitfalls. technic report, ut advanc analyt institute. 
longb cao. 2016d. data science: profess and education. technic report, ut advanc analyt 

institute. 
longb cao. 2017. understand data scienc (to be published). springer. 
longb cao and ruwei dai. 2008. open complex intellig systems. post telecom press. 
longb cao, ruwei dai, and mengchu zhou. 2009. metasynthesis: m-space, m-interact and m- 

comput for open complex giant systems. ieee transact on systems, man, and cybernetics–part 
A 39, 5 (2009), 1007–1021. 

longb cao and philip S. Yu (eds). 2012. behavior computing: modeling, analysis, mine and decision. 
springer. 

longb cao, yume ou, and philip S yu. 2012. coupl behavior analysi with applications. ieee 
transact on knowledg and data engin 24, 8 (2012), 1378–1392. 

longb cao, philip S. yu, chengqi zhang, and yanchang zhao. 2010. domain driven data mining. 
springer. 

capterra. 2016a. top project manag tools. retriev from http://www.capterra.com/project-managem 
nt-software/. 

capterra. 2016b. top report softwar products. retriev from http://www.capterra.com/ 
reporting-software/. 

cbdio. 2016. china big data industri observation. retriev from www.cbdio.com. 
ccf-bdtf. 2013. china comput feder task forc on big data. retriev from http://www. 

bigdataforum.org.cn/. 
john M. chambers. 1993. greater or lesser statistics: A choic for futur research. statist and comput 

3, 4 (1993), 182–184. 
swami chandrasekaran. 2013. becom a data scientist. retriev from http://nirvacana.com/ 

thoughts/becoming-a-data-scientist/. 
hsinchun chen, roger H. L. chiang, and veda C. storey. 2012. busi intellig and analytics: from 

big data to big impact. mi quarterli 36, 4 (2012), 1165–1188. 
china inform security. 2015. big data strategi and action in major countries. retriev from 

http://www.cac.gov.cn/2015-07/03/c_1115812491.htm. 
thoma R. clancy, kathryn H. bowles, lille gelinas, ida androwich, conni delaney, susan matney, joyc 

sensmeier, judith warren, john welton, and bonni westra. 2014. A call to action: engag in big data 
science. nurs outlook 62, 1 (2014), 64–65. 

classcentral. 2016. data scienc and big data—fre onlin courses. retriev from https://www.class- 
central.com/subject/data-science. 

kelli clay. 2013. ce 2013: the year of the quantifi self? retriev from http://www.forbes. 
com/sites/kellyclay/2013/01/06/ces-2013-the-year-of-the-quantified-self/�4cf4d2b55e74. 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 

http://www.sshrc-crsh.gc.ca/newsroom-salledepresse/latestnews-nouvel esrecentes/bigdataconsultation-donneesmassivesconsultation-eng.aspx 
http://www.sshrc-crsh.gc.ca/newsroom-salledepresse/latestnews-nouvel esrecentes/bigdataconsultation-donneesmassivesconsultation-eng.aspx 
http://www.capterra.com/project-management-software/ 
http://www.capterra.com/project-management-software/ 
http://www.capterra.com/reporting-software/ 
http://www.capterra.com/reporting-software/ 
file:www.cbdio.com 
http://www.bigdataforum.org.cn/ 
http://www.bigdataforum.org.cn/ 
http://nirvacana.com/thoughts/becoming-a-data-scientist/ 
http://nirvacana.com/thoughts/becoming-a-data-scientist/ 
http://www.cac.gov.cn/2015-07/03/c_1115812491.htm 
https://www.class-central.com/subject/data-sci 
https://www.class-central.com/subject/data-sci 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/kellyclay/2013/01/06/ces-2013-the-year-of-the-quantified-self/sharp;4cf4d2b55e74 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/kellyclay/2013/01/06/ces-2013-the-year-of-the-quantified-self/sharp;4cf4d2b55e74 


data science: A comprehens overview 43:37 

william S. cleveland. 2001. data science: An action plan for expand the technic area of the 
field of statistics. intern statist review 69, 1 (2001), 21–26. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j. 
1751-5823.2001.tb00477.x 

cmist. 2016. china will establish A seri of nation labs. retriev from http://news.sciencenet.cn/ 
htmlnews/2016/4/344404.shtm. 

cnsf. 2015. nation scienc foundat china. retriev from http://www.nsfc.gov.cn/. 
european commission. 2014. commiss urg govern to embrac potenti of big data. retriev 

from europa.eu/rapid/press-release_ip-14-769_en.htm. 
coursera. 2016. coursera. retriev from www.coursera.org/data-science. 
kevin crowston and jian qin. 2011. A capabl matur model for scientif data management: evid 

from the literature. proceed of the associ for inform scienc and technolog 48, 10 (2011), 
1–9. 

csc. 2012. big data univers begin to explode. retriev from http://www.csc.com/insights/flxwd/ 
78931-big_data_growth_just_beginning_to_explode. 

csnstc. 2009. har the power of digit data for scienc and society: report of the interag 
work group on digit data to the committe on scienc of the nation scienc and technolog 
council. retriev from https://www.nitrd.gov/about/harnessing_power_web.pdf. 

dabs. 2016. data analyt book series. retriev from http://www.springer.com/series/15063. 
darpa. 2016. darpa xdata program. retriev from www.darpa.mil/program/xdata. 
data61. 2016. data61. retriev from https://www.data61.csiro.au/. 
datarobot. 2016. datarobot. retriev from https://www.datarobot.com/. 
datasciences.org. 2005. homepage. retriev from www.datasciences.org. 
thoma H. davenport and D. J. patil. 2012. data scientist: the sexiest job of the 21st century. harvard 

busi review (2012), 70–76. 
jessica davis. 2016. 10 program languag and tool data scientist used. retriev from 

http://www.informationweek.com/devops/programming-languages/10-programming-languages-and-tool 
s-data-scientists-use-now/d/d-id/1326034. 

devendra desale. 2015. top 30 social network analysi and visual tools. retriev from http://www. 
kdnuggets.com/2015/06/top-30-social-network-analysis-visualization-tools.html. 

vasant dhar. 2013. data scienc and prediction. commun of the acm 56, 12 (2013), 64– 
73. 

herman A. dierick and fabrizio gabbiani. 2015. drosophila neurobiology: No escap from ‘big data’ science. 
current biolog 25, 14 (2015), 606–608. 

peter J. diggle. 2015. statistics: A data scienc for the 21st century. journal of the royal statist society: 
seri A (statist in society) 178, 4 (2015), 793–813. 

david donoho. 2015. 50 year of data science. retriev from http://courses.csail.mit.edu/18.337/2015/docs/ 
50yearsdatascience.pdf. 

bonni J. dorr, craig S. greenberg, peter fontana, mark A. przybocki, marion Le bras, cathryn A. ploehn, 
oleg aulov, martial michel, E. jim golden, and Wo chang. 2015. the nist data scienc initiative. 
In proceed of the 2015 ieee intern confer on data scienc and advanc analyt 
(dsaa’15). 1–10. 

dsa. 2016. data scienc association. retriev from http://www.datascienceassn.org/. 
dsaa. 2014. ieee/acm/asa intern confer on data scienc and advanc analytics. retriev 

from www.dsaa.co. 
dsc. 2016a. colleg & univers data scienc degrees. retriev from http://datascience.community/ 

colleges. 
dsc. 2016b. the data scienc community. retriev from http://datasciencebe.com/. 
dscentral. 2016. data scienc central. retriev from http://www.datasciencecentral.com/. 
dse. 2015. data scienc and engineering. retriev from http://link.springer.com/journal/41019. 
dsj. 2014. data scienc journal.retriev from datascience.codata.org. 
dskd. 2007. data scienc and knowledg discoveri lab, uts. retriev from http://www.uts.edu.au/ 

research-and-teaching/our-research/quantum-computation-and-intelligent-systems/data-sciences-and. 
david ewe duncan. 2009. experiment man: what one man’ bodi reveal about hi future, your 

health, and our toxic world. wiley & sons, new york. 
edx. 2016. edx courses. retriev from https://www.edx.org/course?search_query=data+science. 
emc. 2011. data scienc revealed: A data-driven glimps into the burgeon new field. retriev from 

www.emc.com/collateral/about/news/emc-data-science-study-wp.pdf. 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-5823.2001.tb00477.x 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-5823.2001.tb00477.x 
http://news.sciencenet.cn/htmlnews/2016/4/344404.shtm 
http://news.sciencenet.cn/htmlnews/2016/4/344404.shtm 
http://www.nsfc.gov.cn/ 
file:europa.eu/rapid/press-release_ip-14-769_en.htm 
http://www.coursera.org/data-sci 
http://www.csc.com/insights/flxwd/78931-bigdatagrowthjustbeginningtoexplod 
http://www.csc.com/insights/flxwd/78931-bigdatagrowthjustbeginningtoexplod 
https://www.nitrd.gov/about/harnessing_power_web.pdf 
http://www.springer.com/series/15063 
http://www.darpa.mil/program/xdata 
https://www.data61.csiro.au/ 
https://www.datarobot.com/ 
file:www.datasciences.org 
http://www.informationweek.com/devops/programming-languages/10-programming-languages-and-tools-data-scientists-use-now/d/d-id/1326034 
http://www.informationweek.com/devops/programming-languages/10-programming-languages-and-tools-data-scientists-use-now/d/d-id/1326034 
http://www.kdnuggets.com/2015/06/top-30-social-network-analysis-visualiza tion-tools.html 
http://www.kdnuggets.com/2015/06/top-30-social-network-analysis-visualiza tion-tools.html 
http://courses.csail.mit.edu/18.337/2015/docs/50yearsdatascience.pdf 
http://courses.csail.mit.edu/18.337/2015/docs/50yearsdatascience.pdf 
http://www.datascienceassn.org/ 
file:www.dsaa.co 
http://datascience.community/colleges. 
http://datascience.community/colleges. 
http://datasciencebe.com/ 
http://www.datasciencecentral.com/ 
http://link.springer.com/journal/41019 
file:datascience.codata.org 
http://www.uts.edu.au/research-and-teaching/our-research/quantum-computation-and-intelligent-systems/data-sciences-and 
http://www.uts.edu.au/research-and-teaching/our-research/quantum-computation-and-intelligent-systems/data-sciences-and 
https://www.edx.org/course?search_query$=$data+sci 
http://www.emc.com/collateral/about/news/emc-data-science-study-wp.pdf 


43:38 L. cao 

epjds. 2012. epj data science. retriev from http://epjdatascience.springeropen.com/. 
eu. 2014. EU toward a thrive data-driven economy. retriev from https://ec.europa.eu/digital- 

single-market/en/towards-thriving-data-driven-economy. 
eu-dsa. 2016. the european data scienc academy. retriev from edsa-project.eu. 
eu-od. 2016. the european union open data portal. retriev from https://open-data.europa.eu/. 
facebook. 2016. facebook data. retriev from https://www.facebook.com/careers/teams/data/. 
jame H. faghmou and vipin kumar. 2014. A big data guid to understand climat change: the case 

for theory-guid data science. big data 2, 3 (2014), 155–163. 
joshua fairfielda and hannah shteina. 2014. big data, big problems: emerg issu in the ethic of data 

scienc and journalism. journal of mass media ethic 29, 1 (2014), 38–51. 
jack faris, evelyn kolker, alex szalay, leon bradlow, ewa deelman, Wu feng, judi qiu, donna rus- 

sell, elizabeth stewart, and eugen kolker. 2011. commun and data-intens scienc in the 
begin of the 21st century. A journal of integr biolog 15, 4 (2011), 213–215. 

tom fawcett. 2016. mine the quantifi self: person knowledg discoveri a a challeng for data science. 
big data 3, 4 (2016), 249–266. 

usama fayyad, gregori piatetsky-shapiro, and padhraic smyth. 1996. from data mine to knowledg 
discoveri in databases. AI magazin 17, 3 (1996), 37–54. 

william finzer. 2013. the data scienc educ dilemma. technolog innov in statist educ 
7, 2 (2013). 

geoffrey fox, siddharth maini, howard rosenbaum, and david J. wild. 2015. data scienc and onlin 
education. In proceed of the 2015 ieee 7th intern confer on cloud comput technolog 
and scienc (cloudcom’15). 582–587. 

peter fox and jame hendler. 2014. the scienc of data science. big data 2, 2 (2014), 68–70. 
molli galetto. 2016. top 50 data scienc resources. retriev from http://www.ngdata.com/top-data- 

science-resources/?. 
geo. 2016. gene express omnibus. retriev from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/. 
deepak ghodke. 2015. bye bye 2015: what lie ahead for bi. retriev from http://www.ciol.com/bye- 

bye-2015-what-lies-ahead-for-bi/. 
github. 2016a. data scienc colleges. retriev from https://github.com/ryanswanstrom/awesome- 

datascience-colleges. 
github. 2016b. list of recommend systems. retriev from https://github.com/grahamjenson/list_of_ 

recommender_systems. 
michael gold, ryan mcclarren, and conor gaughan. 2013. the lesson oscar taught us: data scienc and 

medium & entertainment. big data 1, 2 (2013), 105–109. 
google. 2016a. googl bigqueri and cloud platform. retriev from https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/. 
google. 2016b. googl cloud predict api. retriev from https://cloud.google.com/prediction/docs/. 
google. 2016c. googl onlin open education. retriev from https://www.google.com/edu/openonline/. 
google. 2016d. googl trends. (2016). https://www.google.com.au/trends/explore#q=datalyticsz=etc re- 

triev on 14 novermb 2016. 
google. 2016e. open mobil data. retriev from https://console.developers.google.com/storage/browser/ 

openmobiledata_public/. 
beij municip government. 2016. beij big data and cloud comput develop action plan. 

retriev from http://zhengwu.beijing.gov.cn/gh/dt/t1445533.htm. 
china government. 2015. china big data. retriev from http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2015-09/05/ 

content_10137.htm. 
matthew J. graham. 2012. the art of data science. In astrostatist and data mining,spring seri in 

astrostatistics, vol. 2. 47–59. 
jim gray. 2007. escience—a transform scientif method. retriev from http://research.microsoft.com/ 

en-us/um/people/gray/talks/nrc-cstb_escience.ppt. 
gtd. 2016. global terror database. retriev from https://www.start.umd.edu/gtd/. 
akash gupta, ahmet cecen, sharad goyal, amarendra K. singh, and surya R. kalidindi. 2015. structure- 

properti linkag use a data scienc approach: applic to a non-metal inclusion/steel composit 
system. acta materialia 91 (2015), 239–254. 

david J. hand. 2015. statist and computing: the genesi of data science. statist and comput 25, 4 
(2015), 705–711. 

hardin. 2016. github. retriev from hardin47.github.io/datascistatsmaterials/. 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 

http://epjdatascience.springeropen.com/ 
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/towards-thriving-data-driven-economi 
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/towards-thriving-data-driven-economi 
file:edsa-project.eu 
https://open-data.europa.eu/ 
https://www.facebook.com/careers/teams/data/ 
http://www.ngdata.com/top-data-science-resources/? 
http://www.ngdata.com/top-data-science-resources/? 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/ 
http://www.ciol.com/bye-bye-2015-what-lies-ahead-for-bi/ 
http://www.ciol.com/bye-bye-2015-what-lies-ahead-for-bi/ 
https://github.com/ryanswanstrom/awesome-datascience-colleg 
https://github.com/ryanswanstrom/awesome-datascience-colleg 
https://github.com/grahamjenson/listofrecommendersystem 
https://github.com/grahamjenson/listofrecommendersystem 
https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/ 
https://cloud.google.com/prediction/docs/ 
https://www.google.com/edu/openonline/ 
https://www.google.com.au/trends/explore#q$=$datalyticsz$=$etc 
https://console.developers.google.com/storage/browser/openmobiledatapublic/ 
https://console.developers.google.com/storage/browser/openmobiledatapublic/ 
http://zhengwu.beijing.gov.cn/gh/dt/t1445533.htm 
http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2015-09/05/content10137.htm 
http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2015-09/05/content10137.htm 
http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/gray/talks/nrc-cstbescience.ppt 
http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/gray/talks/nrc-cstbescience.ppt 
https://www.start.umd.edu/gtd/ 
http://hardin47.github.io/datascistatsmaterials/ 


data science: A comprehens overview 43:39 

johanna hardin, roger hoerl, nichola J. horton, and deborah nolan. 2015. data scienc in statist 
curricula: prepar student to “think with data”. the american statistician 69, 4 (2015), 343–353. 

harlan harris, sean murphy, and marck vaisman. 2013. analyz the analyzers: An introspect survey 
of data scientist and their work. o’reilli media. 

benjamin T. hazena, christoph A. booneb, jeremi D. ezellc, and L. allison jones-farmer. 2014. data 
qualiti for data science, predict analytics, and big data in suppli chain management: An introduct 
to the problem and suggest for research and applications. intern journal of product 
econom 154 (2014), 72–80. 

toni hey, stewart tansley, and kristin toll (eds.). 2009. the fourth paradigm: data-intens scientif 
discovery. retriev from http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/collaboration/fourthparadigm/. 

toni hey and ann trefethen. 2003. the data deluge: An e-scienc perspective. john wiley & sons, ltd, 
809–824. 

hlsg. 2010. final report of the high level expert group on scientif data. http://ec.europa.eu/ 
information_society/newsroom/cf/document.cfm?action=display&doc_id=707. 

hlsg. 2014. An rda europ report. retriev from http://www.e-nformation.ro/wp-content/uploads/2014/ 
12/thedataharvestreport_-final.pdf. 

horizon. 2014. european commiss horizon 2020 big data privat public partnership. retriev 
from http://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/en/h2020-section/information-and-communication- 
technologies. 

peter J. huber. 2011. data analysis: what can Be learn from the past 50 years. john wiley & sons. 
iasc. 1977. intern associ for statist computing. (1977). http://www.iasc-isi.org/. 
ibm. 2010. capit on complexity. retriev from http://www-935.ibm.com/services/us/ceo/ceostudi 

2010/multimedia.html. 
ibm. 2016a. ibm analyt and big data. retriev from http://www.ibm.com/analytics/us/en/orhttp://www- 

01.ibm.com/software/data/bigdata/. 
ibm. 2016b. what be a data scientist? retriev from http://www-01.ibm.com/software/data/infosphere/data- 

scientist/. 
ida. 2014. intern institut of data & analytics. retriev from www.datasciences.org. 
ieeebd. 2014. ieee big data initiative. (2014). http://bigdata.ieee.org/. 
ifsc-96. 1996. data science, classification, and relat methods. retriev from http://d-nb.info/ 

955715512/04. 
ijds. 2016. intern journal of data science. (2016). http://www.inderscience.com/jhome.php?jcode= 

ijds. 
ijrds. 2017. intern journal of research on data science. retriev from http://www.sciencepub 

lishinggroup.com/journal/index?journalid=310. 
informs. 2014. candid handbook. retriev from https://www.informs.org/certification-continuing- 

ed/analytics-certificati on/candidate-handbook. 
informs. 2016. institut for oper research and the manag sciences. retriev from 

https://www.informs.org/. 
shuichi iwata. 2008. scientif “agenda” of data science. data scienc journal 7, 5 (2008), 54–56. 
H. V. jagadish, johann gehrke, alexandro labrinidis, yanni papakonstantinou, jignesh M. patel, raghu 

ramakrishnan, and cyru shahabi. 2014. big data and it technic challenges. commun of the 
acm 57, 7 (2014), 86–94. 

H. V. jagadish. 2015. big data and science: myth and reality. big data research 2, 2 (2015), 49–52. 
jds. 2002. journal of data science. retriev from http://www.jds-online.com/. 
jdsa. 2015. intern journal of data scienc and analyt (jdsa). retriev from http://www. 

springer.com/41060. 
jfds. 2016. the journal of financ and data science. retriev from http://www.keaipublishing.com/ 

en/journals/the-journal-of-finance-and-data-science/. 
kaggle. 2016. kaggl competit data. retriev from https://www.kaggle.com/competitions. 
surya R. kalidindi. 2015. data scienc and cyberinfrastructure: critic enabl for acceler develop 

of hierarch materials. intern materi review 60, 3 (2015), 150–168. 
kdd89. 1989. ijcai-89 workshop on knowledg discoveri in databases. retriev from http://www. 

kdnuggets.com/meetings/kdd89/index.html. 
kdnuggets. 2015. visual software. retriev from http://www.kdnuggets.com/software/visualization. 

html. 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 

http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/collaboration/fourthparadigm/ 
http://ec.europa.eu/informationsociety/newsroom/cf/document.cfm?action=displayamp;docid=707 
http://ec.europa.eu/informationsociety/newsroom/cf/document.cfm?action=displayamp;docid=707 
http://www.e-nformation.ro/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/thedataharvestreport-final.pdf 
http://www.e-nformation.ro/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/thedataharvestreport-final.pdf 
http://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/en/h2020-section/information-and-communication-technolog 
http://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/en/h2020-section/information-and-communication-technolog 
http://www.iasc-isi.org/ 
http://www-935.ibm.com/services/us/ceo/ceostudy2010/multimedia.html 
http://www-935.ibm.com/services/us/ceo/ceostudy2010/multimedia.html 
http://www.ibm.com/analytics/us/en/orhttp://www-01.ibm.com/software/data/bigdata/ 
http://www.ibm.com/analytics/us/en/orhttp://www-01.ibm.com/software/data/bigdata/ 
http://www-01.ibm.com/software/data/infosphere/data-scientist/ 
http://www-01.ibm.com/software/data/infosphere/data-scientist/ 
file:www.datasciences.org 
http://bigdata.ieee.org/ 
http://d-nb.info/955715512/04 
http://d-nb.info/955715512/04 
http://www.inderscience.com/jhome.php?jcode=ijd 
http://www.inderscience.com/jhome.php?jcode=ijd 
http://www.sciencepublishinggroup.com/journal/index?journalid=310 
http://www.sciencepublishinggroup.com/journal/index?journalid=310 
https://www.informs.org/certification-continuing-ed/analytics-certificati on/candidate-handbook 
https://www.informs.org/certification-continuing-ed/analytics-certificati on/candidate-handbook 
https://www.informs.org/ 
http://www.jds-online.com/ 
http://www.springer.com/41060 
http://www.springer.com/41060 
http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/the-journal-of-finance-and-data-science/ 
http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/the-journal-of-finance-and-data-science/ 
https://www.kaggle.com/competit 
http://www.kdnuggets.com/meetings/kdd89/index.html 
http://www.kdnuggets.com/meetings/kdd89/index.html 
http://www.kdnuggets.com/software/visualization.html 
http://www.kdnuggets.com/software/visualization.html 


43:40 L. cao 

kdnuggets. 2016. kdnuggets. retriev from http://www.kdnuggets.com/. 
K kelly. 2012. the quantifi century. In quantifi self conference. retriev from http://quantifiedself. 

com/conference/palo-alto-2012. 
nawsher khan, ibrar yaqoob, ibrahim abak targio hashem, and et al. 2014. big data: survey, technologies, 

opportunities, and challenges. the scientif world journal 2014 (2014), 18. 
john king and roger magoulas. 2015. 2015 data scienc salari survey. retriev from http://duu86 

o6n09pv.cloudfront.net/reports/2015-data-science-salary-survey.pdf. 
ron kohavi, neal J. rothleder, and evangelo simoudis. 2002. emerg trend in busi analytics. 

commun of the acm 45, 8 (2002), 45–48. 
amp lab. 2016. mlbase. retriev from http://mlbase.org/. 
alexandro labrinidi and H. V. jagadish. 2012. challeng and opportun with big data. proceed of 

the vldb endow 5, 12 (2012), 2032–2033. 
dougla laney. 2001. 3D data management: control data volume, veloc and variety. technic 

report, meta group. 
david lazer, ryan kennedy, gari king, and alessandro vespignani. 2014. the parabl of googl flu: trap 

in big data analysis. scienc 343 (2014), 1203–1205. 
ldc. 2016. linguist data consortium. retriev from https://www.ldc.upenn.edu/about. 
linkedin. 2016. linkedin jobs. retriev from https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/data-scientist-jobs. 
mike loukides. 2011. the evolut of data products. o’reilly, cambridge. 
mike loukides. 2012. what be data science? o’reilli media, sebastopol, ca. http://radar.oreilly.com/ 

2010/06/what-is-data-science.htmldata-scientists. 
andrea manieri, steve brewer, ruben riestra, yuri demchenko, matthia hemmje, tomasz wiktorski, 

tiziana ferrari, and jrmi frey. 2015. data scienc profession uncovered: how the edison 
project will contribut to a wide accept profil for data scientists. In proceed of the 2015 
ieee 7th intern confer on cloud comput technolog and scienc (cloudcom’15). 
588–593. 

kate matsudaira. 2015. the scienc of manag data science. commun of the acm 58, 6 (2015), 
44–47. 

mckinsey. 2011. big data: the next frontier for innovation, competition, and productivity. mckinsey 
global institute. 

clair cain miller. 2013. data science: the number of our lives. new york time retriev from 
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/14/education/edlife/universities-offer-courses-in-a-hot-new-field-data- 
science.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0. 

arthur john havart morrel (ed.). 1968. inform processing. In proceed of ifip congress 1968. 
edinburgh, uk. 

peter murray-rust. 2007. data-driven science: A scientist’ view. In nsf/jisc 2007 digit repositori 
workshop. http://www.sis.pitt.edu/repwkshop/papers/murray.pdf. 

peter naur. 1968. ‘datalogy’, the scienc of data and data processes. In proceed of ifip congress 1968, 
1383–1387. 

peter naur. 1974. concis survey of comput methods. studentlitteratur, lund, sweden. 
ncsu. 2007a. institut for advanc analytics, north carolina state university. retriev from 

http://analytics.ncsu.edu/. 
ncsu. 2007b. master of scienc in analytics, institut for advanc analytics, north carolina state uni- 

versity. retriev from http://analytics.ncsu.edu/. 
michael L. nelson. 2009. data-driven science: A new paradigm? educaus review 44, 4 (2009), 6–7. 
nicta. 2016. nation ict australia. retriev from https://www.nicta.com.au/. 
nist. 2015. nist text retriev confer data. retriev from http://trec.nist.gov/data.html. 
nsb. 2005. long-liv digit data collections: enabl research and educ in the 21st century. 

retriev from http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2005/nsb0540/. 
nsf. 2007. US nsf07-28. retriev from http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2007/nsf0728/nsf0728.pdf. 
oecd. 2007. oecd principl and guidelin for access to research data from public funding. retriev 

from https://www.oecd.org/sti/sci-tech/38500813.pdf. 
openedx. 2016. openedx onlin educ platform. retriev from https://open.edx.org/. 
tim o’reilly. 2005. what be web 2.0. retriev from http://oreilly.com/pub/a/web2/archive/what-is-web-20. 

html?page=3. 
D. J. patil. 2011. build data scienc teams. o’reilli media. 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 

http://www.kdnuggets.com/ 
http://quantifiedself.com/conference/palo-alto-2012 
http://quantifiedself.com/conference/palo-alto-2012 
http://duu86o6n09pv.cloudfront.net/reports/2015-data-science-salary-survey.pdf 
http://duu86o6n09pv.cloudfront.net/reports/2015-data-science-salary-survey.pdf 
http://mlbase.org/ 
https://www.ldc.upenn.edu/about 
https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/data-scientist-job 
http://radar.oreilly.com/2010/06/what-is-data-science.htmlsharp;data-scientist 
http://radar.oreilly.com/2010/06/what-is-data-science.htmlsharp;data-scientist 
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/14/education/edlife/universities-offer-courses-in-a-hot-new-field-data-science.html?pagewanted=allamp;r=0 
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/14/education/edlife/universities-offer-courses-in-a-hot-new-field-data-science.html?pagewanted=allamp;r=0 
http://www.sis.pitt.edu/repwkshop/papers/murray.pdf 
http://analytics.ncsu.edu/ 
http://analytics.ncsu.edu/ 
https://www.nicta.com.au/ 
http://trec.nist.gov/data.html 
http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2005/nsb0540/ 
http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2007/nsf0728/nsf0728.pdf 
https://www.oecd.org/sti/sci-tech/38500813.pdf 
https://open.edx.org/ 
http://oreilly.com/pub/a/web2/archive/what-is-web-20.html?page=3 
http://oreilly.com/pub/a/web2/archive/what-is-web-20.html?page=3 


data science: A comprehens overview 43:41 

mark C. paulk, bill curtis, mari beth chrissis, and charl V. weber. 1993. capabl matur model 
version 1.1. ieee softwar 10, 4 (1993), 18–27. 

gil press. 2013. A veri short histori of data science. retriev from http://www.forbes.com/sites/gilpress/ 
2013/05/28/a-very-short-history-of-data-science/61ae3ebb69fd. 

xuesen qian. 1991. revisit issu on open complex giant systems. intern journal of pattern 
recognit and artifici intellig 4, 1 (1991), 5–8. 

xuesen qian, jingyuan yu, and ruwei dai. 1993. A new disciplin of science—th studi of open complex 
giant system and it methodology. chines journal of system engin & electronics. 4, 2 (1993), 
2–12. 

rapidminer. 2016. rapidminer. (2016). https://rapidminer.com/. 
samantha renae. 2011. data analytics: crunch the future. bloomberg businessweek (2011). septemb 

8. 
solut review. 2016. data integr and applic integr solut directory. retriev from 

http://solutionsreview.com/data-integration/data-integration-solutions-directory/. 
C. rudin, D. dunson, R. irizarry, H. ji, E. laber, J. leek, T. mccormick, sherri rose, C. schafer, M. 

van der laan, L. wasserman, and L. xue. 2014. discoveri with data: leverag statist with 
comput scienc to transform scienc and society. retriev from http://www.amstat.org/policy/pdfs/ 
bigdatastatisticsjune2014.pdf american statist association. 

sas. 2013. big data analytics: An assess of demand for labour and skills, 2012-2017. retriev from 
https://www.thetechpartnership.com/globalassets/pdfs/research-2014/bigdata_report_nov14.pdf report. 
sas/th tech partnership. 

sas. 2016. sa retriev from http://www.sas.com/en_us/insights.html. 
tobia schoenherr and cheri speier-pero. 2015. data science, predict analytics, and big data in suppli 

chain management: current state and futur potential. journal of busi logist 36, 1 (2015), 
120–132. 

siam. 2016. siam career center. (2016). http://jobs.siam.org/home/. 
christoph siart, simon kopp, and jochen apel. 2015. the interfac between data science, research assess- 

ment and scienc support—highlight from the german perspect and exampl from heidelberg 
university. In proceed of the 2015 iiai 4th intern congress on advanc appli informat 
(iiai-aai’15). 472–476. 

silk. 2016. data scienc univers programs. retriev from http://data-science-university-programs.silk. 
co/. 

larri smarr. 2012. quantifi your body: A how-to guid from a system biolog perspective. biotechnolog 
journal 7, 8 (2012), 980–991. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/biot.201100495 

F. jack smith. 2006. data scienc a an academ discipline. data scienc journal 5 (2006), 163–164. 
ssds. 2015. springer seri in the data sciences. retriev from http://www.springer.com/series/13852. 
stanford. 2014. stanford data scienc initiatives, stanford university. retriev from https://sdsi. 

stanford.edu/. 
thoma R. stewart and claud mcmillan, jr. 1987. descript and prescript model for judgment and 

decis making: implic for knowledg engineering. In expert judgment and expert systems, 
jeryl L. mumpower, ortwin renn, lawrenc D. phillips, and V. R. R. uppuluri (eds.). springer-verlag, 
london, 305–320. 

michael stonebraker, sam madden, and pradeep dubey. 2013. intel ‘big data’ scienc and technolog center 
vision and execut plan. sigmod record 42, 1 (2013), 44–49. 

alma swan and sheridan brown. 2008. the skills, role career structur of data scientist curators: assess- 
ment of current practic futur needs. (2008). technic report. univers of southampton. 

melani swan. 2013. the quantifi self: fundament disrupt in big data scienc and biolog discovery. 
big data 1, 2 (2013), 85–99. 

technavio. 2016. top 10 healthcar data analyt companies. retriev from http://www.technavio.com/ 
blog/top-10-healthcare-data-analytics-companies. 

tfdsaa. 2013. ieee task forc on data scienc and advanc analytics. retriev from http:// 
dsaatf.dsaa.co/. 

tobd. 2015. ieee transact on big data. retriev from https://www.computer.org/web/tbd. 
predict analyt today. 2016. 29 data prepar tool and platforms. retriev from http://www. 

predictiveanalyticstoday.com/data-preparation-tools-and-platforms/. 
john W. tukey. 1962. the futur of data analysis. the annal of mathemat statist 33, 1 (1962), 1–67. 
john W. tukey. 1977. exploratori data analysis. pearson. 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 

http://www.forbes.com/sites/gilpress/2013/05/28/a-very-short-history-of-d ata-science/sharp;61ae3ebb69fd 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/gilpress/2013/05/28/a-very-short-history-of-d ata-science/sharp;61ae3ebb69fd 
https://rapidminer.com/ 
http://solutionsreview.com/data-integration/data-integration-solutions-directory/ 
http://www.amstat.org/policy/pdfs/bigdatastatisticsjune2014.pdf 
http://www.amstat.org/policy/pdfs/bigdatastatisticsjune2014.pdf 
https://www.thetechpartnership.com/globalassets/pdfs/research-2014/bigdata_report_nov14.pdf 
http://www.sas.com/en_us/insights.html 
http://jobs.siam.org/home/ 
http://data-science-university-programs.silk.co/ 
http://data-science-university-programs.silk.co/ 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/biot.201100495 
http://www.springer.com/series/13852 
https://sdsi.stanford.edu/ 
https://sdsi.stanford.edu/ 
http://www.technavio.com/blog/top-10-healthcare-data-analytics-compani 
http://www.technavio.com/blog/top-10-healthcare-data-analytics-compani 
http://dsaatf.dsaa.co/ 
http://dsaatf.dsaa.co/ 
https://www.computer.org/web/tbd 
http://www.predictiveanalyticstoday.com/data-preparation-tools-and-platforms/ 
http://www.predictiveanalyticstoday.com/data-preparation-tools-and-platforms/ 


43:42 L. cao 

tutiempo. 2016. global climat data. retriev from http://en.tutiempo.net/climate. 
uci. 2016. uci machin learn repository. retriev from archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/. 
udacity. 2016. udac courses. retriev from https://www.udacity.com/courses/data-science. 
udemy. 2016. udemi courses. retriev from https://www.udemy.com/courses/search/?ref=home&src=ukw 

&q=data+science&lang=en. 
uk. 2016. UK big data. retriev from http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/research/infrastructure/big-data/. 
uk-hm. 2012. UK HM government. retriev from http://data.gov.uk/sites/default/files/open_data_whit 

_paper.pdf. 
uk-od. 2016. UK open data. retriev from http://data.gov.uk/. 
umichi. 2015. michigan institut for data science, univers of michigan. retriev from http:// 

midas.umich.edu/. 
un. 2010. unit nation global puls projects. retriev from http://www.unglobalpulse.org/. 
us-od. 2016. US govern open data. retriev from https://www.data.gov/. 
usd2d. 2016. US nation consortium for data science. retriev from data2discovery.org. 
usdsc. 2016. US degre program in analyt and data science. retriev from http://analytics. 

ncsu.edu/?page_id=4184. 
usnsf. 2012. US big data research initiative. retriev from http://www.nsf.gov/cise/news/bigdata.jsp. 
uts. 2011. master of analyt (research) and doctor of philosophi thesis: analytics, advanc an- 

alyt institute, univers of technolog sydney. retriev from http://www.uts.edu.au/research- 
and-teaching/our-research/advanced-analytics-institute/education-and-research-opportuniti-1. 

utsaai. 2011. advanc analyt institute, univers of technolog sydney. retriev from 
https://analytics.uts.edu.au/. 

david van dyk, monts fuentes, michael I. jordan, michael newton, bonni K. ray, duncan templ lang, 
and hadley wickham. 2015. asa statement on the role of statist in data science. retriev from 
http://magazine.amstat.org/blog/2015/10/01/asa-statement-on-the-role-of-statistics-in-data-science/. 

vast. 2016. visual analyt community. retriev from http://vacommunity.org/homepage. 
dan vesset, benjamin woo, henri D. morris, richard L. villars, gard little, jean S. bozman, lucinda 

borovick, carl W. olofson, susan feldman, steve conway, matthew eastwood, and natalya yezhkova. 
2012. worldwid big data technolog and servic 2012-2015 forecast. idc. 

ana viseu and luci suchman. 2010. wearabl augmentations: imaginari of the inform body. berghahn 
books, new york, 161–184. 

whitehouse. 2015. the white hous name dr. D. J. patil a the first u.s. chief data scientist. retriev 
from https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2015/02/18/white-house-names-dr-dj-patil-first-us-chief-data- 
scientist. 

wikipedia. 2016a. comparison of cluster software. retriev from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 
comparison_of_cluster_software. 

wikipedia. 2016b. informatics. (2016). https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/informatics. 
wikipedia. 2016c. list of report software. retriev from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/list_of_reporting_ 

software. 
wired. 2014. how europ can seiz the star role in big data. retriev from www.wired.com/ 

insights/2014/09/europe-big-data/. 
gari wolf. 2012. the data-driven life. new york times. retriev from www.nytimes.com/2010/05/02/ 

magazine/02self-measurement-t.html. 
jeff wu. 1997. statist = data science? retriev from http://www2.isye.gatech.edu/∼jeffwu/ 

presentations/datascience.pdf. 
yahoo. 2016. yahoo finance. retriev from finance.yahoo.com. 
nathan yau. 2009. rise of the data scientist. retriev from http://flowingdata.com/2009/06/04/rise-of-the- 

data-scientist/. 
chri yiu. 2012. the big data opportunity. retriev from http://www.policyexchange.org.uk/images/ 

publications/thepportunity.pdf. 
bin yu. 2014. im presidenti address: let u own data science. im bulletin onlin (2014). oct. 1, 2014. 

receiv june 2016; revis novemb 2016; accept april 2017 

acm comput surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, articl 43, public date: june 2017. 

http://en.tutiempo.net/clim 
http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/ 
https://www.udacity.com/courses/data-sci 
https://www.udemy.com/courses/search/?ref=homeamp;src=ukwamp;q=data+scienceamp;lang=en 
https://www.udemy.com/courses/search/?ref=homeamp;src=ukwamp;q=data+scienceamp;lang=en 
http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/research/infrastructure/big-data/ 
http://data.gov.uk/sites/default/files/opendatawhitepaper.pdf 
http://data.gov.uk/sites/default/files/opendatawhitepaper.pdf 
http://data.gov.uk/ 
http://midas.umich.edu/ 
http://midas.umich.edu/ 
http://www.unglobalpulse.org/ 
https://www.data.gov/ 
file:data2discovery.org 
http://analytics.ncsu.edu/?pageid=4184 
http://analytics.ncsu.edu/?pageid=4184 
http://www.nsf.gov/cise/news/bigdata.jsp 
http://www.uts.edu.au/research-and-teaching/our-research/advanced-analytics-institute/education-and-research-opportuniti-1 
http://www.uts.edu.au/research-and-teaching/our-research/advanced-analytics-institute/education-and-research-opportuniti-1 
https://analytics.uts.edu.au/ 
http://magazine.amstat.org/blog/2015/10/01/asa-statement-on-the-role-of-statistics-in-data-science/ 
http://vacommunity.org/homepag 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2015/02/18/white-house-names-dr-dj-patil-first-us-chief-data-scientist 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2015/02/18/white-house-names-dr-dj-patil-first-us-chief-data-scientist 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/comparisonofclustersoftwar 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/comparisonofclustersoftwar 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/informat 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/listofreportingsoftwar 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/listofreportingsoftwar 
http://www.wired.com/insights/2014/09/europe-big-data/ 
http://www.wired.com/insights/2014/09/europe-big-data/ 
file:www.nytimes.com/2010/05/02/magazine/02self-measurement-t.html 
file:www.nytimes.com/2010/05/02/magazine/02self-measurement-t.html 
http://www2.isye.gatech.edu/jeffwu/presentations/datascience.pdf 
http://www2.isye.gatech.edu/jeffwu/presentations/datascience.pdf 
file:finance.yahoo.com 
http://flowingdata.com/2009/06/04/rise-of-the-data-scientist/ 
http://flowingdata.com/2009/06/04/rise-of-the-data-scientist/ 
http://www.policyexchange.org.uk/images/publications/thepportunity.pdf 
http://www.policyexchange.org.uk/images/publications/thepportunity.pdf 

