






































deepmind AI take IQ test to probe it abil for abstract thought 


deepmind AI take IQ test to probe it abil for abstract 
thought 

By jacob aron 

AI struggl with IQ test 

panther media gmbh / alami stock photo 

will artifici intellig ever be abl to match human in abstract thought, or be they just veri fanci 
number crunchers? research at googl deepmind be tri to find out by challeng ai to solv 
abstract reason puzzl similar to those found in IQ tests. 

If you have ever take an IQ test, you’ll know that one kind of question involv look at set of abstract 
shape and choos which should come next in a give the sequence. these puzzl be know a raven’ 
progress matrix and can onli be solv by figur out the rule behind them. 

the test be a use way of measur someone’ capac for abstract reason – the abil to connect 
differ concept into new ideas. “abstract reason be import in domain such a scientif discoveri 
where we need to gener novel hypothesi and then use these hypothesi to solv problems,” say david 
barrett at deepmind. 

advertis 

learn to think 

deepmind AI take IQ test to probe it abil for abstract thought https://www.newscientist.com/article/2174100-deepmind-ai-takes-iq-test... 

1 sur 2 20-07-18 à 20:16 



human can cheat at the test by over-preparing, allow them to learn rule that bypass the need for 
abstract thought, and with ai, thi issu be exacerbated. neural networks, a popular system behind ais, can 
onli learn by train on huge number of examples, allow them to swot-up on the test without ever 
show a capac for abstract reasoning. 

To get around this, barrett’ team test their neural network on whether they could learn more gener 
concepts, such a “increasing”. sinc thi can appli to a varieti of properties, such a the number of shape or 
the intens of their colour, they could train the ai on puzzl involv one type, but then test them on 
another. 

they test a rang of standard neural network and found they perform extrem poorli on thi test – 
achiev mark a low a 22 per cent. but the team’ new neural network, which be specif design to 
infer relationship between differ part of the puzzle, do much good – achiev a score of 63 per cent. 

“while these structur help specif with thi task, we believ they can also be appli to other problem 
involv abstract relationship and take decis between possibl cours of action,” say team member 
felix hill. 

the team be quick to point out that the puzzl they use in these test aren’t actual the same a those 
found on human IQ tests. “it be import to note that the goal of thi work be not to develop a neural network 
that can pa an IQ test,” say barrett. 

unsurprisingly, all of the ai perform best when the test puzzl be more similar to the train puzzles. 
barrett say in future, he hope that neural network will be abl to generalis more, increas their capac 
for abstract reasoning. 

journal reference: arxiv.org/abs/1807.04225 

more on these topics: 

artifici intellig 
machin learn 
technolog 

deepmind AI take IQ test to probe it abil for abstract thought https://www.newscientist.com/article/2174100-deepmind-ai-takes-iq-test... 

2 sur 2 20-07-18 à 20:16 


