






































deep root analyt sue after data breach - busi insid 


sean gallup/getti imag 

gop data firm that expos million of 
americans' person inform be face it 
first class-act lawsuit 

natasha bertrand 
jun. 22, 2017, 10:51 AM 

A data-analyt firm hire by the 
republican nation committe 
last year to gather polit 
inform about US 
voter accident leak the 
sensit person detail of 
roughli 198 million citizen earli 
thi month. and it' now face it 
first class-act lawsuit. 

deep root analytics, a data firm 
contract by the rnc, store 
detail of about 61% of the US 
popul on an amazon cloud 
server without password protect 
for roughli two week befor it be 
discov by secur research 
chri vickeri on june 12. 

the class-act lawsuit, file by jame and linda mcaleer of florida and all other similarli situated, alleg 
deep root fail to "secur and safeguard the public' person identifi inform such a names, 
addresses, email addresses, telephon numbers, date of birth, reddit.com brows history, and voter ID 
number, which deep root collect from mani sources, includ the republican nation committee." 

the data expos by deep root includ 1.1 terabyt "of entir unsecur person information" compil by 
deep root and at least two other republican contractors, targetpoint consulting, inc., and data trust, accord 
to an analysi from the cybersecur firm upguard. 

"in total, the person inform of potenti near all of america' 200 million regist voter be exposed, 
includ names, date of birth, home addresses, phone numbers, and voter registr details, a well a data 
describ a 'modeled' voter ethnic and religions," upguard said. 

the lawsuit say that presid donald trump "i on record denounc these sort of breach a 'gross 
negligence.'" 

It say that "a a direct and proximit caus of deep root' conduct," those expos in the data breach may 
be vulner to ident theft and "a loss of privacy," and argu that the "actual damages" exceed $5 million. 

the expos inform do not includ highli sensit inform like social secur numbers, and much of 
it be publicli avail voter-registr data provid by state govern officials, a compani spokesman 
told busi insid on tuesday. 

"sinc thi event have come to our attention, we have updat the access set and put protocol in place to 
prevent further access," deep root say in a statement. "we take full respons for thi situation." 

deep root didn't immedi respond to a request for comment wednesday. 

but the expos databas combin people' person inform and polit inclin — includ 
proprietari inform gather via predict model tool — to creat a detail profil of nearli 200 
million american that would be a "gold mine" for anyon look to target and manipul voters, say archi 
agarwal, the founder of the cybersecur firm threatmodeler. 

"thi be the mother lode of all leaks," agarw say monday. "govern be make or broken on this. I don't 
even have the word to describ it." 

joe loomis, the founder and chief technolog offic at the cybersecur firm cybersponse, predict that a 
seri of lawsuit against deep root over the accident leak would prove damaging. 

"even if it be human error and not intentional, one IT person be probabl go to put thi compani out of 
business," he said. 

read the full complaint below: 

mcaleer v. deep root by natasha bertrand on scribd 

deep root analyt sue after data breach - busi insid http://www.businessinsider.com/deep-root-analytics-sued-after-data-brea... 

1 sur 2 16/07/2017 18:52 



deep root analyt sue after data breach - busi insid http://www.businessinsider.com/deep-root-analytics-sued-after-data-brea... 

2 sur 2 16/07/2017 18:52 


