









































microsoft word - design for trust camera readi final.docx 


design for trust: An explor of the challeng and 
opportun of bitcoin user 

corina sa 
lancast univers 

lancaster, UK 
corina@comp.lancs.ac.uk 

irni eliana khairuddin 
univers teknolog mara 

selangor, malaysia 
irnieliana@salam.uitm.edu.mi 


abstract 
bitcoin be a cryptocurr which have receiv increas 
interest over the last five years. built upon a decentr 
peer to peer system, it support transparent, fast, cost 
effective, and irrevers transactions, without the need for 
trust third parti financi institutions. We know howev 
littl about people’ motiv and experi with bitcoin 
currency. thi paper report on interview with 20 bitcoin 
user in malaysia about their experi and trust 
challenges. find show that bitcoin be use more a 
store of valu for specul invest or savings’ 
protection. the paper advanc the hci theori on trust by 
identifi main bitcoin characterist and their impact on 
trust, such a decentralization, unregulation, emb 
expertise, and reputation, a well a transactions’ 
transparency, low cost, and easi to complete. We 
discu insecur transactions, the risk of dishonest trader 
and it mitig strategies. the paper conclud with 
design implic includ support for the transpar 
of two-way transactions, tool for materi trust, and 
tool for support revers transactions. 

author keyword 
bitcoin users; blockchain; trust; dishonest traders; risks. 

acm classif keyword 
h.5.m. inform interfac and present (e.g., hci): 
miscellaneous. 

introduct 
bitcoin be a special form of altern currency: a digit 
cryptocurr describ a the first open and decentr 
currenc [23], whose transact be record on an open 
source, and publicli distribut ledger. thi blockchain 
technolog allow for secur and transpar transactions, 
while protect the ident of transaction’ parti [39]. 
On the one hand, such an innov form of financi 
transact appear particularli appeal to bitcoin users. 


figur 1: merchant’ sign for accept bitcoin payment 

for example, in a preliminari study, khairuddin and sa 
[26] interview 9 user and identifi three motiv for 
bitcoin use: the role of bitcoin technolog in a monetari 
revolution, users’ increas empower due to the open, 
decentr and unregul technology, and their 
percept of the increas valu of bitcoins. On the other 
hand, blockchain’ characterist a a decentr and 
pseudo-anonym platform can pose import trust 
challeng to bitcoin user such a illicit use and 
cyberattack [15,53]. We argu that becaus of these 
characteristics, blockchain offer a uniqu case studi for 
the explor of trust. thi contrast with most hci 
model of trust which have be inform by empir 
work on e-commerc or e-pay system which be 
tradit centralized, regulated, and non-anonymous. 
henc the feasibl of these model for theoriz about 
users’ trust in bitcoin requir exploration. 

sinc it begin in 2009, blockchain technolog have 
steer increas research interest predominantli in the 
area of cryptography, security, and peer to peer computing. 
relev hci work have just start to emerg [5,26,43]. We 
still know littl about bitcoin user and their experi or 
how differ blockchain’ characterist impact on trust. 
thi paper address thi gap, by report on interview 
with 20 bitcoin user about their motiv and 
experi of use bitcoin and their trust relat issues. 
We address the follow research questions: 
• which be the motif for earli adopt and use of 

bitcoins? how do peopl learn about bitcoin and how 
do they use bitcoin for? 

• how differ blockchains’ characterist impact on 
the variou dimens of trust? 

• which be the main trust challeng and how do peopl 
attempt to mitig them? 

permiss to make digit or hard copi of all or part of thi work for 
person or classroom use be grant without fee provid that copi be 
not make or distribut for profit or commerci advantag and that copi 
bear thi notic and the full citat on the first page. copyright for 
compon of thi work own by other than acm must be honored. 
abstract with credit be permitted. To copi otherwise, or republish, to 
post on server or to redistribut to lists, requir prior specif permiss 
and/or a fee. request permiss from permissions@acm.org. 
chi 2017, may 06-11, 2017, denver, co, usa 
© 2017 acm. isbn 978-1-4503-4655-9/17/05…$15.00 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025886 

the infrastructur of trust chi 2017, may 6–11, 2017, denver, co, usa 

6499 



the main contribut of thi work includ advanc the 
theoret discours of trust in hci, by extend it to 
unregulated, decentr and pseudo-anonym system 
such a blockchain. We also identifi three design 
implic for support users’ trust. 

relat work 
while the topic of trust have be well research by variou 
disciplines, for our work we select theori develop in 
hci, particularli for e-pay and e-commerce. 

trust in hci 
We agre with the definit of trust a the willing to 
be vulner [13]. In hci there be two main direct of 
conceptu trust: trust between peopl and technology, 
and trust between peopl interact with technology. 
specif hci work explor people’ trust in bitcoin 
technolog be just start to emerge. for example, in their 
framework for explor the trust challeng of bitcoin 
technology, sa and khairuddin [43] identifi three 
dimens of trust: technolog (users’ trust in bitcoin 
technology), social (trust between and among bitcoin’ 
stakeholders: users, miners, exchang and merchants), and 
institut trust (govern trust in bitcoin technology). 

two preval hci model be the model of onlin trust 
[13], and the framework on mechan of trust [41]. 
corritor and colleagu [13] identifi three trust factor 
includ users’ percept of technology’ credibility, eas 
of use, and risk. their four dimens of credibl 
includ honesti (well intention, truth and unbias 
actions), expertis (knowledge, experi and 
competence), predict (expect that technolog 
will act consist base on past experience), and 
reput (recogn past performance). the model have 
be extens appli to web design in e-government, e- 
commerce, and e-banking, but it valu for blockchain 
technolog have receiv limit attention. the model also 
share similar with davis’ [16] emphasi on use 
and eas of use in hi technolog accept model. 

the framework on mechan of trust [41] investig 
technology-medi trust between user and have be 
appli to e-commerce. thi framework identifi two key 
properti warrant trust in transaction’ partner: 
contextu and intrins properties. contextu properti 
be describ a temporal, social and institut 
embeddedness. tempor embedded refer to parties’ 
potenti for engag in futur transactions, and interest in 
their relationship’ longevity. thi in turn prevent the risk 
of defection, a the present gain come at the cost of futur 
lose ones. tempor embedded requir traceabl of 
action through “repeat interact with stabl identities” 
[p9, 41] so that the trustor can accumul more knowledg 
and make good predict about the trustee’ futur 
behavior. social embedded captur the exchang of 
inform among trustor about trustees’ past 
performance. thi motiv the truste to fulfil the 
agreement in order to protect hi reput among the 

larg pool of trustor access inform about hi past 
performances. institut embedded captur the legal 
aspect underpin transactions, abl to enforc sanction 
such a litig or punish for the parti who do not 
fulfil their agreement. given thi protect by the law 
institutions, the trustor be comfort to engag in 
transact with trustor of whom they know little. 

intrins properti of the truste includ hi abil or 
motiv to act in a trustworthi manner infer on the 
basi of hi credibility; intern norm which captur 
trustee’ integr or respect for moral principl which can 
be support by the parties’ social identifi and presence; 
and benevol captur trustee’ concern for the 
wellb of the other [41]. benevol resembl 
hardin’ theori of trust [24] and the encapsul interest: 
parties’ interest in relationship which tend to be rich and 
ongoing. He also discu risk a the uncertainti of 
trustee’ choic to engag in betray or deflection; risk 
which be good mitig in group or thick relationship 
where trustee’ reput be social embedded. 

To summarize, hci model of trust identifi key factor 
impact on users’ trust in technolog or in each other 
dure technology-medi transactions. there be howev 
limit work on investig the feasibl of these model 
for the explor of trust in bitcoin technology. 

altern crypto currenc 
historically, peopl creat object a medium of exchang 
to replac the barter system [45]. such object includ 
shells, stone or anyth valuabl to both buyer and seller. 
the argument of the medium of exchang be late 
extend in the 17th centuri through fiat money [17]: coin 
of preciou metal issu and declar valuabl by the king. 
such coin be commonli deposit with goldsmith for 
safekeeping, and in return, the owner be give receipt 
call goldsmith’ note [51]. the goldsmith role be late 
take on by the govern institut issu fiat money 
through their treasuri or central banks, so that nowaday 
the nation fiat currenc be the domin medium of 
exchang for trade good or services. they also serv the 
role of store valu for futur purchase, and of unit of 
account in which good and servic could be priced. over 
the last five centuri however, altern medium of 
exchang have also emerg a substitut to nation fiat 
currenc [21], mostli for support local economi and 
their commun [20]. develop privately, most of the 
altern currenc have no legal tender and be not 
regul by nation govern [28]. altern 
currenc have also emerg a unregul digit 
currenc issu and control by developers, and use by 
member of virtual commun [18]. 

bitcoin technolog 
A more recent develop of altern currenc be 
crypto currenc built through cryptograph algorithms. 
among the over 500 cryptocurr avail in the 
current market [12], bitcoin be one of the most popular ones. 

the infrastructur of trust chi 2017, may 6–11, 2017, denver, co, usa 

6500 



design by nakamoto, an anonym entity, bitcoin be 
underpin by the blockchain technolog [39] which have 
receiv increas interest from both the financi and 
industri sector [50]. the blockchain consist of a ledger 
distribut throughout a peer to peer network of node 
which record each transact after it have be approved. 
transact in blockchain be repres a singl data 
structur and from user’ perspect they involv three 
key components: the address where the bitcoin be stored; 
the privat key own by the user to send bitcoins; and the 
wallet software, which run on user’ person computer, 
use to receive, send or store bitcoin [47]. each bitcoin 
transact be creat by the wallet softwar and 
broadcast to the network where it be test for valid 
and includ in the blockchain. 

unlik in the bank system, the blockchain ledger be not 
maintain by a central author and the verif of 
transact be not ensur by trust third parties. instead 
transact be verifi and author by miner use 
secur crypto algorithm [15] ensur thu core secur 
function [4]. A neg consequ of thi unregul 
be the feud between govern and blockchain, with 
some central institut have fail to recogn it 
legal [49]. previou work have also identifi some 
scam cyber threat face by the bitcoin user such a 
scam relat to fake website, ponzi scheme, phishing, and 
applic plugin [53]. As the ledger be public, blockchain 
be also know a a transpar system: each machin 
connect to the blockchain can download a full copi of the 
ledger, allow for brows or queri the global histori 
of transact a well a the remain balanc of the 
bitcoin left in each wallet address [47]. sinc it no longer 
requir trust in third parti entiti to keep the ledger, 
blockchain technolog have be call trustless. 

In nakamoto’ view [39] the concept of irrevers 
transact and trust be strongli coupled. the blockchain 
aim to address the key weak of the tradit trust 
base model where financi institut act a trust third 
parti to mediat e-payments. bank transact howev 
be costli both in time and fees. they can also be revers 
by the banks, in order to arbitr disput between the 
trade parties. the problem howev be that the bank be 
not bound to enforc the contract between the trade 
parties, so that refund may be approv even if the 
contract stipul otherwise. In contrast, blockchain be 
intend to elimin thi middl link and it high cost, a 
well a the option of revers transactions. 

anoth import aspect of the blockchain be protect the 
privaci of the parti involv in bitcoin transact [39]. 
A similar function be avail in the bank system 
where the privaci be ensur by limit access to 
transact inform to the involv parti and the 
bank. however, the protect of privaci in blockchain be 
even stronger, sinc it do not requir ani person 
identifi inform in order to allow user to engag in 

bitcoin transactions. thi make the blockchain pseudo- 
anonym [4]: the wallet address be public while the 
ident of it owner be not [39]. It be howev users’ 
respons to ensur that the two be never link [15]. 
To support this, nakamoto suggest the use of new wallet 
address for each transact [39]. the pseudo-anonym 
natur of blockchain technolog let it open to misus on 
the onlin black market such a silk road, with neg 
consequ for blockchain’ reput [15]. 

To conclude, the technolog underpin bitcoin 
transact have be purpos design a 
decentr and secure, unregul and transpar yet 
pseudo-anonymous. these uniqu strength of the 
blockchain also relat to some trust challeng such a 
illicit use or damag reputation. there be howev limit 
empir studi explor the relationship between 
blockchain’ properti and users’ trust [30,33]. 

method 
We recruit 20 bitcoin users, 18 male, 2 female, (mean age 
30, rang 21-50). six particip have less than 6 month 
experi of use bitcoins, 8 particip have between 6 
month and 2 years, while the remain 6 have more than 
2 years. In term of educ background, half of 
particip have bachelor degrees, 7 be school leavers, 
and 3 have master degrees. particip have a broad rang of 
occupations: 8 in administr roles, 4 in financi and 
market sector, 3 school teachers, 2 unemployed, 1 in 
medic field, 1 in IT and 1 student. each particip be 
reward rm50 (equival to £10 in malaysian currency). 
particip be recruit from five facebook and 
telegram group of malaysian bitcoin users, join by the 
second author. malaysia offer a specif opportun for 
the explor of bitcoin practices. On the one hand, 
despit five decad of econom growth, it be still a 
develop countri with increas inflat rate, 
underdevelop democraci and a financi system which be 
now under the scrutini of law enforcement. On the other 
hand, malaysia experi a massiv growth of remitt 
and payment market, and interest in crypto currency, be 
in 2016 the first develop countri consid 
fintech regulation. over the last year it also rank fourth 
on bitcoin search on googl trends, and first among 
develop countri on the number of bitcoin nodes. 

the invit for take part in the studi be both 
publicli post and privat sent to the most activ 
member in each of the onlin groups. We also appli 
snowbal sampl so that six more particip be 
introduc by the interview ones. We conduct semi- 
structur interview between april and may 2016, to 
explor users’ motivation, understand and use of bitcoin. 
We asked: “whi be you interest in bitcoin”, “how do 
you learn about bitcoin” and “which be the benefit and 
challeng of use bitcoins”. We also ask about users’ 
challeng and trust-rel issues: “what be the 
challeng that you face when use or engag with 

the infrastructur of trust chi 2017, may 6–11, 2017, denver, co, usa 

6501 



bitcoin technology”, and “how much trust do you have in 
bitcoin technology”, and follow up with addit 
question on perceiv secur and anonymity. not at least, 
we explor participants’ percept of risk and their 
mitig strategies: “did you experi ani fraud”, and 
“will you take ani action to prevent that in the future”. 

the interview take place via skype or phone. they last 
at least an hour, be audio record and fulli transcribed. 
the analysi involv a hybrid approach where exist 
concept be use for the deduct cod while new 
concept ground on the empir data, contribut to the 
induct cod [19]. the deduct cod includ 
concept from the hci literatur on trust such a 
technological, social and institut dimens of trust 
[43], factor of user’ trust in technolog such a 
credibility, eas of use, and risk [13], and properti 
warrant trust between technolog user such a 
temporal, social and institut embeddedness, a well a 
credibility, integr and benevol [41]. We have also 
use concept relat to blockchains’ characterist such a 
decentralization, unregulation, pseudo-anonymity, a well 
a transpar and irrevers transactions. the cod list 
be iter refin in the light of the interview data, a 
new code emerg under the theme of motivation, insecur 
transact and risk mitig strategies. 

result 
We start by outlin users’ motiv for engag with 
bitcoin technology, follow by a descript of it key 
characterist and their impact on users’ trust. In particular, 
we highlight the issu of insecur transact and the 
associ human and technology-rel risks. We further 
unpack the risk of deal with dishonest traders, and the 
mitig strategi for address them. 

motiv for the use of bitcoin currenc 
thi section highlight the motiv of end users, peopl 
with limit knowledg of bitcoin technology, who adopt 
and engag in the use of bitcoins. the motiv and 
percept of earli adopt toward bitcoin can be 
group accord to davis’ technolog accept model 
[16] in perceiv usefulness, and eas of use. We further 
describ the perceiv use of bitcoin a an extern 
motiv factor and it key econom rationale. 

econom rational 
the econom aspect captur people’ distrust in financi 
institut and the govern legitim them. sever 
particip refer to the import of protect one’ 
save in the face of an unstabl econom climate, 
domin not onli by inflat but also by governments’ 
decis to control person bank account holders’ money 
and their movement [11]. for example, the follow quot 
be illustr for a quarter of our participants: “from what I 
learn from the cypru crisis, govern and bank 
have the author to take your money from your account 
[…] the trust in financi institut be go forever. So I 
look for altern and found bitcoin to keep the 

savings” [p16]. thi outcom provid support for the 
secur motiv for acquir money and bitcoins’ 
perceiv valu for provid safeti when peopl distrust 
the world and the futur [22], particularli in the context of 
inflat and econom downturn: “current our currenc 
be fall and I be worried. As a backup plan, I convert 
my money in gold or bitcoins, which be not influenc by 
ani big parti or power” [p8]. thi be interest a 
reflect the assumpt of gold a commodity, which 
wrongli conflat gold’ long-run price stabil with the 
absenc of power for regul it price: while such power 
do not need to belong to central banks, it still requir 
government’ author [6]. 

A third econom reason underpin the adopt of 
bitcoin be specul on their futur value. almost half of 
particip share thi view: “I keep my save in bitcoin 
[because] their futur valu will increas over time” [p11]. 
In such cases, particip purpos explor altern 
mean of exchang for replac their volatil fiat currenc 
in order to both protect save and more importantly, to 
invest for futur income. 

social learn 
find indic that in order to learn about the bitcoin 
currency, particip leverag the emerg social network 
of bitcoin users. thi social aspect underpin the initi 
motiv of bitcoin’ earli adopt includ onlin 
commun where most of particip have heard for the 
first time what bitcoin currenc is: “the first time I heard 
[about bitcoins] be from the reddit forum”. after find 
out about the bitcoin currenc and it potenti value, 
particip describ their effort to learn more through 
self-guid onlin research: “first I read about bitcoin 
onlin in 2009, [and] in 2013 I could see the price rise 
up, so I start to learn more about” [p7]. An addit 
sourc of inform about bitcoin be peer and friends: “I 
start to know about bitcoin a few year ago, when my 
friend told me about the wallet, the process and how 
bitcoin could elimin banks’ transactions” [p3].thi 
quot indic how some earli adopt champion the use 
of bitcoin currenc by highlight it advantag against 
the nation fiat currencies. 

use of bitcoin 
while most of the literatur describ bitcoin a 
cryptocurr [8,12], our find indic that they be 
use predominantli a store of value, i.e., predict 
valuabl for late use. eight particip use bitcoin on a 
regular basi to gener income, 7 use them occasion 
for investment, while 5 be full time investors. thi be 
interesting, because, bitcoin experi high volatil 
which make them on the long-term unreli store of 
valu [52]. It appear that the complet control over one’ 
save be prefer over the less volatil yet less 
control fiat currency. such characterist be share 
by other cryptocurr such a litecoin and swisscoin 
also use by our participants. 

the infrastructur of trust chi 2017, may 6–11, 2017, denver, co, usa 

6502 



anoth surpris find be that we have see onli three 
isol account of the use of bitcoin a currenc for 
buy good or services, despit the grow number of 
merchant who accept bitcoin (figur 1). most of the 
payment be for onlin util or phone bills, food, or 
mine equipment. for exampl one particip note the 
payment of hi mobil phone’ prepaid credit with bitcoin 
[p10], while anoth refer to the payment of food 
supplement from a friend: “he just sent me hi QR code and 
I scan the code and transfer the amount of bitcoin ” 
[p19]. In addit one particip mention both onlin 
and offlin us of bitcoin currency: “I pay my util bill 
in bitcoin from the cryptomarket.my. I even buy my 
cigarett from expedia.com, and use cheapair.com to buy 
my flight ticket and hotel book too. then there be a 
restaur in johor where I pay in bitcoins” [p12]. thi 
divers way of spend bitcoin a currenc be an 
except rather than the norm, a we fail to find ani 
addit particip report similarli rich use of 
bitcoin currency. interestingly, we onli found one account 
of illeg purchase: “I bought an unlimit spotifi account 
from the dark web use bitcoin” [p1]. 

blockchain’ characterist and their impact on trust 
We now describ the main characterist of bitcoin 
technology, and how they contribut to trust in bitcoin. 
these includ blockchain’ decentralization, unregulation, 
emb expertis and reputation, a well a transparent, 
low cost, easy, and insecur transactions. 

decentr blockchain 
one of the main identifi characterist relat to the 
decentr natur of bitcoin technolog [47]. find 
indic that most particip appreci that bitcoin 
transact do not involv ani third parti involv 
from financi institutions: “A decentr currenc be a 
bit more secur in term of handl it be same like an asset. 
So if nobodi els [third party] handl the asset, it be more 
secur for me to handl it by myself” [p20]. the 
decentr of blockchain also foster confid in it 
clear intent to circumvent, arguabl dishonest central 
financi institutions. thi in turn provid support for 
honesti a a dimens of credibl in corritor and 
colleagues’ [13] model of onlin trust. 

peopl also understand the reduc need for the 
complic author process for send and receiv 
money: “if you look at the current bank system, it take 
three work day to do the settlement, but with blockchain 
you can settl it instantly” [p3]. thi quot illustr the 
appreci for quicker transfer of money between 
accounts, and therefor the eas of use. 

unregul blockchain 
particip also express appreci for the unregul 
aspect of blockchain technology. As a result, more than half 
of particip perceiv thi a an opportun to becom 
more empow and privileg to regain control over their 
own money: “all govern love to control peopl [but] 

they cannot control bitcoin, and that’ whi they cannot 
accept it. bitcoin be people’ money give them financi 
freedom” [p14]. thi be a milit statement, which link 
back to the initi motiv for engag with blockchain 
technology: the eros of trust in financi and govern 
institut coupl with the econom crisi [43]. 

unregul set no limit for send and receiv 
money, which can take place either local or worldwide: “I 
see no boundari for peopl to do trade global or 
nationwide; a freedom to do the trade without ani 
restrict from the authority” [p2]. As a decentr and 
unregul system, the risk of abus of power over 
individuals’ person asset be highli restricted. thi 
confirm a limit of the perceiv risk a the third 
dimens of the model of onlin trust [13]. sever 
particip refer to the benefit of blockchain’ pseudo- 
anonymity, and it valu in support unregul a 
illustr by thi quote: “we can keep our money a much 
a we want and the govern will not abl to freez our 
wallet becaus of the pseudo-anonymity” [p11]. 

blockchain’ embed expertis 
anoth characterist of bitcoin technolog be people’ 
appreci for the expertis requir for mine bitcoin 
and verifi transactions. thi be interest give that for 
example, mine a rig need limit technic knowledge. 
find howev indic that the cost requir by the 
mine process provid a guarante for the invest 
expertis and ultim for the credibl of the blockchain 
technology: “produc bitcoin be not someth easy. 
there be specif way to mine and expens equip 
needed” [p8]. As the competit and difficulti for mine 
bitcoin increas over time, more comput intens 
mine equip be need which in turn lead to high 
cost for produc bitcoins. almost a quarter of 
particip mention thi complex and the cost of the 
mine procedure. their appreci for miners’ expertis 
foster credibl in bitcoin currenc and transactions. thi 
further confirm the credibl dimens of the onlin 
model of trust and it applic to bitcoin technolog [13]. 

blockchain’ reput 
the reput of the blockchain technolog have be 
notori damag due to illicit activ on silk road, 
an anonym onlin marketplac predominantli for 
narcotics, which us bitcoin a it exchang currenc 
[10]. four particip mention such reput issu due 
also to current cybercrimes, sinc silk road be close 
down in 2013: “there be lot of crime due to bitcoin’ 
anonymity: money laundering, terrorist financ and tax 
evasion” [p15] but surprisingly, with limit refer to it 
neg impact on participants’ credibl in bitcoin 
technology. interestingly, we also found instanc where 
particip in fact valu the grow reput of bitcoin 
technology: “in the long term, thi technolog have a veri 
bright future. there be lot of big compani which start 
do research on blockchain” [p17]. thi quot suggest 

the infrastructur of trust chi 2017, may 6–11, 2017, denver, co, usa 

6503 



that the larg companies’ interest in blockchain offer 
altern rout for legitim it authent and 
ultim credibility. apart from trust in blockchain, 
particip also refer to trust in bitcoin transactions. We 
now discu the main characterist of bitcoin transact 
and how they support or hinder trust. 

transpar transact 
our find indic an import and valu characterist 
of bitcoin transactions: their transpar [47]. the public 
ledger allow public access to the movement of bitcoin 
from one wallet to another. user be abl to track ani 
bitcoin transact from the veri first one, until the present 
day: “becaus bitcoin us blockchain, we can see the 
movement of the bitcoin in a public ledger. It be veri 
transparent” [p11]. transpar echo technology’ 
credibl dimens in corritor and colleagues’ [13] 
model of onlin trust, and it honesti dimension. 

easi and quick transact 
anoth valu characterist of bitcoin transact be their 
eas and speed of completion: “with bitcoin you can move 
your money global in just a second; veri easy” [p11]. A 
similar quot emphas the eas of complet 
worldwid transact by compar them with the eas of 
texting: “it be easi to move money from one countri to 
another. It be just like you send a text messag and the 
transact be done” [p13]. the abov outcom suggest 
that through transparent, easy, and quick transactions, 
peopl experi eas of use. accord to corritor and 
colleagues’ [13] model of onlin trust, eas of use be one of 
the three factor of trust. 

low cost transact 
A third valu characterist of bitcoin transact be their 
low cost. A few particip provid quot to support 
this: “it onli cost me 10 cent for each transaction” [p6]; or 
“the main benefit of transact be that they be easy, fast 
and cheap” [p14]. these outcom indic that 
transactions’ low cost could further contribut to reduc 
transactions’ perceiv risk, a particip do not have to 
fear hidden or high costs. In their model of onlin trust, 
corritor and colleagues’ [13] refer to risk a the third 
factor of trust, and explain the direct relationship between 
users’ percept of control and their trust. If the abov 
characterist support users’ trust in their bitcoin 
transactions, find also indic one characterist which 
hinder trust which be further detailed. 

insecur transact 
An import find be that despit the abov 
characterist support trust in blockchain technolog 
and bitcoin transactions, particip also report their 
concern about the risk associ with insecur 
transactions. It be worth mention that insecur 
transact do not concern miners’ cryptograph protocol 
for author transactions. indeed, none of particip 
report concern about the secur of thi protocol, but 
strong trust in miners’ expertis and in the predict of 

the protocol. instead, insecur transact relat to human 
error or malic and technology’ limit to address them. 
more specifically, we identifi four type of insecur 
transactions, three relat to human factors: those due to 
user themselves, to the other person or entiti engag in 
transaction, or to the third human parti not engag in 
transactions; and one relat to technology’ limit to 
address them. We now discu the associ risk for each 
of these type of transactions. 

risk due to users’ challeng of handl password 
six particip mention the risk of lose the password 
for their wallets, or the risk of insuffici protect it. 
for example, the quot below illustr thi type of risk 
and it seriou consequ of no longer be abl to 
access one’ bitcoin from that wallet: “make sure you 
don’t forget your password becaus blockchain do not 
keep your password […] it cannot be recov and you 
will lose all your bitcoin from that wallet” [p16]. 

the second risk of insuffici protect the password 
can have equal seriou consequ of have the bitcoin 
stolen: “I lose 30 bitcoin in the last month becaus of my 
own secur mistake. I set up my wallet password the same 
a my email password. one day, my wife click on a 
phish email and the hacker be abl to get my email 
password and use it to log in to my bitcoin wallet” [p12]. 

In order to address these risks, some user mention the 
import of take respons for secur store and 
protect their passwords: “a user we must know how to 
make sure that our bitcoin be secured. It be the same a 
protect our own cash or ani person valuabl thing 
that can be steal by others” [p15]. some particip even 
instal addit secur applic in their bitcoin 
wallet such a doubl authent [p12], sinc although 
“the system be secured, the secur respons be with the 
user. If anyon lose their bitcoins, the first person to be 
blame be themselves, not the system” [p14]. 

risk due to hackers’ malici attack 
three particip mention that insecur transact be 
also due to malici hacker attacks. We have see abov 
that some of these involv phish email to target wallet 
passwords. such attack can penetr even through doubl 
authentication: “you must make sure that your password be 
difficult to guess. A friend lose 14 bitcoin even though he 
appli doubl authent on multipl devices” [p11]. 

risk due to failur to recov from human error or malic 
although a third of particip consid themselv 
respons to secur their bitcoins, a few also indic that 
the recoveri from users’ failur to protect their password 
or from hackers’ attack be limitedli support by the 
bitcoin technology. the main imit here be that 
transact be irreversible: “let’ say the hacker have 
divert the money to anoth bitcoin wallet address; you 
will never know where your money have be transfer to 
and you cannot revers the transact either” [p1]. thi be 

the infrastructur of trust chi 2017, may 6–11, 2017, denver, co, usa 

6504 



an interest finding, indic a drawback of the 
blockchain technology. the rational for irrevers 
transact address the limit of the central 
financi system which allow revers transact 
without be bound to enforc the parties’ contract state 
that the sale be final [39]. however, a suggest in the 
abov quote, thi design featur fail to account for 
malici transact due to hacking, or to the dishonesti 
of the trade parties, a further detailed. 

It be import to make the distinct between how 
transact be repres in blockchain, i.e., data 
structur allow the transfer of bitcoin from one 
electron wallet to another; and how our particip 
perceiv transactions: a two-way transfer of bitcoin and 
money/goods. unlik the one-way remitt transact 
well support by the bitcoin technolog [27], all 
transact report by particip be two-way, with both 
parti send and receiv assets. although most 
transact involv buy or sell bitcoin against fiat 
currency, particip be onli abl to track one side of 
the transaction, name the movement of bitcoin captur 
within the blockchain. thi rais major risk and trust 
issu particularli in relat to potenti dishonest 
trade partners, a the untrack part of transact do 
not allow for scrutiny. thi issu be further emphas 
when deal with trader who be not author entities. 

risk relat to dishonest partner of transact 
find indic that a consider risk factor be dishonest 
partner with whom one engag in bitcoin transactions. A 
quarter of particip report incid where either them, 
or their close friend have be cheat and their trust 
betrayed: “I transfer some bitcoin but the buyer didn’t 
pay me” [p6]. thi quot illustr the import of 
know about the transact partner. thi point have be 
mention by other particip who express concern 
about strangers’ unknown reputation: “you don’t know 
whether the seller be scam or not” [p1]. 

strategi for mitig the risk of dishonest trader 
We identifi five strategi for deal with dishonest 
transact partners, and for mitig their risks. these 
strategi involv two form of trading: directli with 
anoth person, or through onlin exchanges, i.e. servic 
for match price and offer between bitcoin seller and 
buyers. these strategi be further describ start with 
the most frequent one, and we shall see that the run 
theme across these strategi be the traders’ pseudo- 
anonym and the unregul of blockchain technology. 

trade with author exchang 
the onlin exchang be by far the first and most prefer 
form of transaction, mostli becaus it regul support 
users’ trust. indeed, although bitcoin technolog and it 
cryptograph protocol be unregulated, exchang requir 
author from the financi servic such a financi 
conduct author [54]. for example, five particip 
mention their check of exchangers’ credentials: “I do 

look at their background, and legal term condit and 
from there I put trust on the exchange” [p2]. the 
exchanges’ websit be crucial for foster trust: “a 
proper website, [indic the amount of] trading, and 
testimoni [supports] trust on the exchange” [p3]. 

thi extend previou hci find on the valu of websit 
for trust [3,38], to the context of cryptocurr 
transactions. An addit sourc of trust be the option to 
contact directli the exchange’ agents: “I prefer thi 
exchang becaus they have their repres to contact 
if there be ani problem or question to ask” [p12]. In turn, 
thi make users’ relationship with the exchanges, a more 
person one. apart from be author by financi 
services, and have credibl websites, exchang also 
foster trust in transact partners, a they requir seller 
and buyer to regist and have their ident verified. thi 
be an import finding, indic way to address the 
extens concern around traders’ pseudo-anonymity. 
surprisingly, onli one particip report the use of the 
escrow servic (third parti hold the asset to be releas 
onc both parti be satisfi with the transaction). 
find indic that eas of use be neg impact by 
the use of the escrow, becaus of it addit registr 
requirements: “it be easi and faster to do the transact 
[directly] with other traders” [p10]. 

these find provid support for the contextu properti 
describ in the framework on mechan of trust [41], 
warrant users’ trust in exchang becaus of their 
success perform and the expect that they will 
perform consist well in the futur (tempor 
embeddedness), exchanges’ reput (social 
embeddedness), and their legal author servic 
(institut embeddedness). We also found evid for 
the intrins properti warrant trust in exchanges, for 
exampl through social presenc of profession websit 
and contact local repres (integrity), a well a 
reput through testimoni (credibility). 

trade with social author trader 
In comparison with exchanges, deal with individu 
trader offer weaker risk mitig strategies. the 
strong strategi be deal with social author 
traders. these be well-known, de-anonym member of 
onlin group who regularli join discuss and trade 
bitcoins. thu they becom trust and their name be 
add by the group administr to an onlin list of 
verifi traders: “I onli buy from author trader a lot 
of friend experienc scam and huge losses” [p18]. the 
label of author trader be usual provid within an 
onlin group of bitcoin user on the basi of a seri of 
success de-anonym transactions. thi outcom 
indic the crucial valu of de-anonym for credibl 
and trust. these find also provid evid for the 
framework on mechan of trust [41] warrant users’ 
trust in author trader (tempor and social 
embeddedness), but limit institut embeddedness. 

the infrastructur of trust chi 2017, may 6–11, 2017, denver, co, usa 

6505 



trade with reput individu trader 
If an author trader cannot be found, particip engag 
in a weaker risk mitig strategy: deal with reput 
traders. unlik trader author by an onlin user group, 
reput one benefit onli by credibl by proxy, from a 
few group member who have engag in success 
transact with these traders. for example, particip 
indic the use of peers’ or friends’ recommendations: “I 
knew the trader from the telegram group, and a few 
recommend from friend who can be trusted” [p8]. 
almost half of particip note that their first point of 
contact for background check on an unknown trader be their 
onlin group “if I be deal with stranger, I will ask in 
my onlin group to verifi that particular person. If they 
don’t know him I will not proceed with the transaction” 
[p10]. In addition, more than half of particip mention 
their prefer for know trader whom they have have 
success trust in the past: “most of them be my close 
friends, so I have no problem trust them” [p20]. thi 
show the valu of reput and benevol in 
support traders’ credibl [13]. these find confirm 
the framework on mechan of trust [41] warrant users’ 
trust in trader becaus of their reput (social 
embedded and credibility), and when deal with 
friends, becaus of perceiv integr and benevolence. 

trade with de-anonym individu trader 
although less common and mostli due to lack of 
experience, sometim bitcoin user engag in transact 
with unknown traders. In such cases, find indic that 
seldom the trader remain unknown, a we identifi two 
mechan for ensur traders’ de-anonymization: face to 
face meeting, or onlin share of their ids. for example, 
sever particip express the view that they onli 
proceed with the transact if the trader be will to de- 
anonymize. one way of achiev thi be through face to 
face meeting, where both side of the transact take place 
simultaneously, i.e., the exchang of bitcoin and fiat 
currenc or goods: “we cannot trust them online. We need 
to see that person and to do cash on delivery” [p4]. other 
particip requir trader to de-anonym by email 
their copi of person id: “I need to know their identity” 
[p5]. thi strategi do not provid ani contextu factor 
to allow users’ trust in unknown trader for whom they 
have no reputation-rel inform (neither social nor 
institut embeddedness) [41]. hence, user attempt to 
develop institut embedded by de-anonym the 
traders, or by reduc the risk of asynchron transact 
altogeth through face to face meet to perform 
synchron two-way exchanges. 

regul bitcoin 
In order to address the challeng of dishonest traders, mani 
particip express the wish that bitcoin becom 
regulated: “I think we must demand to our politician to 
regul bitcoin” [p1]. thi be an import find 
indic a high level strategi which do not address 
the trade itself but the unregul natur of blockchain. 

theoret implic 
We now reflect on the valu of these find for advanc 
the hci discours on trust. We also discu the specif 
tension that unregul and pseudo-anonym bring to 
trust. our implic be mostli relev for bitcoin user 
in develop contexts. they may also hold valu for 
understand and support trust in cryptocurr in 
gener in both develop and develop contexts, but 
futur work be requir to explor this. 

toward a model of trust among bitcoin user 
our find advanc the understand of users’ trust in 
blockchain technolog and in transact partners. We 
argu for the feasibl of the consid hci theori 
[13,41,43] for identifi key blockchain’ characterist 
support users’ trust: decentralization, unregulation, 
miners’ expertise, a well a transparent, easy, and low cost 
transactions. the main trust challeng experienc by 
bitcoin user be the risk of insecur transactions, and in 
particular that of deal with dishonest traders. 

We start by discuss the find in the light of sa and 
khairuddin’ [43] bitcoin trust framework. our find 
suggest that technolog trust of bitcoin user in 
blockchain technolog be strong, a particip valu it 
secur cryptograph protocol. thi extend prior find 
on users’ challeng to secur their bitcoin [29] with their 
willing to take respons for their weak, easi to 
break wallet passwords. 

find also indic novel insight into the social 
dimens of trust among bitcoin users. the main challeng 
here relat to dishonest bitcoin traders. with respect to 
differ stakeholders, it be worth mention that our 
find captur the blur of the boundari between 
merchant and user when the object of transact be 
bitcoins. In fact, we found littl evid that bitcoin user 
engag with merchant to buy goods, indic 
participants’ preferenti use of bitcoin a a store of valu 
rather than currency. our outcom also suggest extend 
thi framework’ definit of institut trust to includ 
not onli govern trust in blockchain technolog but also 
the trust of bitcoin user in govern and financi 
institution. We have also see evid for how the eros 
of such institut trust be crucial in users’ adopt of 
bitcoin and accept of it algorithm author [33]. 

probe further into the explor of technolog trust, 
we appli the model of onlin trust [13] to identifi specif 
blockchain’ characterist impact on trust. our find 
provid support for extend the applic of thi 
model to bitcoin technology. blockchain’ characterist 
support users’ credibl include: honesti ensur by 
decentr and public ledger’ transparency; expertis 
support by miners’ compet and hard labor; 
predict support by the cryptograph protocol; and 
reput support by larg companies’ interest in bitcoin. 
find also identifi blockchain’ characterist 
support the other dimens of trust: eas of use 

the infrastructur of trust chi 2017, may 6–11, 2017, denver, co, usa 

6506 



ground in eas and quick transactions; and limit risk 
due to transactions’ low cost and the decentralized, 
unregul natur of blockchain which limit the risk of 
institut power abuse. outcom also suggest a specif 
technolog characterist perceiv a a risk factor: the 
blockchain’ purpos design featur for irrevers 
transactions. We found the challeng of two-way 
transact and in particular the offlin one which be not 
captur by the blockchain. the challeng of irrevers 
transact be not ground in people’ distrust on 
transaction, but in potenti the dishonest part of 
transaction, i.e., the payment of fiat currenc for acquir 
the bitcoins. If thi side of agreement be not fulfilled, user 
would prefer to revers the bitcoin transaction, an oper 
which be not possible. An interest design opportun 
here would be explor new way of track thi 
movement of fiat currenc (current not captured) in the 
blockchain. 

As a mean of explor users’ support for trust their 
transact partners, we appli the framework on 
mechan of trust [41]. thi framework allow the 
identif of differ sourc of trust for each of the 
risk mitig strategies. among these strategi for 
deal with dishonest traders, bitcoin user engag in 
decreas order of prefer with exchanges, author 
or reput traders, and ultim with unknown trader 
which they attempt to de-anonymize. onli the exchang 
provid legal author servic [37,52], while trust in 
the other type of trader be support mostli by the 
inform about their credibl and reput within the 
thick relationship [24] of onlin user groups. the less 
reputation-rel inform user can gather about the 
traders, the strong the need to de-anonym them. most 
particip go even further suggest the valu of 
regul the blockchain (institut embedded for 
all type of traders). 

the paradox of unregul 
We argu that the explor of bitcoin use offer an 
unpreced opportun for question common 
assumpt that peopl hold about fiat money and in 
particular around the valu of money, their control and 
legitimacy. blockchain’ unregul and the pseudo- 
anonym of peopl behind transact be crucial 
characterist of thi technolog [18,28,46,49]. together, 
these characterist ensur the privaci of the owner of 
bitcoin addresses, which be central to nakamoto’ vision 
[39]. our find howev highlight an interest tension: 
bitcoin user desir regulation, mostli becaus of the 
challeng of deal with dishonest traders, which they 
believ may be address by de-anonym transaction’ 
parties. thi be an import find a the effort to 
regul bitcoin have be driven mostli by govern 
and financi institut rather than user [21]. users’ 
desir for regul may be also relat to the new form 
of think that a disrupt technolog like bitcoin 
demands. bitcoin provid freedom over one’ asset which 

mani particip enjoy, but at the same time, it no longer 
provid the secur that regul financi institut 
provide, and which user be accustom with. We argu 
that at present, bitcoin user continu to oper under the 
old mind-set of fiat money in tradit central and 
regul financi systems, and may need support for 
develop new mental model underpin the 
unregul bitcoin technology. thi call for new way of 
support user to further develop their digit literacy. It 
also call for the explor of innov technolog 
and social mechan for limit the impact of dishonest 
traders, while still preserv anonymity. 

the challeng of pseudo-anonym transact 
our find indic that blockchain’ deliber pseudo- 
anonym of user engag in bitcoin transact becom 
a challeng for the contextu properti for warrant trust 
a describ in the framework on mechan of trust [41]. 
thi be becaus all three form of temporal, social and 
institut embedded would becom effect onli 
through the know and stabl ident of bitcoin user 
across transactions. thi would ensur that the transact 
partner build togeth a histori of transact (temporal), 
and a reput among other potenti transact partner 
(social), while becom vulner to legal sanction when 
they dishonestli fail to meet their transact agreement 
(institut embeddedness). however, neither of these be 
possible, a the blockchain protect the privaci of the 
transact parties, both by prevent the link between the 
wallet address and the owner’ identify, and by enabl the 
loss of the link between user’ transact over time, i.e., 
through the option of creat new wallet address for 
each transact [39]. thi be problematic, a blockchain’ 
failur to support for contextu properti motiv user 
to fulfil their agreement [41], mean that such fulfil 
reli entir on the trustees’ intrins properti such a 
credibility, integrity, and benevol or encapsul 
interest [24]. We found howev signific evid that 
peopl do not trust the intrins properti of the trustee, 
and aim to protect themselv by challeng the trustees’ 
pseudo-anonym a one of blockchain’ key design 
featur [39]. thi confirm find on people’ readi 
to take veri small risk regard unknown truste [24]. 

design implic 
now we turn our attent to the design implic [44] 
that our find suggest. We discu the need to support 
the transpar of two-way transactions, tool for 
materi trust, and tool for support revers 
transactions. these design implic have be 
develop to address the identifi trust challeng of 
dishonest traders, while respect blockchain’ main 
characterist such a decentralization, unregul and 
pseudo-anonymity. 

support transpar of two-way transact 
all transact report in the studi be two-way, most of 
them sequenti and asynchronous, i.e., typic one parti 
send the fiat currenc and after receiv it, the other parti 

the infrastructur of trust chi 2017, may 6–11, 2017, denver, co, usa 

6507 



send the bitcoins. however, peopl can onli track on the 
blockchain the movement of bitcoins. send fiat currenc 
can be fake through fraudul statement of transfer. 
thi coupl with the lack of legal author partner 
warrant one’ trust in them, i.e., institut 
embeddedness, lead to increas risk of defraud from 
dishonest traders. such trader be not know and cannot be 
make account for fail to complet their part of 
transaction, neither respons for the retribut it entails. 

one can imagin creativ design method [42] and new 
tool for digit captur the content of transact 
which be not bitcoins, to ensur that their transfer be also 
verified, author and store on the public ledger. our 
find indic that such content of transact be often 
fiat currency. blockchain alreadi provid mechan for 
creat digit token back by fiat currency, i.e., color 
coin, omni layer [48]. such mechan can also be 
har for creat digit token (metadata emb in 
the blockchain) back by physic goods, such a the one 
explor in the proven context where token repres 
document accompani the transact of good or 
financ a mean of track their ownership. such 
mechan need to remain decentr and to becom 
integr into the blockchain interfac so that end user 
with limit technic expertis can access and use them. 

tool for materi trust in blockchain 
find indic that in the absenc of know and stabl 
identities, bitcoin user who engag in transact with 
each other reli mostli on social embeddedness. As one of 
the properti warrant trust in anoth parti [41], social 
embedded be reflect in users’ activ effort to gather 
reputation-rel inform about unknown traders, 
either from peopl they alreadi trust such a close friends, 
or from member of the onlin group where most of their 
social learn about bitcoin technolog take place. one 
way to good support thi data gather be through 
design mechan for captur and visual 
reput a meta-data link to a wallet address. 
blockchain protocol alreadi support the creation of 
metadata within a transaction, by allow the gener of 
a new secur address refer the metadata. A reput 
manag system built on top of the blockchain will 
strongli contribut to the social embedded for 
warrant trust among traders. thi in turn, motiv 
trader to keep the same wallet address in order to grow 
their reputation, henc provid more stable, albeit still 
private, identities. for example, carboni [7] propos 
voucher attach to transact for the transfer of payment 
for a service. If the buyer be satisfi with the service, he 
can accept and co-sign the voucher which contain an 
incent fee paid by the servic provid to the buyer for 
leav a posit feedback. the reput score of a 
servic provid could be comput by add the vote 
fee for that servic across blockchain’ relev 
transactions. altern mechan for support also 
the caption of neg feedback be much needed. 

tool to support revers transact 
find indic that in the case of dishonest traders, the 
irrevers bitcoin transact be problematic. thi stem 
from the lack of transpar of the two-way transactions: 
while the transfer of bitcoin be captur by the blockchain, 
the counterpart asynchron transfer of money (or goods) 
for which peopl receiv (or pay bitcoins) be not. one way 
of address thi be by explor novel mechan for 
revers individu two-way transact on top of the 
irrevers blockchain protocol [2]. thi be not a trivial 
issue, a in it current form, the blockchain protocol do 
not allow revers transact which have be alreadi 
confirm and add to the ledger. one solut would be 
new tool for enabl the de-anonym of the owner 
of dispos wallet address (discard after one use). 
besid hinder dishonesty, such tool would allow users’ 
to protect their privaci on the blockchain, while 
enabl them to contact the other party, and request 
revers the bitcoin transfer. thi would also support 
social embeddedness, a the reput of a give trader 
oper in a local onlin group can well extend beyond 
the lifetim of a dispos wallet. other tool could 
leverag the support of multisignatur transact enabl 
by the bitcoin protocol [2]. A common exampl be 2-of-3 
transact model where money be place in a joint address 
own by the both parti and a third arbitrator, to be 
sign off onc each parti be satisfied. If there be a problem, 
the arbitr will investig and decid to transfer the 
payment back to the buyer or to the seller. onc the 
transact receiv 2 out of 3 signatures, it be completed. 
the multisignatur tool differ from the escrow servic a 
the arbitr receiv a fee agre by all three parties, but 
cannot defraud a he will need two signatur for this. 
surprisingly, no particip mention the use of 
multisignatur tools, probabl becaus of the same reason 
they do not engag with the escrow services: perceiv 
difficulti of use, or limit awar of such tools. futur 
work could further explor this. 

conclus 
thi empir studi investig blockchain’ 
characterist which support and challeng users’ trust, 
alongsid their motiv for bitcoin use, and strategi for 
mitig identifi risks. We advanc the theori toward 
a model of trust among user of bitcoin’ decentralized, 
unregul and pseudo-anonym technolog in 
develop context, and provid insight into the specif 
tension around these characteristics. studi find lead to 
a number of design implic that would support bitcoin 
user develop increas trust in each other, includ 
support for the transpar of two-way transactions, tool 
for materi trust, and tool for support revers 
transactions. 

acknowledg 
thi work be support by the UK research council 
through the digit thread project, (ahrc grant 
ah/p014186/1). 

the infrastructur of trust chi 2017, may 6–11, 2017, denver, co, usa 

6508 



refer 
1. michael bacharach and diego gambetta. 2003. trust in 

signs. In trust in society, karen S. cook (ed.),. russel 
sage, new york. 

2. rachid El bansarkhaniand jan sturm. 2016. An 
effici lattice-bas multisignatur scheme with 
applic to bitcoins. In intern confer on 
cryptolog and network security, 140-155. 

3. ardion beldad, menno de jong and michaël 
steehouder. 2010. how shall I trust the faceless and the 
intangible? A literatur review on the anteced of 
onlin trust. comput in human behavior 26, 5: 857- 
869. 

4. bitcoin wiki. anonymity. retriev septemb 14, 
2016 from https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/anonym 

5. mad bodker. 2004. trust and the digit environment. 
retriev june 10, 2016 from 
http://www.itu.dk/people/boedker/trustpaper.pdf 

6. michael bordo. 1981. the classic gold standard: some 
lesson for today. review, 2-17. 

7. david carboni. 2015. feedback base reput on 
top of the bitcoin blockchain. retriev septemb 19, 
2016 from arxiv preprint arxiv:1502.01504 

8. raul carillo. 2015. altern currenc be big 
than bitcoin: how they’r build prosper from 
london to kenya. retriev june 22, 2016 from 
http://www.yesmagazine.org/commonomics/alternative- 
currencies-bigger-than-bitcoin-bangla-pesa-brixton 

9. john M. carrol and victoria bellotti. 2015. creat 
valu together: the emerg design space of peer- 
to-peer currenc and exchange. In proceed of the 
18th acm confer on comput support 
cooper work & social computing, 1500-1510. 

10. nicola christin. 2013. travel the silk road: A 
measur analysi of a larg anonym onlin 
marketplace. In proceed of the 22nd intern 
confer on world wide web. acm, 213-224. 

11. cnn money. 2015. greec shut bank in bid to 
prevent collapse. retriev june 10, 2016 from 
http://money.cnn.com/2015/06/28/news/economy/greec 
e-banks-ecb/ 

12. coin market cap. 2016. crypto-curr market 
capitalizations. retriev june 10, 2016 from 
https://coinmarketcap.com/ 

13. cynthia L. corritore, beverli kracher and susan 
wiedenbeck. 2003. intern journal of human- 
comput studi 58, 6: 738-758. 

14. robert costanza, et. al. 2003. complementari 
currenc a a method to improv local sustain 
econom welfare. retriev june 10, 2016 from 
http://78.46.126.155/record/632 

15. michael crosby, nachiappan , pradhan pattanayak, 
sanjeev verma and vignesh kalyanaraman. 2015. 
retriev june 10, 2016 from 
http://scet.berkeley.edu/wp- 
content/uploads/blockchainpaper.pdf 

16. fred D. davis. 1989. perceiv usefulness, perceiv 
eas of use, and user accept of inform 
technology. mi quarterli 13, 3: 319-340. 

17. encyclopedia.com. 2002. coin and currency. retriev 
septemb 19, 2016 from 
http://www.encyclopedia.com/topic/coin.aspx 

18. european central bank. 2012. virtual currenc 
schemes. retriev june 10, 2016 from 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/virtualcurrenc 
yschemes201210en.pdf 

19. jennif fereday and eimear muir-cochrane. 2006. 
demonstr rigor use themat analysis: A hybrid 
approach of induct and deduct cod and theme 
development. intern journal of qualit 
methods, 5, 1: 80-92. 

20. ami fontinelle. 2011. An introduct to 
complementari currencies. retriev june 10, 2016 
from 
http://www.investopedia.com/articles/economics/11/intr 
oduction-complementary-currencies.asp 

21. david gilbert. 2016. bitcoin’ big problem: transact 
delay renew blockchain debate. retriev june 10, 
2016 from http://www.ibtimes.com/bitcoins-big- 
problem-transaction-delays-renew-blockchain-debate- 
2330143 

22. herb goldberg and lewi robert. 2000. money 
madness: the psycholog of saving, spending, loving, 
and hat money. well institute, inc, gretna la, 

23. andr guadamuz, chri marsden guadamuz. 2015. 
blockchain and bitcoin: regulatori respons to 
cryptocurrencies. first monday, 20: 12-7. 

24. russel hardin. 2002. trust and trustworthiness. sage 
foundation, new york. 

25. garrick hileman. 2014. from bitcoin to the brixton 
pound: histori and prospect for altern currencies. 
In intern confer on financi cryptographi 
and data secur ,163-165. 

26. jofish kaye, janet vertesi, jennif ferreira, barri 
brown, and mark perry. 2014. #chimoney: financi 
interactions, digit cash, capit exchang and mobil 
money. In chi '14 extend abstract on human 
factor in comput system (chi EA '14). 111-114. 

27. erol kazan, chee-we tan, and eric TK lim. 2015. 
valu creation in cryptocurr networks: toward 
A taxonomi of digit busi model for bitcoin 
companies. the 19th pacif asia confer on 
inform system (paci 2015). 

28. irni eliana khairuddin, corina sas, sarah clinch, and 
nigel davies. 2016. explor motiv for bitcoin 
technolog usage. In proceed of the 2016 chi 
confer extend abstract on human factor in 
comput systems. acm, 2872-2878. 

29. brad klontz, sonya L. britt, jennif mentzer, and ted 
klontz. 2011. money belief and financi behaviors: 
develop of the klontz money script inventory. 
journal of financi therapi 2,1. 

the infrastructur of trust chi 2017, may 6–11, 2017, denver, co, usa 

6509 



30. katharina krombholz, aljosha judmayer, matthia 
gusenbau and edgar weippl. 2016. the other side 
of the coin: user experi with bitcoin secur 
and privacy. financi cryptographi and data 
security. 

31. sara lipki and amanda roth. 2016. anatomy: what be 
altern currency? retriev june 10 2016 from 
http://www.worldpolicy.org/anatomy-what-alternative- 
currenc 

32. nikla luhman. 1979. trust: a mechan for reduct 
of social complexity. In trust and power, nikla 
luhmann (ed). wiley, new york, 

33. caitlin lustig and bonni nardi. 2015. algorithm 
authority: the case of bitcoin. In system scienc 
(hicss), 2015 48th hawaii intern confer 
ieee. 743-752. 

34. roger C. mayer, jame H. davi and F. david 
schoorman. 1995. An integr model of 
organiz trust. the academi of manag 
review 20, 3: 709 

35. barbara A. misztal. 1996. trust in modern societies. 
the search for basi of social order. cambridg 
univers press, cambridge, 42-87. 

36. guido mollering. 2006. trust: reason, routine, 
reflectivity. elseiver, netherlands. 

37. malt moser. 2013. anonym of bitcoin transactions: 
an analysi if mix service. retrievedjun 10, 2016 
from 
https://www.wi.unimuenster.de/sites/wi/files/public/dep 
artment/itsecurity/mbc13/mbc13-moeser-paper.pdf 

38. fiona F. nah and sid davis. 2002. hci research issu 
in e-commerce. journal of electron commerc 
research 3.3: 98-113. 

39. satoshi nakamoto. 2008. bitcoin: peer to peer 
electron cash system. retriev septemb 14, 2016 
from https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf 

40. p2p foundations. 2015. definit of bitcoin. retriev 
june 10, 2016 from http://p2pfoundation.net/bitcoin 

41. jen riegelsberger, M. angela sass and john D. 
mccarthy. 2005. the mechan of trust: a framework 
for research and design. intern of human- 
comput studies. 62, 3: 381-422. 

42. antti salovaara, kristina höök, keith cheverst, 
michael twidale, matthew chalmers, and corina sas. 
2011. appropri and creativ use: link user 
studi and design. In chi '11 extend abstract on 
human factor in comput system (chi EA '11). 
acm, new york, ny, usa, 37-40. 

43. corina sa and irni eliana khairuddin. 2015. explor 
trust in bitcoin technology: A framework for hci 
research. In proceed of the annual meet of the 
australian special interest group for comput human 
interact (ozchi '15), 338- 342. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2838739.2838821 

44. corina sas, steve whittaker, steven dow, jodi forlizzi, 
and john zimmerman. 2014. gener implic 
for design through design research. In proceed of 
the 32nd annual acm confer on human factor in 
comput system (chi '14). acm, new york, ny, 
usa, 1971-1980. 

45. larri schweikart. 1991. u.s. commerci banking: a 
historiograph survey. busi histori review. 65 
(autumn): 606. 

46. evand smart. 2015. top 10 countri in which 
bitcoin be banned. retriev june 10, 2016 from 
https://www.cryptocoinsnews.com/top-10-countries- 
bitcoin-banned/ 

47. melani swan. 2015. blockchain blueprint for a new 
economy. o.reilly, california. 

48. tether. white paper. retriev septemb 19, 2016 
from 
https://www.weusecoins.com/assets/pdf/library/tether% 
20whitepaper.pdf 

49. the law librari of congress. 2014. regul of 
bitcoin in select jurisdiction. retriev june 10, 
2016 from https://www.loc.gov/law/help/bitcoin- 
survey/regulation-of-bitcoin.pdf 

50. UK government. 2016. distribut ledger technolog 
beyond block chain. retriev june 10, 2016 from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/upload 
s/attachment_data/file/492972/gs-16-1-distributed- 
ledger-technology.pdf 

51. randal L. wray. 2012. introduct to an altern 
histori of money. levi econom institut work 
paper, 717. 

52. david yermack. 2013. Is bitcoin a real currency? an 
econom appraisal. nber work paper19747. 

53. suraya zainuddin. 2016. the complet guid to bitcoin 
scams. retriev june 10, 2016 from 
https://www.coingecko.com/buzz/complete-guide-to- 
bitcoin-scams?locale=en 

54. adam vaziri zanjani. 2014. bitcoin exchang a 
payment institution. retriev septemb 16, 2016 
from http://neopay.co.uk/site/wp- 
content/uploads/diacle-bitcoin-regulation.pdf 





the infrastructur of trust chi 2017, may 6–11, 2017, denver, co, usa 

6510 




