


















































earli warn of cyber threat in onlin 
discuss 

anna sapienza* 
usc 

inform scienc institut 
marina del rey, california, 90292 

paulo shakarian 
arizona state univers 
tempe, arizona, 85281 

alessandro bessi* 
usc 

inform scienc institut 
marina del rey, california, 90292 

kristina lerman 
usc 

inform scienc institut 
marina del rey, california, 90292 

saranya damodaran 
arizona state univers 
tempe, arizona, 85281 

emilio ferrara 
usc 

inform scienc institut 
marina del rey, california, 90292 

abstract—w introduc a system for automat gener 
warn of immin or current cyber-threats. our system 
leverag the commun of malici actor on the darkweb, 
a well a activ of cyber secur expert on social medium 
platform like twitter. In a time period between september, 2016 
and january, 2017, our method gener 661 alert of which 
about 84% be relev to current or immin cyber-threats. 
In the paper, we first illustr the rational and workflow of 
our system, then we measur it performance. our analysi be 
enrich by two case studies: the first show how the method 
could predict ddo attacks, and how it would have allow 
organ to prepar for the mirai attack that caus 
widespread disrupt in octob 2016. second, we discu 
the method’ time identif of variou instanc of data 
breaches. 

I. introduct 

On octob 21, 2016, hundr of popular websites, in- 
clude twitter, netflix, and paypal, becom unreach due 
to a massiv cyber-attack direct against the infrastructur 
of the internet. attack exploit a vulner in the 
softwar use by internet of thing (iot) devic that en- 
abl them to command a vast number of such devices. 
attackers, then, use thi so call botnet to unleash a massiv 
distribut denial of servic (ddos) attack against dyn, a 
popular domain name system (dns) servic provider. the 
overwhelm dyn dn server stop rout internet traffic 
effectively, result in widespread disrupt of the involv 
websit and therefor massiv econom damag 1. despit 
the sudden of the attack, there be signal indic the 
avail of the iot botnet in question a well a evid 
of threat actor will to employ thi platform prior to the 
attack. thi could have give decis maker key warn 
to prepar for the immin exploit. 

To conduct a cyber-attack, malici actor typic have to 
1) identifi vulnerabilities, 2) acquir the necessari tool and 
tradecraft to success exploit them, 3) choos a target and 
recruit participants, 4) creat or purchas the infrastructur 

*a. sapienza and A. bessi contribut equal to thi work. 
1https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2016/10/a-lot/505025/ 

needed, and 5) plan and execut the attack. other actors— 
system administrators, secur analysts, and even victims— 
may discu vulner or coordin a respons to attacks. 
these activ be often conduct onlin through social 
media, (open and dark) web forums, and profession blogs, 
leav digit trace behind. collectively, these digit trace 
provid valuabl insight into evolv cyber-threat and can 
signal a pend or develop attack well befor malici 
activ be note on a target system. for example, exploit be 
discuss on twitter befor they be publicli disclos [1] and 
on darkweb forum even befor they be discuss on social 
medium [2]. 

here, we introduc a lightweight framework that leverag 
onlin social medium sensor such a twitter and darkweb 
forums, to gener alert that function a earli warn of 
cyber-threats. the system monitor social medium feed of a 
number of promin secur researchers, analysts, and white- 
hat hackers, scan for post (tweets) relat to exploits, 
vulnerabilities, and other relev cyber-secur topics. after- 
wards, it appli text mine techniqu to identifi import 
term and remov irrelev ones. then, the system verifi 
whether the term that be identifi dure the filter 
stage have ever be use in darkweb hack forums, and 
eventu report the volum of mention a well a the con- 
tent of posts. such inform might be extrem valuable, 
sinc mention that have be found by the algorithm might 
point to link to steal credenti a well a thread where 
a novel vulner be discuss along with sourc code 
aim at exploit it. our framework reli on a database, 
updat daily, of post publish on nearli 200 darkweb and 
deepweb hack forum and marketplac [3]–[5]. finally, 
the system gener warn for the newli discov terms, 
along with their frequenc of appear on social medium and 
darkweb, the content of possibl mention found in darkweb 
and deepweb, and a collect of word provid semant 
context for facilit situat awar and interpret 
of the warning. the algorithm design allow for gener of 
addit warn over the same time period. thi choic be 

ar 
X 

iv 
:1 

80 
1. 

09 
78 

1v 
1 

[ 
c 

.C 
R 

] 
2 

9 
Ja 

n 
20 

18 



due to the willing to keep track of the attent around the 
possibl cyber-threat, and in particular to monitor the evolut 
of darkweb activ relat to the discov terms. 

To test the precis of the method we collect warn 
gener between septemb 1, 2016 and januari 31, 2017. 
then, we ask to 5 human annot with knowledg of 
cyber-secur to independ annot each warn a a 
legitim cyber-threat or a fals alarm (see section iii for 
addit details). We found that about 84% of the total 
gener warn be relat to immin or current cyber- 
threats, wherea the vast major of fals alarm be due 
to foreign languag term (e.g. german) or term relat to 
cyber-secur yet too gener to be consid a immin or 
current threats. In futur version of our algorithm, the number 
of fals alarm could be reduc by add dictionari and 
updat the exist ones. the averag time requir to 
complet it entir workflow—from data retriev to warn 
generation—i onli 0.6 seconds. thi make our system 
amen to real-tim monitor of multipl onlin platform 
for immin cyber-threats. indeed, our system current run 
continu in a cloud environment: all data be store on 
amazon ec2 and retriev via elast search, an open sourc 
distribut search engin that provid a powerful, scalable, 
and fast infrastructur for data retrieval. the endpoint of the 
system be design to deliv earli warn to analyst and 
enabl decis make allow for prevent measur to 
face incom attacks. 

the rest of the paper be organ a follows. section II 
illustr and explain the algorithm, from data retriev to 
early-warn generation. section iii be dedic to the eval- 
uation of it perform and discoveri accuracy. In section 
iv, we consid two differ case studies, show the use 
of the method to predict distribut denial of servic attacks, 
specif mirai, and to detect instanc of data breaches. 
finally, in section VI we discu futur improv a well 
a promis research directions. 

ii. method 

In thi section we provid a detail explan of our 
method, illustr it workflow, from data retriev to warn- 
ing gener pass through data process and sensor 
fusion. To facilit the comprehens of our framework, 
we provid some practic exampl throughout the section. 
moreover, figur 1 provid a graphic illustr of the 
system’ workflow. 

A. data retriev 

We compil a list of well know and reliabl twitter 
expert who post frequent on issu relat to cyber-security. 
thi manual curat list includ 69 intern research 
and secur analyst associ with secur firms, a well a 
widely-follow whitehat hackers. the list can be arbitrarili 
extend by includ other expert with similar degre of 
activ and trustworthiness. We hourli collect all tweet 
post in the previou 60 minut by these experts. the tweet 
be collect in real-tim by mean of twitter api, store 

data retriev 

amazon ec2 

data process 

darknet 
post 

tweet 

dictionari 

sensor fusion 

warn gener 

fig. 1. workflow of the method. 

in amazon ec2, and retriev use elast search, an open 
sourc search engin base on apach lucen that provid a 
distributed, multitenant-cap full-text search with a schema- 
free json documents. 

darkweb and deepweb crawl infrastructure.: We 
briefli recap the infrastructur for crawl the darkweb and 
deepweb origin introduc in [4], [5]. In thi context, dark- 
web refer to site access through anonym protocol 
such a tor and i2p, while deepweb refer to non-index site 
on the open internet [6]. our crawl infrastructur handl 
site of both types. the framework consist of an infrastructur 
that enabl lightweight crawler and parser that be focu 
on specif sites. At the time of thi writing, we have creat 
crawler and parser for a manually-compil list of nearli 
200 site relat to malici hack and/or onlin financi 
fraud, includ fishing, spear-fishing, ransomware, credit card 
frauds, etc. while our framework enabl common crawl 
and pars task base on aspect such a protocol and site 
structure, it remain imper to use focu crawler due 
to the varieti of sites. the use of custom parser allow 
inform from a varieti of websit to be store in a 
unifi rdbm schema which simplifi data clean [4], 
tag [7], and other analysi [8]. these step help ensur that 
the obtain data remain relev to cyber-secur use cases: 
indeed, mani darkweb and deepweb forum and marketplac 
also involv other illicit activ such a drug market and 
the sale of steal goods. To interfac with the remaind of 
our method, we use a rest-bas api, that allow to access 
posts’ content and metadata such a public date, authors’ 
usernames, authors’ reputations, etc. 

B. data process 

after everi iter of the data collection, the tweet that 
have be retriev be pre-process use tradit text 
mine techniques: each tweet be lowercased, and numbers, 
symbols, twitter handl and url be removed. At the end 
of thi pre-process stage, text be token and all the tweet 
collect be aggreg and reduc to a uniqu list of terms. 



for example, on septemb 5th 2016, between 8am and 9am 
gmt, a tweet that read ”mi interview to @malwaremustdi 
for @securityaffair on a new botnet target #iot. detail 
on #mirai trojan #linux ” have be retweet seven time by 
the cyber-secur expert that our system be monitoring. these 
seven ident tweet have be reduc to the follow list 
of terms: my, interview, to, for, on, a, new, botnet, targeting, 
iot, details, mirai, trojan, linux. 

each execut of the data pre-process stage result in a 
veri long list of terms, mani of which be not relat to cyber- 
threats. To address thi issue, our framework automat 
exclud ani discov term that appear in ani of the 
follow dictionaries: 

• english dictionary: 235, 892 common english 
words—e.g. interview, new, details, ...; 

• stopword dictionary: 2, 390 stopword (for en- 
glish, german, italian, french, etc.)—e.g. to, on, a, for, 
...; 

• technic dictionary: 57, 459 technic and 
context-specif term that have be use from january, 
2013 to august, 2016 by cyber-secur expert the al- 
gorithm be monitoring—e.g. hacker, domain, dns, ...; we 
manual creat and curat thi dictionari by analyz 
the past six and a half year of activ of such expert 
on twitter; 

• threat dictionary: 25 gener term indicat- 
ing know type of cyber-threats—e.g. ddos, phishing, 
databreach, botnet, etc; we curat thi list manually; 

• italian dictionary: 129, 121 common italian 
words—e.g. intervista, attacco, spazio, ...—need sinc 
sometim a few of the cyber-secur expert tweet in 
italian; other non-english dictionari may be also use 
depend on the set of expert that the system leverages. 

the four-stag filter process allow the system to gener- 
ate warn onli for term that be like to be relat to new 
cyber-threats. use english dictionary, stopword 
dictionary, italian dictionary, we filter out com- 
mon word that be unlik to be relat to cyber-threats; 
wherea by mean of the technic dictionari we 
remov sever context-specif word that have be use in 
the past by the cyber-secur expert that we be monitoring. 
finally, those word that do not co-occur with term contain 
in the threat dictionari be removed. thi last stage 
of the filter process be necessari to avoid the gener of 
warn for word that becaus of their novelti be like to 
pa through the first three filter stages—e.g. word relat 
to socio-polit or novel trend topic discuss on twitter. 

continu the illustr example, after the filter pro- 
cess, the origin list of term obtain by token tweet 
have be reduc to a list contain onli a singl word: 
mirai. the four-stag filter process be abl to filter out 
common word (interview, new, details), stopword (my, to, 
for, on, a) and sever context-specif word (targeting, botnet, 
linux, trojan, iot) includ in the dictionaries. then, sinc the 
uniqu word left, mirai, co-occur with term relat to cyber- 

threat includ in the threat dictionary, the algorithm 
proce to the third stage: sensor fusion. 

C. sensor fusion 

after raw data have be process and irrelev term 
filter out, the algorithm verifi whether the newli discov- 
ere term have ever be use in a set of darkweb hack 
forums. In fact, our algorithm reli on an up-to-d collect 
of all the post that have be publish in nearli 200 darkweb 
hack forum a well a social media. these post be 
store in amazon ec2 and retriev use elast search. 
continu our example, in thi stage the algorithm make a 
elast search queri to look for occurr of the word mirai 
throughout all the post that have be publish on deepweb 
and darkweb forums. eventually, the algorithm report volum 
and content of post mention the discov term, often 
point either to link to steal credenti or thread where 
a novel vulner be discussed. 

D. warn gener 

In the final stage, the algorithm gener alert provid 
some inform relat to it. eventually, for each alert that 
pass all the four filter stage and that occur more than 
onc in the observ period, the algorithm gener a warn 
reporting: 

• the term that have be discov and that be like to 
be relat to current or immin cyber-threats; 

• the number of time that the discov term have be 
mention on twitter dure the previou 60 minutes; 

• the number of time that the discov term have be 
mention on deepweb and darkweb hack forum and 
marketplac so far; 

• the content of post where the discov term have be 
mention on deepweb and darkweb hack forum so 
far; 

• A collect of term includ in the threat 
dictionari that co-occur in the tweet mention 
the discov term. such a collect of word provid 
semant context for situat awar that facilit 
the interpret of the gener warning. 

continu our example, the warn that have be gener- 
ate after data process and sensor fusion is: 

• time: current time; 
• threat: mirai; 
• frequenc on twitter: 7; 
• frequenc on darknet/deepweb: 0; 
• post on darknet/deepweb: empty; 
• context: botnet, linux, iot, trojan. 

iii. precis and perform evalu 

To evalu the accuraci of our framework, we ran it from 
septemb 1, 2016 to januari 31, 2017 and collect all the 
warn that have be gener dure that period. then, 
we ask to 5 annot with extens knowledg in cyber- 
secur to independ annot each warn a legitim 
cyber-threat or fals alarm. annot be instruct to 



fig. 2. number of warn gener on a daili basis, along with their precision, the averag fraction of expert agre on fals alarms, and the 
amount of relat tweet and darknet posts. main event relat to differ type of attack be also annot on the timeline. 

annot threat fals alarm precis (%) 
1 540 121 81.69 
2 532 129 80.48 
3 565 96 85.48 
4 534 127 80.79 
5 578 83 87.44 

tabl I 
algorithm’ precis accord TO differ annotators. 

mark a warn a legitim cyber-threat if and onli if the 
discov word be strongli relat to immin or current 
cyber-threats. the annot be further instruct about the 
possibl of use googl search to tri identifi attack that 
occur before, during, or after the warn gener time 
involv the specif threat. thi enhanc the annotator’ 
abil to determin whether the warn gener by our 
system be correl to an actual attack or just a spuriou 
coincid (e.g., an old news regard some old threat be 
retweet and becom contemporari even though no current 
or futur threat occurred). 

over thi period, the algorithm gener 661 alerts, of 
which about 84% have be consid legitim cyber- 
threats, from data breach to novel vulnerabilities, by the 
major (i.e. at least 3) of the annotators. tabl I report 
precis accord to each annotator. 

warn annot a fals alarm be mostli repres 
by term too gener to be consid legitim cyber-threat 
or foreign languag terms. notic that the perform of 
our algorithm could be improv use addit dictionari 
(e.g., other foreign languages) or add new word to exist 
dictionaries. 

figur 2 show the number of warn gener along 
with the averag fraction of expert agre on fals alarms, 
and the number of relat post occur on twitter and 
on the darknet/deepweb. for each day, we also show the 

achiev discov precision. tabl II show some popular 
cyber-threat for which the algorithm gener sever warn- 
ings. In particular, the algorithm found malwar and ran- 
domwar softwares, such a gooligan and luabot, both asso- 
ciat with disrupt attack occur dure our observ 
period; vulner such a mirai; and data breach such a 
adultfriendfinder, and brazzersforum, which we will discu 
in the follow section. 

concern the execut performance, the averag time 
requir to complet the entir workflow—from data retriev 
to warn generation—i 0.6 seconds. such a fast execut 
time be guarante by streamlin it entir workflow by 
mean of elast search, a distribut search engin that 
provid a powerful, scalable, and fast infrastructur for data 
retrieval. 

iv. scenario analysi 

In thi section we provid evid of the effect of 
our method. In particular, we analyz two differ scenarios, 
show how our algorithm be abl to identifi immin and 
current cyber-threats: 

• vulnerabilities: we will discu how the method can 
be effect use to time predict vulner 
that can be exploit in associ with futur cyber 
attacks. We will focu on the most promin event 
dure our analysi period (septemb 1, to januari 31, 
2017), name mirai and the disrupt of the dyn dn 
oper occur in octob 2016; 

• data breaches: we will demonstr how the method 
time identifi the avail of leak data on dark- 
web/deepweb, a a consequ of data breach due to 
cyber attacks; we will cover two instanc of such data 
breaches, name the public on the darkweb of sen- 



fig. 3. timelin of mirai warnings. 

discov type of number of mention on mention on 
word threat warn twitter darkweb 
mirai vulner 94 537 85 

teamxrat ransomwar 13 30 0 
luabot trojan 12 27 0 

cryptoluck ransomwar 12 29 0 
clixsens data breach 12 26 5 
gooligan malwar 9 26 0 

usbe malwar 9 18 0 
adultfriendfind data breach 9 23 0 

starhub data breach 9 82 0 
badepilogu malwar 8 21 0 

evoni data breach 8 25 0 
tabl II 

top cyber-threat anticip BY the method. 

sitiv data on user of two platforms, adultfriendfinder, 
and brazzersforum. 

A. vulner 

a) mirai.: In the introduct of thi paper we mention 
the attack perpetr on octob 21, 2016 toward dyn, a 
popular domain name system servic provider. In thi section 
we show how our algorithm gener warn that could 
have allow the organ to anticip and prepar for 
the attack. 

the first warn relat to the vulner that eventu 
lead to the aforement cyber attack be gener on 
septemb 5, 2016 between 7am and 9am gmt. A tweet 
link to a blog post describ a vulner in the operat- 
ing system of internet of thing (iot) devic be retweet 
sever time by the monitor cyber-secur experts. our 
algorithm gener two warn for the term mirai on that 
morning. the warn gener by our system show that 
the term mirai be mention 14 time between 7am and 9am 
gmt of septemb 5, 2016 along with term relat to cyber- 
threat such a malware, botnet, linux, iot, trojan. 

mirai be a malwar that turn comput system run 
linux—primarili iot devic such a remot camera and 
home routers—into remot control bots, that can be use 
a part of a botnet in large-scal network attacks. devic 
infect by mirai continu scan and identifi further vul- 
nerabl iot devic use a tabl of more than 60 common 
factori default usernam and passwords; onc a vulner 
devic be identified, mirai log into it and infect it with a 

copi of it malware. infect devic will continu to function 
normally, except for an increas use of bandwidth, associ 
to the scan activity, and/or the execut of distribut 
denial of servic attack (ddos). there be hundr of 
thousand of iot devic that use default settings, make 
them vulner to infection. onc infected, the devic will 
monitor a command and control server which indic the 
target of an attack. the use of a larg number of iot devic 
allow to bypass some anti-ddo softwar which monitor 
the IP address of incom request and filter or set up a 
block if it identifi an abnorm traffic pattern—e.g. if too 
mani request come from a particular IP address. moreover, 
a larg number of differ infect devic can provid more 
bandwidth than the perpetr can assembl alone, a well a 
reduc the chanc of be traced. 

On octob 1, the algorithm gener further warn for 
the term mirai and found that mirai be mention sever 
time on darkweb forum a well. indeed, on septemb 30, 
the sourc code of a softwar kit exploit thi vulner 
be releas on one of the darkweb forum that the method 
constantli monitors. 

In the follow days, sever warn be gener for 
the term mirai, alway emphas it co-occurr with 
term such a botnet and iot. In fact, the news of sourc code 
releas quickli spread online, through blog post and news 
stories, caus signific onlin chatter on twitter and hacker 
forum that be promptli detect by our system. figur 3 
show the timelin of warn gener for the word mirai. 

summarizing, the algorithm be abl to gener warn 



for a vulner with a lead time of 49 day befor hacker 
manag to exploit it to take over thousand of iot devic 
and launch larg scale distribut attacks. moreover, sinc 
octob 1—almost three week befor the main attack of 
octob 21, 2016—the warn be advis that the term 
mirai be mention on darkweb/deepweb forum where user 
be share knowledg and sourc code to exploit such 
a vulnerability, thu indic that the threat be real and 
imminent. 

thi scenario illustr the inher predict of such 
type of cyber attacks: the prepar of these event often oc- 
cur in plain sight, discuss on onlin platform and publicly- 
access discuss forums. our system leverag the human 
compon that contribut to the attacks’ prepar and 
leaf onlin digit trace behind. 

B. data breach 

a) adultfriendfinder.: On novemb 14, 2016 sever 
news outlet report that more than 300m account of the 
popular adult date websit adultfriendfind be expos 
in a massiv data breach. 

the day before, on novemb 13, 2016 the algorithm 
start to issu sever warn relat to the word adult- 
friendfind and associ with term such a breach, ac- 
counts, databreach (see fig. 4). our warn point to 6 
mention of adultfriendfind in darkweb and deepnet forums. 
further inspect of these post provid inform about 
how to access to the leak data, a well a link to market- 
place be the leak data be sold. 

b) brazzersforum.: On septemb 5, 2016 newspap 
and magazin report that nearli 800k account for popular 
adult websit brazzer be expos in a data breach. 

On septemb 6, 2016 our algorithm gener 4 warn 
relat to the word brazzersforum and associ with term 
such a account and databreach (see fig. 5). initially, the 
algorithm do not find ani mention to brazzersforum in 
deepnet and darkweb forums, but two day later, on septemb 
8, the algorithm gener addit warn indic 65 
mention to brazzersforum in deepnet and darkweb forums. 
such sources, again, provid variou form of access to these 
leak data. 

thi case demonstr that some event be more challeng- 
ing to predict than others, sinc the system do not anticip 
the data breach, differ from the adultfriendfind case. 
however, the method be yet capabl of identifi sourc 
that provid data availability, yield action insight to 
analyst and decis maker to limit the damag of cyber- 
threat that have alreadi occurred. 

V. relat work 

the framework introduc in thi paper leverag the 
commun of malici actor on darkweb and deepnet 
hack forum a well a the activ of cyber-secur expert 
on twitter. 

previou work analyz hacker forum to detect threat that 
pose great risk to individuals, organizations, and governments. 

research show that the distribut of inform among 
user be base on their skill level and reput [9]–[11]. 
still, user dissemin tacit knowledg and share tool such 
a malwar sampl and sourc code by simpli attach 
them to post messag [12], [13]. moreover, knowledg 
and methodolog be dissemin among hacker in the form 
of tutori either write a text file or in the form of 
instruct video [10]. mani of these tutori directli 
enabl reader to launch crimin cyber attack such a denial 
of services, sql injections, cross-script attacks, and more 
[14]. research identifi the presenc of such hacker com- 
muniti to be common across variou geopolit regions, 
includ the us, china, russia, the middle-east, and other 
region where inform technolog be either ubiquit 
or rapidli grow [15], [16]. 

previou studi on onlin social medium suggest that twit- 
ter might serv a an import tool to predict futur event 
in differ domains, includ earthquak detect [17], 
epidemiolog [18], [19], and the stock market [20], [21]. In 
the secur domain, much work have be devot to twitter a 
object of manipul and abus [22], studi the effect of 
spam account [23], [24], social bot [25], [26], and malici 
campaign [27]–[31]. sabottk et al. publish the first studi 
to use social medium to identifi cyber vulner [1]; we 
push thi concept further and use secur expert and their 
twitter activ a sourc for cyber-threat anticipation. 

vi. discuss and conclus 

In thi paper we introduc a framework that gener 
warn for immin or current cyber-threat by leverag- 
ing unconventional, public data sensor such a twitter and 
the darknet. the perform evalu report in section 
iii highlight that our system provid veri high discoveri 
precision, which could be easili improv by add new 
dictionari (e.g., foreign languag dictionaries), enrich the 
exist one, and improv the threat dictionari to includ 
new attack terms. indeed, the vast major of fals alarm 
report by the annot be due to foreign languag term 
and term relat to cyber-secur yet too gener to be 
consid a real threats. the recal of our system may be 
improv by expand the list of monitor experts, and 
add further data sources. 

In section iv, our analysi of the timelin of warn 
point out how our algorithm could have allow orga- 
nizat to anticip and prepar for attack that caus 
wide spread disrupt in fall 2016. In particular, the sys- 
tem gener warn for mirai—th vulner that be 
exploited—49 day befor hacker take over thousand of iot 
devic and unleash a massiv ddo attack that put the 
internet infrastructur on it knee and disrupt the oper 
of hundr of organizations, includ bank and financi 
institutions, the entertain industry, the US government, 
and variou foreign countries. furthermore, start three 
week befor the attack, the warn be also identifi 
that the term mirai be mention on darkweb hacker forums, 
in associ with the avail of softwar toolkit to 



nov 11 2016 nov 13 2016 nov 15 2016 nov 17 2016 nov 19 2016 nov 21 2016 nov 23 2016 
0 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

w 
a 
rn 

in 
g 
s 

first warn data breach 
report by news outlet 

fig. 4. timelin of adultfriendfind warnings. 

sep 04 2016 sep 05 2016 sep 06 2016 sep 07 2016 sep 08 2016 sep 09 2016 sep 10 2016 sep 11 2016 
0 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

w 
a 
rn 

in 
g 
s 

data breach report 
by news outlet 

warn point to 
65 mention in darknet 

fig. 5. timelin of brazzersforum warnings. 

autom attack operations, stress out that the threat be 
immin even further. 

however, we have notic that for certain threats, such a 
the one relat to brazzersforums, our algorithm be not abl to 
produc warn befor the actual event occurs. To face thi 
problem, we be now work on extend our algorithm to 
monitor multipl data sourc at a time, e.g., twitter, darkweb 
forums, cyber secur relat blogs, etc. thi new extens 
will allow to gener warn from sever data sourc and 
thu to detect cyber threat that might be not mention in 
twitter or that might be mention in other sourc earli 
than in twitter. As an example, by continu monitor the 
warn gener by our method we be abl to detect the 
two major attack that occur on may 12th, 2017 and on jun 
27th, 2017 respect relat to the ransomwar wannacri 
and petya. the method take twitter a a primari sourc 
produc the follow warnings. 

a) wannacry: 24 warn relat to the word wannacry, 
and 7 to wannacrypt be gener on may 12th. however, 
by monitor other sourc we have mention in cyber 
secur relat blog of the word wannacry, wannacrypt, 
and wcry, which first appear in apr 18th and that our method 
could easili mark a warnings. 

b) petya: : 5 and 3 warn relat to the word petrwrap 
(other name for petya) be respect gener back in 
march, 15th and march 21st. thi signal disappear in twitter 
until jun 27th, the day of the cyber attack. the method 
be inde abl to gener earli warn relat to thi 
ransomware. however, the use of addit sourc could help 
to continu monitor the mention of a discov word. 
In the present, case we have see mention of petwrwrap in 
the darkweb forum both in march and april, 2017. 

futur work will be also devot both to find a baselin 
model that could be use to compar the perform of 
our algorithm and to develop a method to automat 
annot the date in which a cyber threat becom public. thi 
improv will enabl to further evalu the algorithm, by 
comput the averag tempor length of the algorithm to 
discov new cyber threat in advance. 

finally, our method be still be improv with the aim 
to gener more detail and inform warnings. futur 
version of the algorithm will includ a natur languag 
process (nlp) stage aim at extract knowledg and 
insight from the darkweb post mention the discov 
terms. In particular, we be develop nlp method to 
recogn entiti such a actor (hacker or groups), target 



(organizations, specif sectors, etc.), sourc codes, etc. We 
will consid extend our monitor keyword list to layman 
term (out-of-service, unavailable, etc., instead of e.g., ddos), 
monitor commun of open-sourc softwar develop (e.g., 
android, linux, etc.) to time identifi new bug and vulner- 
abil a they becom publicli known. 

We plan to leverag comput linguist method to 
investig person trait and socio-cultur trait of user 
mention the discov word on darkweb forums: thi will 
allow u to determin the credibl of a threat base on the 
expertis and the intent demonstr by the actor associ 
to it. 

vii. acknowledg 
the author be support by the offic of the director of 

nation intellig (odni) and the intellig advanc 
research project activ (iarpa) via the air forc re- 
search laboratori (afrl) contract number fa8750-16-c- 
0112. the u.s. govern be author to reproduc and 
distribut reprint for government purpos notwithstand 
ani copyright annot thereon. disclaimer: the view and 
conclus contain herein be those of the author and 
should not be interpret a necessarili repres the offi- 
cial polici or endorsements, either express or implied, of 
odni, iarpa, afrl, or the u.s. government. 

the author would like to thank sindhu kiranmai ernala 
of georgia institut of technolog for her contribut to the 
paper. 

refer 
[1] C. sabottke, O. suciu, and T. dumitras, “vulner disclosur in 

the age of social media: exploit twitter for predict real-world 
exploits.” in usenix security, vol. 15, 2015. 

[2] E. nunes, A. diab, A. gunn, E. marin, V. mishra, V. paliath, J. robert- 
son, J. shakarian, A. thart, and P. shakarian, “darknet and deepnet 
mine for proactiv cybersecur threat intelligence,” in intellig 
and secur informat (isi), 2016 ieee confer on. ieee, 2016, 
pp. 7–12. 

[3] S. mittal, P. K. das, V. mulwad, A. joshi, and T. finin, “cybertwitter: 
use twitter to gener alert for cybersecur threat and vulnerabil- 
ities,” in advanc in social network analysi and mine (asonam), 
2016 ieee/acm intern confer on. ieee, 2016, pp. 860– 
867. 

[4] E. nunes, A. diab, A. T. gunn, E. marin, V. mishra, V. paliath, 
J. robertson, J. shakarian, A. thart, and P. shakarian, “darknet and 
deepnet mine for proactiv cybersecur threat intelligence,” in ieee 
confer on intellig and secur informatics, isi, 2016, pp. 
7–12. [online]. available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/isi.2016.7745435 

[5] J. robertson, A. diab, E. marin, E. nunes, V. paliath, J. shakarian, and 
P. shakarian, darkweb cyber threat intellig mining. cambridg 
univers press, 2017. [online]. available: https://books.google.com/ 
books?id=aktrvgaacaaj 

[6] J. shakarian, A. T. gunn, and P. shakarian, “explor malici 
hacker forums,” in cyber deception, build the scientif foundation. 
springer, 2016, pp. 261–284. [online]. available: http://dx.doi.org/10. 
1007/978-3-319-32699-3 11 

[7] E. marin, A. diab, and P. shakarian, “product offer in 
malici hacker markets,” in ieee confer on intellig and 
secur informatics, isi, 2016, pp. 187–189. [online]. available: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/isi.2016.7745465 

[8] J. robertson, V. paliath, J. shakarian, A. thart, and P. shakarian, 
“data driven game theoret cyber threat mitigation,” in proceed 
of the thirtieth aaai confer on artifici intelligence, februari 
12-17, 2016, phoenix, arizona, usa., 2016, pp. 4041–4046. [online]. 
available: http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/iaai/iaai16/paper/view/ 
12041 

[9] T. J. holt, “subcultur evolution? examin the influenc of on-and 
off-lin experi on deviant subcultures,” deviant behavior, vol. 28, 
no. 2, pp. 171–198, 2007. 

[10] T. J. holt, D. strumsky, O. smirnova, and M. kilger, “examin the 
social network of malwar writer and hackers,” intern journal 
of cyber criminology, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 891, 2012. 

[11] T. jordan and P. taylor, “A sociolog of hackers,” the sociolog 
review, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 757–780, 1998. 

[12] H. fallmann, G. wondracek, and C. platzer, “covertli probe under- 
ground economi marketplaces,” in intern confer on detec- 
tion of intrus and malware, and vulner assessment. springer, 
2010, pp. 101–110. 

[13] V. benjamin and H. chen, “secur cyberspace: identifi key actor 
in hacker communities,” in intellig and secur informat (isi), 
2012 ieee intern confer on. ieee, 2012, pp. 24–29. 

[14] V. benjamin, W. li, T. holt, and H. chen, “explor threat and 
vulner in hacker web: forums, irc and card shops,” in 
intellig and secur informat (isi), 2015 ieee intern 
confer on. ieee, 2015, pp. 85–90. 

[15] M. motoyama, D. mccoy, K. levchenko, S. savage, and G. M. voelker, 
“an analysi of underground forums,” in proceed of the 2011 acm 
sigcomm confer on internet measur conference. acm, 
2011, pp. 71–80. 

[16] V. benjamin and H. chen, “time-to-ev model for predict 
hacker irc commun particip trajectory,” in intellig and secur 
informat confer (jisic), 2014 ieee joint. ieee, 2014, pp. 25– 
32. 

[17] T. sakaki, M. okazaki, and Y. matsuo, “earthquak shake twitter users: 
real-tim event detect by social sensors,” in proceed of the 19th 
intern confer on world wide web. acm, 2010, pp. 851–860. 

[18] E. aramaki, S. maskawa, and M. morita, “twitter catch the flu: detect- 
ing influenza epidem use twitter,” in proceed of the confer 
on empir method in natur languag processing. associ for 
comput linguistics, 2011, pp. 1568–1576. 

[19] D. A. broniatowski, M. J. paul, and M. dredze, “nation and local 
influenza surveil through twitter: an analysi of the 2012-2013 
influenza epidemic,” plo one, vol. 8, no. 12, p. e83672, 2013. 

[20] J. bollen, H. mao, and X. zeng, “twitter mood predict the stock 
market,” journal of comput science, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2011. 

[21] J. bollen, H. mao, and A. pepe, “model public mood and emotion: 
twitter sentiment and socio-econom phenomena.” icwsm, vol. 11, 
pp. 450–453, 2011. 

[22] E. ferrara, “manipul and abus on social media,” acm sigweb 
newsletter, no. spring, p. 4, 2015. 

[23] A. H. wang, “don’t follow me: spam detect in twitter,” in secur 
and cryptographi (secrypt), proceed of the 2010 intern 
confer on. ieee, 2010, pp. 1–10. 

[24] F. benevenuto, G. magno, T. rodrigues, and V. almeida, “detect 
spammer on twitter,” in collaboration, electron messaging, anti-abus 
and spam confer (ceas), vol. 6, 2010, p. 12. 

[25] E. ferrara, O. varol, C. davis, F. menczer, and A. flammini, “the rise 
of social bots,” commun of the acm, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 96–104, 
2016. 

[26] V. subrahmanian, A. azaria, S. durst, V. kagan, A. galstyan, K. ler- 
man, L. zhu, E. ferrara, A. flammini, and F. menczer, “the darpa 
twitter bot challenge,” computer, vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 38–46, 2016. 

[27] J. ratkiewicz, M. conover, M. R. meiss, B. gonçalves, A. flammini, 
and F. menczer, “detect and track polit abus in social media.” 
icwsm, vol. 11, pp. 297–304, 2011. 

[28] K. thomas, C. grier, and V. paxson, “adapt social spam infrastruc- 
ture for polit censorship.” in leet, 2012. 

[29] A. bessi and E. ferrara, “social bot distort the 2016 u presidenti 
elect onlin discussion,” first monday, vol. 21, no. 11, 2016. 

[30] O. varol, E. ferrara, C. davis, F. menczer, and A. flammini, “onlin 
human-bot interactions: detection, estimation, and characterization,” in 
intern aaai confer on web and social media, 2017, pp. 
280–289. 

[31] E. ferrara, “disinform and social bot oper in the run up to the 
2017 french presidenti election,” first monday, vol. 22, no. 8, 2017. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/isi.2016.7745435 
https://books.google.com/books?id=aktrvgaacaaj 
https://books.google.com/books?id=aktrvgaacaaj 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-32699-3_11 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-32699-3_11 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/isi.2016.7745465 
http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/iaai/iaai16/paper/view/12041 
http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/iaai/iaai16/paper/view/12041 

I introduct 
II method 
ii-a data retriev 
ii-b data process 
ii-c sensor fusion 
ii-d warn gener 

iii precis and perform evalu 
IV scenario analysi 
iv-a vulner 
iv-b data breach 

V relat work 
VI discuss and conclus 
vii acknowledg 
refer 

