






































effect of incom inequ on econom growth | vox, ceprâ•ž polici portal 


column video vox vox talk public peopl debat event about 

vox cepr' polici portal 
research-bas polici analysi and commentari from lead economist 

creat account | login | subscrib 

88 A A 

relat 

growth, inequality, and social welfar 
david dollar, tatjana kleineberg, aart kraay 

whi do inequ grow? 
coen teul 

how to address inequ 
jeffrey frankel 

human capit and incom inequ 
amparo castelló-climent, rafael doménech 

effect of incom inequ on econom growth 

marku brückner, daniel lederman 07 juli 2015 

the relationship between aggreg output and incom inequ be central in macroeconomics. thi column 

argu that great incom inequ rais the econom growth of poor countri and decreas the growth 

of high- and middle-incom countries. human capit accumul be an import channel through which 

incom inequ affect growth. 

aggreg output and incom distribut 

the relationship between aggreg output and the 
distribut of incom be an import topic in 
macroeconom (galor 2011). the role that incom 
inequ play in econom growth have also receiv 
quit a bit of attent in polici circl and the press 
recently. for instance, the world bank group have 
includ among it key global object for 
develop the erad of extrem poverti and 
boost the incom of the bottom 40% of develop countries. the imf have weigh in with a 
discuss on the role of incom distribut a a caus and consequ of econom growth (see, 

marku brückner 
professor of economics, 

univers of queensland 

daniel lederman 
senior economist, develop 

econom research group, 

world bank 

don't miss 

By topic By date By read By tag 

cooki control 

thi site us cooki to store 

inform on your computer. 

about thi tool 

effect of incom inequ on econom growth | vox, cepr’ polici portal http://voxeu.org/article/effects-income-inequality-economic-growth 

1 sur 5 14/08/2017 19:18 



for example, ostri et al. 2014). 

In a recent paper (brueckner and lederman 2015), we provid estim of the within-countri effect 
that incom inequ have on aggreg output. our empir analysi start from the premis that 
the effect of chang in incom inequ on gdp per caput may differ between rich and poor 
countries. thi premis be ground in econom theory. In a semin contribution, galor and zeira 
(1993) propos a model with credit market imperfect and indivis in invest to show 
that inequ affect gdp per caput in the short run a well a in the long run. galor and zeira’ 
model predict that the effect of rise inequ on gdp per caput be neg in rel rich 
countri but posit in poor countries. We test thi predict by introduc in the panel model an 
interact term between incom inequ and countries' initi (i.e. begin of sample) gdp per 
capita. 

how larg be the effects? 

our empir analysi show that for the averag countri in the sampl dure 1970-2010, 
increas in incom inequ reduc gdp per capita. 

specifically, we find that, on average, a 1 percentag point increas in the gini coeffici reduc 
gdp per caput by around 1.1% over a five-year period; the long-run (cumulative) effect be larg 
and amount to about -4.5%. 

To be clear, thi find impli that, on average, increas in the level of incom inequ lead to 
low transit gdp per caput growth. increas in the level of incom inequ have a 
neg long-run effect on the level of gdp per capita. We document the robust of thi result 
to altern measur of incom inequality, altern incom inequ data sources, split the 
sampl between pre- and post-1990 period (end of the cold war), and restrict the sampl to 
countri locat in latin america and the caribbean or asia. 

while the averag effect of incom inequ on gdp per caput be neg and significantli 
differ from zero, it vari with countries' initi incom level. In an econometr model that 
includ an interact term between initi gdp per caput and incom inequality, the coeffici on 
the interact term be neg and significantli differ from zero at the 1% level. quantitatively, 
the size of the coeffici on the interact term impli that differ in initi incom induc a 
substanti effect on the impact that chang in incom inequ have on gdp per capita. for 

trilemma redux: evid 
from emerg market 
economi 

risk, return, and skill in the 
portfolio of the wealthi 

transit to clean 
technolog 

econom of the populist 
backlash 

china’ wto entri benefit 
US consum 

introduc voxdev 

globalis and execut 
compens 

econom and polici in the 
age of trump 

obstfeld, ostry, qureshi 

bach, calvet, sodini 

acemoglu, akcigit, hanley, kerr 

rodrik 

amiti, dai, feenstra, romali 

editor 

keller, olney 

bown 

event 

shadow banking: financi 
intermedi beyond bank 
14 - 15 septemb 2017 / 
helsinki, finland / suerf - 
the european money and 
financ forum and bank of 
finland 

corpor financ theori 
symposium 

cooki control 

thi site us cooki to store 

inform on your computer. 

about thi tool 

effect of incom inequ on econom growth | vox, cepr’ polici portal http://voxeu.org/article/effects-income-inequality-economic-growth 

2 sur 5 14/08/2017 19:18 



example, at the 25th percentil of initi incom the predict effect of a 1 percentag point increas 
in the gini coeffici on gdp per caput be 2.3% (with a correspond standard error of 0.6%); at 
the 75th percentil of initi incom the effect be -5.3% (the correspond standard error be 0.8%). 

the estim from the interact model thu suggest that in poor countries, increas in incom 
inequ rais gdp per caput while the opposit be the case in high- and middle-incom countries. 

effect of inequ on human capit 

addit evid that our empir result be in line with galor and zeira’ (1993) model come 
from the respons of invest and human capital.1 our panel estim show that within-countri 
increas in incom inequ significantli increas the investment-to-gdp ratio in poor countri 
but decreas it in high- and middle-incom countries. furthermore, within-countri increas in 
incom inequ significantli increas human capit (measur by the averag year of school 
and share of the popul with a secondari and tertiari education) in poor countries. On the other 
hand, in high- and middle-incom countri increas in incom inequ reduc human capital. 

identif 

identif of the causal effect of incom inequ on aggreg output be complic by the 
endogen of the former variable. incom inequ may be affect by countries' gdp per caput 
a well a other variabl relat to deep-root differ in their geographi and history. We 
address thi issu by estim a panel model with countri and time fix effects. We instrument 
incom inequ with variat in that variabl not driven by gdp per caput build on the work of 
brueckner et al. (2015). 

conclus 

our empir analysi be motiv by the theoret work of galor and zeira (1993). who 
examin the relationship between inequ and aggreg output in the presenc of credit market 
imperfect and indivis in human capit investment. galor and zeira’ model predict 
heterogen in the effect of inequ on aggreg output across countries' initi incom levels. 
take thi predict seriously, our econometr model includ an interact between measur 
of incom inequ and countries' initi level of gdp per capita. instrument variabl estim 
show that incom inequ have a signific neg effect on aggreg output for the averag 

15 septemb - 16 januari 
2017 / cambridg / cambridg 
judg busi school 

imf eighteenth jacqu 
polak annual research 
conference: the global 
financi cycl 
2 - 3 novemb 2017 / 
washington dc, usa / 
intern monetari fund 

snb research conference: 
monetari polici design, 
conduct and effect 
22 - 23 septemb 2017 / 
zurich, switzerland / the swiss 
nation bank 

call for papers: adbi-world 
economi workshop on 
global and the 
environ 
26 - 27 septemb 2017 / 
tokyo, japan / asian 
develop bank institut 

cepr polici research 

discuss paper insight 

homeownership of 
immigr in france: 
select effect relat to 
intern migrat flow 
gobillon, solignac 

climat chang and long- 
run discount rates: 
evid from real estat 
giglio, maggiori, stroebel, 
weber 

the perman effect of 
fiscal consolid 
summers, fatá 

cooki control 

thi site us cooki to store 

inform on your computer. 

about thi tool 

effect of incom inequ on econom growth | vox, cepr’ polici portal http://voxeu.org/article/effects-income-inequality-economic-growth 

3 sur 5 14/08/2017 19:18 



countri in the sample. however, for poor countri incom inequ have a signific posit 
effect. We document that thi heterogen be also present when consid invest – in 
particular, invest in human capit – a a channel through which inequ affect aggreg 
output. overall, our empir result provid support for the hypothesi that incom inequ be 
benefici to econom growth in poor countries, but that it be detriment to econom growth in 
advanc economies. 

disclaimer: the findings, interpretations, and conclus express be entir those of the 
authors. they do not necessarili repres the view of the intern bank for reconstruct 
and development/world bank and it affili organisations, or those of the execut director of 
the world bank or the govern they represent. 

refer 

brueckner, M and D lederman (2015), "effect of incom inequ on aggreg output", world 
bank polici discuss paper 7317. 

brueckner, M, E dabla norris, M gradstein (2015), "nation incom and it distribution", journal of 
econom growth 20: 149-175. 

galor, O (2011), “inequality, human capit formation, and the process of development”, brown 
univers work paper 2011-7. 

galor, O and J zeira (1993), “incom distribut and macroeconomics”, review of econom 
studi 60: 35-52. 

ostry, J D, A berg, and G D tsangarid (2014), “redistribution, inequality, and growth”, imf staff 
discuss note no. sdn/14/02, february. 

perotti, R (1996), “growth, incom distribution, and democracy: what the data say?”, journal of 
econom growth 1(2): 149—187. 

footnot 

1 ideally, in the cross-countri time seri context, we would like to use data on the distribut of 
wealth rather than incom sinc wealth inequ be the relev measur in theoret model with 

@voxeu 

rss feed 

weekli digest 

demograph and the 
secular stagnat 
hypothesi in europ 
favero, galasso 

QE and the bank lend 
channel in the unit 
kingdom 
butt, churm, mcmahon, 
morotz, schanz 

subscrib 

cooki control 

thi site us cooki to store 

inform on your computer. 

about thi tool 

effect of incom inequ on econom growth | vox, cepr’ polici portal http://voxeu.org/article/effects-income-inequality-economic-growth 

4 sur 5 14/08/2017 19:18 



88 A A 

credit market imperfections. unfortunately, data on wealth inequ be not avail to gener a 
long time-seri for a larg number of countries. As note in previou empir research (e.g. 
perotti 1996), incom inequ and wealth inequ be highli posit correlated. 

topics: global economi poverti and incom inequ 

tags: incom inequality, aggreg output, human capit 

relat 

growth, inequality, and social welfar 
david dollar, tatjana kleineberg, aart kraay 

whi do inequ grow? 
coen teul 

how to address inequ 
jeffrey frankel 

human capit and incom inequ 
amparo castelló-climent, rafael doménech 

57,809 read 
printer-friendli version 

cooki control 

thi site us cooki to store 

inform on your computer. 

about thi tool 

effect of incom inequ on econom growth | vox, cepr’ polici portal http://voxeu.org/article/effects-income-inequality-economic-growth 

5 sur 5 14/08/2017 19:18 


