











































composit graphic 

page 2 

emerg technologies’ impact 
ON societi & work IN 2030 

the next era of 

human|machin 
partnership 



institut for the futur 
institut for the futur (iftf) be an independent, nonprofit 501(c)(3) 
strateg research and educ organ celebr nearli 
50 year of forecast experience. the core of our work be 
identifi emerg trend and discontinu that will transform 
global societi and the global marketplace. our research gener 
the foresight need to creat insight that lead to action and span 
a broad territori of deepli transform futures, from health and 
health care to technology, the workplace, learning, and human 
identity. As an educ organization, iftf strive to compli with 
fair-us standard and publish onli materi in the public domain 
under the creativ common 4.0 intern licens 
(cc by-nc-nd 4.0). the institut for the futur be base in 
palo alto, california. (www.iftf.org) 

thi report be researched, written, designed, and produc by iftf 
in english. with iftf permission, the dell technolog global 
team have translat the work with approv languag servic 
provid (lsps) around the world to obtain qualiti translat of the 
work, howev content may differ from the origin sourc material. 
all translat shall remain under the origin copyright. 

dell technolog 
dell technolog be a uniqu famili of busi that provid the 
essenti infrastructur for organ to build their digit future, 
transform it, and protect their most import asset, information. 
the compani servic custom of all sizes—rang from 98% 
of the fortun 500 to individu consumers—with the industry’ 
broad and most innov portfolio from edg to core to cloud. 
dell technolog famili consist of the follow brands: dell, dell 
emc, pivotal, rsa, secureworks, virtustream, and vmware. 

acknowledg 
thi report would not have be possibl without the 
substanti contribut of mani collaborators, a partial list 
of whom includes: 

juli mage 
christoph bishop 
srinivasan sankarambadi 
sudhir swami 
Ed kennedi 
jarl taggueg 
katherin miller 
diann E. durham 
anastasia nylund 

cristian malineanu 
eunic romero 
hester bruikman 
ghanima abdullah 
amanda maher 
rachel michaud 
greg vanderhorst 
ashley drake 
amardeep sodhi 

© 2017 institut for the futur for dell technologies. all right reserved. all trademark be the properti of their respect owners. sr-1940 



content 

introduct 1 

emerg technolog impact our live 3 

human-machin partnership by 2030 7 

impact on individu and organ by 2030 9 

digit conductor 

work chase peopl 

in-the-mo learn 

prepar for the next era of human-machin partnership 17 

skill & trait for individu 

skill & respons for organ 

conclusion: human-machin partnership in 2030 21 

endnot 23 



about thi research 
In 2017, dell technolog partner with the independ 
futur research group, institut for the futur (iftf), to explor 
the emerg technolog shape the futur of the human 
experi over the next decade, and the specif impact and 
implic they will have on societi and work. To execut 
this, iftf reli on it decades-long studi on the futur of work 
and technology, in-depth interview with key stakeholders, and 
the opinion and idea gener dure an all-day facilit 
workshop with a divers set of expert from across the globe. 
expert inform the report include: 

ian bork, ceo, lumin health 
ming-li chai, principal, design research & strategi 
offic envisioning, microsoft 
devin fidler, research director, institut for the futur 
eri gentry, research manager, institut for the futur 
deborah johnson, ann shirley carter olsson 
professor emeritu of appli ethics: 
science, technology, and society, univers of virginia 
jordan howard, social good strategist, genynot 
toshi hoo, director of emerg media lab, 
institut for the futur 
jeremi kirshbaum, research manager, 
institut for the futur 
rachel maguire, research director, institut for the futur 
lauren mccarthy, programmer, media artist, 
assist professor of design media art 
univers of california lo angel 
adam miner, psyd, post-doctor fellow 
stanford clinic excel research 
stanford univers school of medicin 
liam quinn, chief technolog officer, 
sr. vice president, sr. fellow, dell technolog 
zulfikar ramzan, chief technolog officer, rsa secur 
tasneen salim, founder/manag director, 
gcon, saudi arabia 
william senyo, co-found & chief execut officer, 
impact hub accra, ghana 
john suh, vice president, hyundai ventur 
mark thiele, chief strategi officer, apcera 
thuc vu, co-found & chief execut officer, ohmnilab 
norman wang, execut producer, opaqu media, australia 
david yeo, chief learn architect, kydon group, singapor 



the next era of human-machin partnership 1 

introduct 

At it inception, veri few peopl anticip the pace at which the internet would spread across the 
world, or the impact it would have in remak busi and culture. and yet, a journalist oliv 
burkeman write in 2009, “without most of u quit notic when it happened, the web go from 
be a strang new curios to a background condit of everyday life.”1 

today’ emerg technolog also feel like strange, new 
curiosities. artifici intellig (ai), augment and virtual 
reality, home robots, and cloud computing, to name onli a 
few of the sophist technolog in develop today, 
be captur the imagin of many. the advanc 
capabl of today’ emerg technolog be drive 
mani academics, entrepreneurs, and enterpris to envis 
futur in which their impact on societi will be noth 
short of transformative. At a recent expert workshop host 
by dell technolog and the institut for the futur (iftf), 
particip suggest that the technolog in play over 
the next decad have the potenti to “solv some of the 
intract problem that human have face for so long,” 
offer the opportun to “increas product [such that] 
all our basic need [are take care of],” and fundament 
refram “notion of what it mean to be a person.”2 

whether or not these emerg technolog will realiz these 
ambiti possibl be uncertain. what be certain be that they 
will intersect and interact with power demographic, eco- 
nomic, and cultur forc to upend the condit of everyday 
life and reshap how mani live and work in 2030. As a result, 

mani organ and peopl will navig unchart 
water over the next decade, unsur of what lie ahead. 
In dell’ digit transform index study, with 4,000 
senior decis maker across the world, 45% say they be 
concern about becom obsolet in just 3-5 years, nearli 
half don’t know what their industri will look like in just three 
years’ time, and 73% believ they need to be more ‘digital’ 
to succeed in the future. 

with thi in mind, we set out with 20 expert to explor how 
variou social and technolog driver will influenc the 
next decad and, specifically, how emerg technolog 
will recast our societi and the way we conduct busi by 
the year 2030. As a result, thi outlook report conclud that, 
over the next decade, emerg technolog will underpin 
the format of new human-machin partnership that make 
the most of their respect complementari strengths. these 
partnership will enhanc daili activ around the coordi- 
nation of resourc and in-the-mo learning, which will 
reset expect for work and requir corpor structur to 
adapt to the expand capabl of human-machin teams. 



the next era of human-machin partnership 3 

there be no univers agre upon determin of which technolog be consid emerging. 
for the purpos of thi study, iftf explor the impact that robotics, artifici intellig (ai) and 
machin learning, virtual realiti (vr) and augment realiti (ar), and cloud computing, will have on 
societi by 2030. these technologies, enabl by signific advanc in software, will underpin the 
format of new human-machin partnerships. 

robot 
for decades, robot have perform activ that human 
should not or do not want to do. thi includ danger 
situations, repetit tasks, or task that do not requir special 
cognit or problem-solv skills. In the most advanc 
manufactur sectors—among japan’ carmakers, for 
example—robot be alreadi abl to work unsupervised, 
around the clock, for up to 30 day without interruption. 

rapid develop across science, technology, engineering, 
and commun have brought about what have be call 
the new industri revolution, or “second machin age,” which 
will greatli expand robots’ compet and functions. with 
these changes, a whole suit of job be be reimagin a 
autom displac and disrupt human labor, the benefit of 
which have be well chronicled. 

while offshor manufactur job to low-cost economi can 
save up to 65% on labor costs, replac human worker with 
robot can save up to 90% of these costs.3 china be current 
embark upon an effort to fill it factori with advanc man- 
ufactur robots, a workers’ wage rise and technolog allow 
the industri to becom more efficient. the provinc of guang- 
dong, the heartland of chines manufacturing, have promis 
to invest $154 billion in instal robots. accord to a report 
releas by pwc, more than a third of u.k. job could be at 
“high risk” of autom by the earli 2030 and robot could 
take over 38% of current u.s. job in the next 15 years.4 

buoy by their commerci success, the adopt of robot will 
extend beyond manufactur plant and the workplace. famili 
robots, caregiv robots, and civic robot will all becom 
commonplac a deep learn improv robots’ abil to 
empath and reason. googl recent won a patent to build 
worker robot with personalities. while there be certainli 
regulatori and legal hurdles, a well a cultur acceptance, to 
overcome, thi introduct of robot into our person life will 
continu over the next 15 years. 

emerg technolog 
impact our live 

ohmnilab 
ohmni be an afford telepresence, self-charg and 
self-repair home robot. 

ohm 
nilabs.com 



4 institut for the futur 

emerg technolog impact our live (cont.) 

artifici intellig and machin learn 
artifici intellig have come a long way from the day of 
herbert simon’ logic theori machin program in 1956. sinc 
1997, when a chess-play computer, deep blue, beat gari 
kasparov, the reign world chess champion, machin 
have becom smarter, faster, and abl to manag increasingli 
complex tasks. 

approxim 1,500 compani in north america alon be 
do someth relat to AI today, which equat to less than 
1% of all medium-to-larg companies. we’r see thi in the 
financi servic industri already, with data recognition, pattern 
recognition, and predict analyt be appli to huge data 
set on a broad scale. In a 2015 report, bank of america merril 
lynch estim that the AI market will expand to $153 billion 
over the next five years—$83 billion for robots, and $70 billion 
for artifici intelligence-bas systems.5 

accord to michel zhou, an expert in ai, develop 
can be thought of in three stages.6 the first be recognit 
intelligence—algorithm that recogn patterns; follow by 
cognit intelligence—machin that make infer from 
data; with the final stage be virtual human beings. It be plausi- 
ble that, by 2030, we will enter the second stage in AI a thi 
technolog continu to progress. AI be be appli in both 
simpl and complex applications—from autonom vehicl 
to apple’ siri. recently, an AI program call libratu from 
carnegi mellon univers beat the world’ best profession 
poker player in pittsburgh after a 20-day event. significantly, 
the machin be abl to outsmart the human by use “imper- 
fect information.” thi be because, in poker, there be a degre of 
miss information. player will never reveal the card in their 
hand until they must (unlik chess, where everyon can see the 
piec and possibl moves). 

In addit to their abil to make decis with imperfect 
information, machin be now abl to learn from their expe- 
rienc and share that learn with other AI program and 
robots. but AI progress also bring new challenges. discuss 
surround who or what have moral and ethic respons for 
decis make by machin will onli increas in import 
over the next decade. 

libratu supercomput 
dure the “brain vs. artifici intellig re-match” in 2017, the 
supercomputer, libratus, develop at carnegi mellon university’ 
school of comput science, reign suprem in texa hold’em 
against some of the world’ best profession poker players. 

cm 
u.edu 



the next era of human-machin partnership 5 

oculu VR with dell precis workstat 
student use virtual realiti for an immers and educ 
experience. 

dell.com 

virtual realiti and augment realiti 
although both virtual and augment realiti be chang 
the form factor of computing, there be a simpl distinct 
between the two. VR block out the physic world and 
transport the user to a simul world, wherea AR creat 
a digit layer over the physic world. despit the difference, 
both technolog repres a fundament shift in inform 
present becaus they allow peopl to engag in what 
toshi hoo, director of iftf’ emerg media lab, call 
“experienti media” a oppos to repres media. No 
longer depend on one or two of our sen to process data, 
immers technolog like AR and VR will enabl peopl to 
appli multipl senses—sight, touch, hearing, and soon, tast 
and smell—to experi medium through embodi cognition. 

both VR and AR stand to transform not onli medium and 
entertain but also drive develop of innov use 
case in education, health care, travel and transportation, 
construction, and manufacturing. the inform layer that 
both technolog creat will acceler the meld of digit 
and physic identities, with digit trail and trace form 
a digit coat over individuals’ physic environments. 
on-demand access to AR learn resourc will reset 
expect and practic around workplac train and 
retraining, and real-tim decision-mak will be bolster by 
easi access to inform flows. vr-enabl simul will 
immers peopl in altern scenarios, increas empathi for 
other and prepar for futur situations. It will empow the 
internet of experi by blend physic and virtual worlds. 

right now, analyst project revenu associ with AR 
technolog and servic will grow to about $90 billion by 
2020, the major of which will be gener through revenu 
spent on hardware. VR be forecast to grow more modestly, 
increas to $30 billion by 2020.7 yet, a author tool get 
simplified, make it easi to creat VR content, VR will 
catch up to ar. over the next decade, hoo forecast 
that vr, combin with vast sensor network and 
connect technologies, will be one of mani tool that enabl 
distribut presenc and embodi cognition, allow 
peopl to experi medium with all their senses. 



6 institut for the futur 

cloud comput 
it’ import to recogn that cloud comput isn’t a place, 
it’ a way of do it. whether public, private, or hybrid (a 
combin of privat and public), the technolog be now use 
by 70% of u.s. organizations. thi figur be expect to grow 
further, with 56% of busi survey say they be work- 
ing on transfer more IT oper to the cloud, accord to 
idg enterprise’ 2016 cloud comput execut summary.8 

chital dairi exemplifi the power of cloud comput to 
improv the econom well-b of dairi farmer in india. 
recently, chital dairi launch a ‘cow to cloud’ initi in 
which each cow be fit with rfid tag to captur data that be 
held in the cloud. the relev analysi of thi data be then sent 
to the local farmer via sm and the web, to alert farmer when 
they need to chang the cows’ diet, arrang vaccinations, etc. 
the time deliveri of thi inform be increas the cows’ 
yield, support local farmers, whose livelihood depend on 
the dairi farms, and enabl chital to manag a part of the 
suppli chain which be normal fraught with uncertainty. 

while the cloud be not a recent technolog advancement, 
cloud technolog onli realli gather momentum in recent 
years, a enterpris grade applic hit the market, virtualiza- 
tion technolog matured, and busi becom increasingli 
awar of it benefit in term of effici and profitability. 
increas innov in cloud-n app and their propen- 
siti to be built and deploy in quick cadenc to offer great 
agility, resilience, and portabl across cloud will drive further 
uptake. start-up be start to use cloud-n approach to 
disrupt tradit industries; and by 2030, cloud technolog 
will be so embedded, memori from the pre-cloud era will feel 
posit archaic by comparison. 

chital dairi 
chital dairi launch the ‘cow to cloud’ initi to improv the health 
and well-b of cow on dairi farm in india. 

chitaledairy.com 

emerg technolog impact our live (cont.) 



the next era of human-machin partnership 7 

recent conversations, reports, and articl about the 
intersect of emerg technolog and societi have 
tend to promot one of two extrem perspect about the 
future: the anxiety-driven issu of technolog unemploy 
or the optimist view of tech-en panacea for all social 
and environment ills. perhap a more use convers 
would focu on what the new relationship between technolog 
and societi could look like, and what need to be consid 
to prepar accordingly. By frame the relationship between 
human and machin a a partnership, we can begin to build 
capac in machin to 
improv their understand 
of humans, and in societi and 
organizations, so that more 
of u be prepar to engag 
meaning with emerg 
technologies. 

Of course, peopl have 
live and work alongsid 
machin for centuries. from 
the hand axe, possibl the first exampl of a human-mad 
devic design to enhanc human power, to time-sav 
home devic such a lawn mower and vacuum cleaners, 
to calculators, person computers, and the prolifer 
of mobil devices. however, societi be about to enter a new 
phase, character by even great effici and 
possibl than ever before. 

As process power increas 10 time everi five year 
(source: moore’ law), human will be eclips by comput 
in mani areas. machin will bring lightn speed and accu- 
raci to all manner of tasks. however, it would be a fallaci to 
assum that technolog be make human effort redundant. it’ 
doubt that comput will have fulli master the funda- 
mental, instinct skill of intuition, judgment, and emot 
intellig that human valu by 2030. over the next decade, 
partner with machin will help human transcend their 
limitations. 

human-machin partnership will enabl peopl to find and 
act on inform without interfer of emot or extern 
bias, while also exercis human judgment where appropri- 
ate. they’ll learn to team up with technolog integr with 
machin learn tool to help activ and deactiv the 

resourc they need to manag their daili lives. and they’ll 
partner with ar/vr technolog to develop necessari work 
skills, blend experienti medium with human judgement to 
perform well at work. 

meanwhile, organ will increas valu and custom 
satisfact by grow their relianc on machin learn sys- 
tems, make it possibl for organ to find and deploy 
resourc rapidli to wherev they be needed, whenev they 
be needed, to creat valu and high custom satisfaction. 

their abil to evalu talent 
will also be bolster by vr/ 
AR technology, which will 
increas managers’ abil to 
evalu a worker’ aptitud 
for gain new knowledg or 
learn new skill and apply- 
ing thi knowledg to 
a new scenario. 

given the pace of industri 
disruption, now be the time to strengthen individu and 
organiz capac to engag activ in human-machin 
partnerships. the next section describ the impact on 
individu and organ and how they’ll come togeth 
to produc mutual benefici partnership to enhanc daili 
activ and reset expect for learn and work. 

human-machin 
partnership by 2030 

“thi [human-machin partnerships] be 
a great opportun for mankind. By 
offload more, we’ll be abl to focu 
on what human do best.” 

— norman wang, opaqu media 



the next era of human-machin partnership 9 

the sophist capabl of today’ 

emerg technolog be underpin 

the format of new human-machin 

partnerships, which will have signific 

impact on both individu and 

organizations. work in partnership 

with machin will enhanc people’ 

abil to coordin resourc and learn 

in-the-moment, which, in turn, will reset 

expect for work and requir corpor 

structur to adapt to the expand 

capabl of human-machin teams. 

impact on individu and 
organ by 2030 



10 institut for the futur 

today, an increas portion of human mobil need be 
be met by an app. soon it will be hard to justifi keep 
a car in a garag or maintain a piec of equip that’ 
rare used, when technolog be provid what peopl need, 
when they need it. and it’ not just mobil servic that be 
be mediat through an app. already, the number of digit 
platform that be be use to orchestr either physic 
or human resourc have surpass 1,800.9 they be not onli 
connect peopl in need of a ride with drivers, or vaca- 
tioner with a place to stay, but job searcher with work, and 
vulner popul with critic services. the popular of 
the servic they offer be introduc societi to the capabl 
of coordin technolog and reset expect about 
the ownership of fix assets. 

By 2030, populations’ need and resourc will be 
orchestr by self-learning, digit technologies, allow 
human to take the role of digit resourc conductors. 
technolog will work a an extens of people, help 
orchestrate, manage, and autom mani day-to-day 
activities. and becaus the technolog will be woven 
into everyone’ life (some will even be implanted), and 
person to the individual, some need will be met often 
befor peopl even realiz they have them. these digit 
technolog will be integr with machin learn to creat 
a popul of digit orchestr systems, har 
technolog to arrang and direct resourc to produc a 
desir result. 

digit nativ will lead the charge. As they becom parents, 
they’ll reli upon human-machin partnership to manag work 
and famili commitments. they’ll be join by the million of 
peopl involv in care for a love one. In region of asia 
and europ where peopl age 80 year or old compris the 
fast grow subset of their populations, the 
retirement-ag cohort will remain larg than the working- 
age popul for decad to come. mani rel of elderli 
peopl will use lightweight and afford home robot to cul- 
tivat co-presence, and depend on coordin platform to 
schedul and monitor caregiv servic on-demand to find 
support for their love ones. 

By 2030, mani will be savvi digit orchestra conductors, 
reli on their suit of person technologies, includ voice- 
enabl connect devices, wearables, and implantables; to 
infer intent from their pattern and relationships, and activ 
and deactiv resourc accordingly. yet, a be often the case 
with ani shift in society, there be a risk that some segment 
of the popul will get left behind. individu will need to 
strengthen their abil to team up with machin to arrang 
the element of their daili life to produc optim outcomes. 
without empow more to hone their digit conduct 
skills, the benefit that will come from offload ‘life admin’ 
to machin partner will be limit to the digit literate. 

impact on individu and organ by 2030 

digit conductor 

If you imagin thi partnership [between human and 
machines] transform how we arrang and direct 
our life to seamlessli provid what we need, befor 
we need, with just the wave of a hand per se, it’ 
possibl to imagin a futur in which machin becom 
extens of ourselves. today we have digit natives. 
In ten years, we’ll have digit conductors.” 

—thuc vu, co-found and ceo, ohmnilab 

“ 



the next era of human-machin partnership 11 

signal of changea day in the life 2030 … 
janine, a freelanc designer, just 
receiv a notif from her AI 
assist that her elderli aunt be 
unwell. janin access her aunt’ 
home robot, which be constantli 
monitor her aunt’ vital signs. 
she see that the algorithm health 
system have alreadi diagnos the 
issu and have order her medicine. 
janin also add some flower to 
the deliveri to cheer up her aunt. the 
whole packag be deliv within the 
hour via a drone. janin coordin 
all of that while commut in a 
driverless, share ride servic 
program to pick her up and go 
directli to her daughter’ school. 
janine’ AI assist monitor the 
data flow from her daughter’ 
implant health tracker. janin 
conclud that her daughter’ 
blood sugar level must have be 
low becaus a her car pull up, 
a deliveri drone be drop off a 
healthi snack. 

origin research conduct by institut for the futur in 2016 identifi more than 
1,800 digit work platform (similar to uber, seamless, upwork, etc.) in oper around 
the world. notably, the vast major of the platform be found in the last five years, 
suggest that the tool and servic that digit conductor will need to orchestr their 
work and home life be onli begin to form. 
iftf 

honor be an app that match patient with caregivers, and coordin meals, 
transportation, housekeeping, and companionship, so old peopl can be care for 
and carer can be present—without physic be in the same room. It us one 
platform to manag all aspect of eldercare. although it provid patient care, it founder, 
seth sternberg, says, “honor be realli about the technology”—connect health care 
profession (people) and those in need of care with one another.10 
joinhonor.com 



12 institut for the futur 

human-machin partnership will not onli help autom and 
coordin lives, they will also transform how organ 
find talent, manag teams, deliv product and services, 
and support profession development. human-machin 
partnership won’t spell the end of human jobs, but work 
will be vastli different. 

By 2030, expect of work will reset and the landscap 
for organ will be redrawn, a the process of find 
work get flip on it head. As an extens of what be often 
refer to a the ‘gig economy’ today, organ will begin 
to autom how they sourc work and teams, break up 
work into tasks, and seek out the best talent for a task. 
instead of expect worker to bear the brunt of find work, 
work will compet for the best resourc to complet the job. 
reput engines, data visualization, and smart analyt 
will make individuals’ skill and compet searchable, 
and organ will pursu the best talent for discret 
work tasks. 

the abil to orchestr both physic and human resourc 
will make it possibl for organ to activate, deactivate, 
and deploy resourc to wherev and whenev they be 
needed. not onli will thi make the organ leaner 
and more competitive, it will also reduc fix cost and 
overheads, and place them on the path to becom more 
agil and profitable. however, none of thi be assured. To 
prepar for 2030, organ will need to build out their 
capac to disaggreg the task and duti of jobs, a they 
be design today. 

busi will need to manag thi shift carefully. upon first 
glance, ani reduct in full-tim employ could seem 
peril for the econom stabil of individu and families. 
however, refram talent from fix to variabl resourc will 

unleash novel opportun for a divers pool of truli global 
talent. these skill individu will benefit from a suit of 
sophist commun and social collabor tool 
that allow independ worker and team to coordin 
across institut and time zones. By loosen the tie 
between work and geography, it will be possibl to chip 
away at the misalign of global talent that exist today. 
with region of south-centr asia and sub-saharan africa 
project to grow by almost one billion peopl by 2030, work, 
particularli digit work, will search for the top talent and 
innov idea hous in emerg regions. 

work chase peopl could also reduc person bia 
and stereotyp in the job seek process. integr VR 
technolog into recruit protocols, for example, enabl 
the prospect worker to demonstr compet by 
showcas skill without reveal gender or ethnicity. hire 
through immers technolog could improv the dismal 
represent of woman in comput job (currently, in the 
unit states, onli 26% of them be held by women), and 
open more door to peopl who, historically, have not have 
equal opportun to demonstr their abilities. 

for continuity, strateg advantage, and other critic reasons, 
there will still be mani role that will benefit from have full- 
time employe with long tenur within a singl organization. 
yet, organ will need to appli a more discern len 
to distinguish when full-tim employ be necessari and 
when procur the top talent for a specif set of task be 
more prudent. similarly, organ will need to rethink the 
recruit process and determin when immers and expe- 
riential technolog serv a good hire tool than human 
judgment. without incorpor these expand capabl 
of machines, organ will run the risk of miss out on 
new channel to identifi optim talent. 

impact on individu and organ by 2030 

work chase peopl 

I lead a commun of young, post-college, activ technolog 
user in ghana and west africa, and my work be to give 
them access to global opportunities” 

—william senyo, co-found & chief execut officer, impact hub accra, ghana 

“ 



the next era of human-machin partnership 13 

signal of changea day in the life 2030 … 
eng be a natur when it come 
to be entrepreneurial. He us 
work local a a kind of “date 
service” to find great opportunities. 
today, eng have be rout a project 
from a candi compani in sweden 
look for help with market research 
a they consid open export to 
the philippines. they be particularli 
interest in find someon who 
can interview local shopkeep 
in manila and take photograph of 
their candi display for analysi by 
comput vision systems. eng have 
alway like the process of figur 
out what peopl want. He be happi 
to see that the work local system 
be start to recogn hi talent for 
thi and will probabl offer similar 
opportun in the future. 

alice, a technolog power by circular board, be the world’ first artifici intellig 
platform for woman entrepreneurs. alic connect founder in real-tim with care 
curat resourc specif to their industry, stage of growth, and location. As alic 
populates, machin learn will allow her to predict the need of founder to guid 
them to referrals, events, mentors, and access to capit and ecosystems. 
helloalice.com 

glowork be the first women’ employ organ in the middl east and have launch 
a platform that link femal jobseek with employers. So far it have put over 3,000 woman 
in the workplace, and found work-from-hom job for 500 women. leverag big data, 
employ can search for candid base on differ search criterion a well a the right 
target market for them.11 

glowork.net 



14 institut for the futur 

the u.s. bureau of labor statist say that today’ learner 
will have 8 to 10 job by the time they be 38. mani of them 
will join the workforc of freelancers. alreadi 50 million 
strong, freelanc be project to make up 50% of 
the workforc in the unit state by 2020.12 most freelanc 
will not be abl to reli on tradit HR departments, 
onboard processes, and mani of the other afford 
of institut work. 

not onli will worker have mani jobs, the task and duti of 
the job they’ll perform will be markedli differ from what 
they studied. the expert that attend the iftf workshop 
in march 2017 estim that around 85% of the job that 
today’ learner will be do in 2030 haven’t be invent 
yet. thi make the famou predict that 65% of grade 
school kid from 1999 will end up in job that haven’t yet 
be creat seem conserv in comparison.13 

whether either forecast come to fruition, it’ clear that, by 
2030, worker will creat new work infrastructur to acquir 
the skill and knowledg they will need to execut their 
work successfully. they will routin improvise, learn from 
each other, and make their own way. some will reli on past 
work experiences, frameworks, or mental models. other 
will experi across differ platforms, discov their 
own workaround and pioneer their own innovations. 
these factor combined, will serious challeng tradit 
establishments. most will partner with machin to learn while 
on-the-gig. By 2030, in-the-mo learn will becom the 
modu operandi, and the abil to gain new knowledg will 
be valu high than the knowledg peopl alreadi have. 

To acquir the necessari knowledge, some will use AR 
technolog to perform unfamiliar and complex task on the 
job. instead of depend on technic school or train 
program to learn new skill and retrain displac workers, 
workers, wear an AR headset, will be fed the inform 
that they need in real-tim and in their field-of-vis so they 
can do the work. As amit mahajan, manag partner at 
presenc capital, forecasted, “A worker in the futur may 
put on their AR headset and, just like a ride-shar driver, 
start receiv request to physic perform technic 
operations.”14 other will depend on app and servic that 
be design to engag user in learn dure the idl 
moment of their lives. one earli exampl of thi be waitsuite, 
develop by research at mit’ comput scienc 
and artifici intellig laboratory, to turn everi wait 
opportun into a learn opportun (a practic call 
‘wait-learning’).15 

As the transfer of knowledg will be increasingli offload to 
emerg technologies, individu will shoulder the burden of 
use these new technolog to acquir necessari skill to 
demonstr proficiency. As a result, peopl will need to know 
how to access inform and learn through immers and 
experiment medium such a AR and vr. whether it’ use 
vr/ar technolog to prepar respons team for emerg 
event or teach someon how to fix a leak, emerg 
technolog will reshap the method and tool avail to 
impart information. thi will requir both access to technolog 
a well a increas confid in their know-how to util 
emerg technologies. 

impact on individu and organ by 2030 

in-the-mo learn 

worker in the gig economi will self-direct their wage. 
they’ll increas their salari by take on job in which 
they can learn. peopl be learn a they go and 
consid new avenu for their career in the process. 
thi will have wide-rang implications—on work and 
educ establishments.” –eri gentry, institut for the futur 

“ 



the next era of human-machin partnership 15 

signal of changea day in the life 2030 … 
when lydia be in her earli 20s, 
she spent over $5,000 to studi 
automot mechan in new york 
city. shortli after, she found steadi 
work a an automot technician 
at a larg dealership. throughout 
her tenure, she have routin take 
onlin cours to updat her skillset 
and attend train relat 
to specif car brands. sinc her 
employ introduc AR technolog 
into the repair shop, she doesn’t 
have to sacrific famili time and 
modest save to acquir new 
skills. when she be charg with 
perform an unfamiliar or complex 
task, she slip on her safeti glass 
equip with AR technology. 
As she begin the task, relev 
inform be serv up, across her 
field of vision, guid her process 
throughout the task. what’ more, 
lydia us a person system, 
so the inform and guidanc she 
receiv be built on what she alreadi 
knows, and deliv in the way she 
learn best. 

daqri, base in lo angeles, california, be use state-of-the-art AR devic to display 
inform and work instruct over a worker’ environment, enabl them to complet 
a task safe and efficiently. with daqri’ technology, worker be abl to see their 
colleague’ field of view and provid assistance—mean field worker will never have to 
work alone, without the aid of their team’ collect intelligence. 
daqri.com 

waitsuit be develop by research at mit’ comput scienc and artifici 
intellig laboratory. waitsuit be emb directli into exist task so user can 
learn a they wait for a whatsapp messag to appear for instance, without have to leav 
the whatsapp platform. acquir skill through app like waitsuit will onli grow a more 
peopl strive to learn in the moment. 
people.csail.mit.edu 



the next era of human-machin partnership 17 

prepar for the next era of 
human-machin partnership 

the sophist capabl of today’ 

emerg technolog will fuel a new 

level of human-machin collabor and 

codependence. A futur in which peopl 

partner with machin to build on their 

mutual strength provid tremend 

possibl to improv the condit for 

everyday living. classifi the skill that 

machin should bring to the tabl and what 

human should contribut to the partnership 

be key. forg strong work relationship 

depend upon each parti bring 

someth uniqu to the collaboration. 

thi section help jump-start the new 

distribut of human and organiz 

skill and trait need to thrive in the next 

era of human-machin partnerships. 



18 institut for the futur 

prepar for the next era of human-machin partnership (cont.) 

for individuals, domain expertise, the combin of 
experience, context, and knowledg on how “thing get 
done,” will continu to be a decidedli human trait over the next 
decade. In addit to domain expertise, the set of attitud 
often associ with entrepreneurs—vision, perseverance, 
creativ problem-solving—wil be a critic trait for all worker to 
employ. the abil to take a measur approach to balanc 
the big pictur object of the organ with an entrepre- 
neur’ drive to design workaround and circumv constraint 
will differenti the human from the machines. In other words, 
the skill tradit employ by entrepreneur will be funda- 
mental for all workers. 

while the creativ skill of human be often tout a superior 
to what machin intellig might produce, human passion 
may be even more challeng to program. As highli valu a 
soft skill may be for human to contribut to the new partner- 
ships—such a creativ and empathy—th human drive that 
compel peopl to act be equal important. brian mullins, ceo 
and co-found of daqri, believ passion be a clear advan- 
tage that human will have over machines. As mullin argued, 
“if you pick up a devic and learn how to do someth that 
you couldn’t do before, you could fire up a passion in peopl 
and that be what’ go to make a chang in our world. thi be 
how the applic of these technolog will solv even more 
interest problem on a global scale.”16 

As the rise of reput engines, data visualization, and smart 
analyt make individuals’ skill and compet increas- 
ingli searchable, cultiv and preserv a strong person 
brand will be consid basic profession hygien over the 
next decade. In order for reward and challeng work to 
find them, peopl will need to maintain a favorable, profession 
reput in one’ network. 

mani will depend on machin to run the daili activ 
associ with manag person brand and profession 
reputations, exemplifi anoth critic skill for individu to 
develop—th nimbl abil to integr lightweight autom 
tool into their own work and home lives. instead of resist 
the afford of autom tools, be abl to appli them to 
one’ own life will help individu to easili offload automat 
tasks, like person brand audits, and hone the need human 
skill in work and at home. 

finally, a AI cloud servic enabl more applic and 
devic to incorpor AI capabl without heavi invest 
in the technic infrastructure, access to inform will be 
even more expans than it be today. In 2030, skill in 
inform qualif and judgment will remain critical, 
a will the new skill of interpret an output produc by an 
algorithm. the abil to make sens of combin human- 
machin output will be key for success in the next era of 
human-machin partnerships. 

individu skill & trait 

• contextu intelligence: 
nuanc understand of culture, society, 
business, and peopl 

• entrepreneuri mindset: 
appli creativity, learn agility, and an enterpris 
attitud to find workaround and circumv constraint 

• person brand cultivation: 
a searchabl and favor digit ident a 
basic work hygien 

• autom literacy: 
the nimbl abil to integr lightweight autom 
tool into one’ own work and home life 

• comput sensemaking: 
abil to deriv mean from blend machin 
and human-bas output 

individu 



the next era of human-machin partnership 19 

prepar for the next era of human-machin partnership (cont.) 

for organizations, build out technolog capabl will 
be key. central to thi will be recogn that the threat of 
fall victim to secur breach be no longer a technolog 
problem, but a busi problem. thi will elev the role of 
build and maintain secur systems, a well a design 
effect respons strategies. over the next decade, peopl 
will digit transmit more and more traceabl data, blending, 
in mani cases, their physic and digit identities. As a result, 
maintain consum trust will be vital. organ will need 
to show that they’v go to the nth degre to protect their cus- 
tomers’ data. As zulfikar ramzan, chief technolog offic at 
rsa security, explained, “ani ambiti enterpris will be truli 
a joint ventur between busi and security.”17 understand 
the busi implic of secur breach will drive 
organ to develop risk-mitig secur strategi that 
work both to prevent attack and respond and resolv incid 
quickli when they occur. 

meet the exact expect of consum will be equal 
critic for organizations’ success in 2030. whether it’ the 
deliveri of a product, execut of a service, or even identifi- 
cation of the next job, ani delay in a digit transact will be 
increasingli unaccept to consumers. As AI be progress 
applied, organ will be abl to fix problem and offer 
new servic at speed, repres a continu cycl of 
improvement. elimin latencies, respond in real-time, and 
activ thi automat cycl of improv will be anoth 
key organiz compet to perfect. 

organ will need to quickli ramp-up their intern 
compet to ensur that the grow number of algorithm 
that be run more and more aspect of their busi align 
with their brand and values. In addit to ensur that the 
output from the machine-learn system be accurate, for 
public relat and litig purposes, organ will need 
to be adept at review the assumpt built into machin 
system to prevent the system from exhibit implicit racial 
and gender bias. 

especi in a futur of work chase people, organ 
will need to test and reset the assumpt employe have 
around the valu of work. they’ll need to understand how the 
valu of work in people’ life be changing, and to ass what 
will be their anticip return on time spent working. digit 
nativ will expect to appli their individu skill around digit 
conduct at work, and will view job a opportun to learn 
and make a meaning impact. organ that support 
those aspir will attract the next decade’ top talent. 

finally, a more autom machine-learn system partner 
with workers, find way to creat spontan and novel 
approach to accomplish task will help inspir creativ 
in the workplace. implement structur and process 
that incent worker to deviat from algorithm system will 
reduc the likelihood that system be run on histor or 
outdat assumptions, and impos attract challeng for the 
workforc to outsmart the machines. 

organiz skill & trait 

• business-driven security: 
emb secur a a busi strategi 

• elimin latencies: 
exceed consum expect for real-tim deliveri 

• algorithm branding: 
ensur algorithm align with organiz valu 

• diversifi valu of work: 
reset assumpt behind the valu of work 

• inspir innovation: 
incent worker to deviat from machine-learn system 

organ 



the next era of human-machin partnership 21 

both individu and organ be grappl with the digit and workforc transform 
underway today. As these transform be inform and influenc by emerg technolog 
over the next decade, peopl will develop new and deeper relationship and new depend on 
machines, at home and in the workplace. If we start to approach the next decad a one in which 
partnership between human and machin transcend our limit and build on our strengths, 
we can begin to creat a more favor futur for everyone. 

jordan howard, social good strategist and execut 
director of genynot, see tremend promis for the futur 
of human-machin partnerships: “mani of the complex issu 
face societi today be root in waste, inefficiency, and 
simpli not know stuff, like how to stop certain gene from 
mutating. what if we could solv these problem by pair up 
more close with machin and use the mass of data they 
provid to make breakthrough at speed? As a team, we can 
aim higher, dream bigger, and accomplish more.” 

liam quinn, dell chief technolog officer, liken the emerg 
technolog of today to the roll-out of electr 100 year ago. 
quinn argu that we no longer fixat on the “mechanics” or 
the “wonders” of electricity, yet it underpin almost everyth 

we do in our lives. similarly, quinn argues, in the 2030s, today’ 
emerg technolog will underpin our daili lives. As quinn 
provokes, “imagin the creativ and outlook that’ possibl 
from the vantag point these tool will provide: In 2030, it will 
be less about the wonder of the tool itself and more about 
what that tool can do.”18 

By 2030, we will no longer rever the technolog that be 
emerg today. they will have long disappear into the 
background condit of everyday life. If we engag in the hard 
work of empow human-machin partnership to succeed, 
their impact on societi will enrich u all. 

conclusion: human-machin 
partnership in 2030 



the next era of human-machin partnership 23 

1. oliv burkeman, “forti year of the internet: how the world 
chang forever” in the guardian (octob 23, 2009) 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2009/oct/23/inter- 
net-40-history-arpanet 

2. expert workshop held at institut for the futur in palo alto, 
california on march 23, 2107. 

3. heather stewart, “robot revolution: rise of ‘thinking’ machin 
could exacerb inequality,” the guardian (novemb 4, 2015) 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/05/robot-revo- 
lution-rise-machines-could-displace-third-of-uk-job 

4. pricewaterhousecoopers, “will robot steal our jobs?: the 
potenti impact of autom on the UK and other major 
economies.” (march 2017) http://www.pwc.co.uk/economic- 
services/ukeo/pwcukeo-section-4-automation-march-2017-v2.pdf 

5. bank of america merril lynch, “themat investing: robot 
revolution—glob robot & AI primer.” (decemb 16, 2015) 
https://www.bofaml.com/content/dam/boamlimages/documents/ 
pdfs/robotics_and_ai_condensed_primer.pdf 

6. Om malik, “the hype-and hope- of artifici intelligence” in the 
new yorker (august 26, 2016) http://www.newyorker.com/business/ 
currency/the-hype-and-hope-of-artificial-intellig 

7. digi-capital, “augmented/virtu realiti revenu forecast revis 
to hit $120b by 2020” (januari 2016) http://www.digi-capital.com/ 
news/2016/01/augmentedvirtual-reality-revenue-forecast- 
revised-to-hit-120-billion-by-2020/#.wr3mdlpyub8 

8. idg enterprise, 2016 cloud comput survey, (nov 1, 2016) 
https://www.idgenterprise.com/resource/research/2016-idg- 
enterprise-cloud-computing-survey/ 

9. origin analysi conduct by iftf research director devin fidler 
in march 2017. 

10. tomio geron, “elder care get an upgrade,” in wall street journal 
(februari 20, 2017) https://www.wsj.com/articles/elder-care-gets- 
an-upgrade-1487646120 

11. tamara pupic, “entrepreneur of the week: khalid alkhudair, 
founder of glowork” in arabianbusiness.com (februari 28, 2016) 
http://www.arabianbusiness.com/entrepreneur-of-week-khalid- 
alkhudair-founder-of-glowork-623010.html 

12. brian rashid, “the rise of the freelanc economy,” forbes, 
(januari 26, 2016) www.forbes.com/sites/brianrashid/2016/01/26/ 
the-rise-of-the-freelancer-economy/#6033ad94379a. rashid notes, 
“thi do not mean they be all full-tim freelancers, but one of 
everi two worker will be freelanc in some capacity.” 

13. u.s. depart of labor, futurework: trend and challeng for 
work in the 21st century. (septemb 1999) https://www.dol.gov/ 
oasam/programs/history/herman/reports/futurework/report.htm 

14. amitt mahajan, “how augment realiti will put peopl back to 
work,” medium (april 5, 2017), https://medium.com/@amitt/how- 
augmented-reality-will-put-people-back-to-work-31f8bff10d53 

15. carri J. cai, philip J. guo, jame glass, and robert C. miller. 
2014. wait-learning: leverag convers dead time for 
second languag education. In chi ‘14 extend abstract on 
human factor in comput system (chi EA ‘14). acm, new 
york, ny, usa, 2239-2244. http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/90407 

16. brian mullins, panel, “emerg tech trends’ impact on futur 
society” at dell emc world (may 9, 2017). 

17. ramzan, zulfikar. phone interview by iftf. may 23, 2017. 

18. quinn, liam. phone interview by iftf. may 23, 2017. 

endnot 



201 hamilton avenu 
palo alto, CA 94301 
www.iftf.org 

composit graphic 

page 2 




