






































empow robot for ethic behavior: research have develop a concept call empower to help robot and human to work and live side-by-sid safe and effect -- sciencedaili 


follow all of sciencedaily' 

late research news and 

top scienc headlines! 

your sourc for the late research news break news: In total solar eclipse, moon Is front and center 

mobil follow subscrib 

scienc new from research organ 

date: 

source: 

summary: 

share: 

empow robot for ethic behavior 
research have develop a concept call empower to help robot 
and human to work and live side-by-sid safe and effect 

juli 18, 2017 

frontier 

scientist have develop a concept call empower to help robot to protect and 

serv humans, while keep themselv safe. rather than tri to make a machin 

understand complex ethic questions, the concept be base on robot alway seek 

to keep their option open, and do the same for the human around them. 

full stori 

scientist at the univers of hertfordshir in the 

UK have develop a concept call empower 

to help robot to protect and serv humans, while 

relat topic 

mind & brain 

brain-comput interfac 

most popular thi week 

space & time 

planet nine hypothesi support 
by new evid 

smallest-ev star discov by 
astronom 

nasa' juno spacecraft spot 
jupiter' great red spot 

one of the brightest galaxi ever 
discov 

matter & energi 

scientist design solar cell that captur 
nearli all energi of solar spectrum 

print email share 

empow robot for ethic behavior: research have develop a concept call empow... https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/07/170718103528.htm 

1 sur 5 21/07/2017 19:07 



keep themselv safe. 

robot be becom more common in our home and workplac 

and thi look set to continue. mani robot will have to interact 

with human in unpredict situations. for example, self-driv 

car need to keep their occup safe, while protect the car 

from damage. robot care for the elderli will need to adapt to 

complex situat and respond to their owners' needs. 

recently, thinker such a stephen hawk have warn about 

the potenti danger of artifici intelligence, and thi have spark 

public discussion. "public opinion seem to swing between enthu- 

siasm for progress and downplay ani risks, to outright fear," 

say daniel polani, a scientist involv in the research, which be 

recent publish in frontier in robot and ai. 

however, the concept of "intelligent" machin run amok and 

turn on their human creator be not new. In 1942, scienc fiction 

writer isaac asimov propos hi three law of robotics, which 

govern how robot should interact with humans. put simply, these 

law state that a robot should not harm a human, or allow a human 

to be harmed. the law also aim to ensur that robot obey order 

from humans, and protect their own existence, a long a thi 

doesn't caus harm to a human. 

the law be well-intentioned, but they be open to misinterpreta- 

tion, especi a robot don't understand nuanc and ambigu- 

ou human language. In fact, asimov' stori be full of exampl 

where robot misinterpret the spirit of the laws, with tragic con- 

sequences. 

one problem be that the concept of "harm" be complex, context- 

specif and be difficult to explain clearli to a robot. If a robot 

doesn't understand "harm," how can they avoid caus it? "we re- 

aliz that we could use differ perspect to creat 'good' ro- 

bot behavior, broadli in keep with asimov' laws," say 

christoph salge, anoth scientist involv in the study. 

the concept the team develop be call empowerment. rather 

languag acquisit 

social psycholog 

matter & energi 

robot research 

engin 

vehicl 

comput & math 

robot 

artifici intellig 

neural interfac 

scienc & societi 

disast plan 

bioethic 

sport 

strang & offbeat 

test a soft artifici heart 

air pollution: diesel Is now better 
than gas, emit fewer 
carbonac particul 

more than 8. 3 billion ton of 
plastic made: most ha now been 
discard 

comput & math 

No more queue at the ladies' room 

new transistor concept develop 

fold robots: No battery, No 
wire, No problem 

evid for the majorana fermion, 
a particl that' it own 
antiparticl 

space & time 

holograph imag could Be 
use to detect sign of life in 
space 

smallest particl and the vast 
of the univers connect 

empow robot for ethic behavior: research have develop a concept call empow... https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/07/170718103528.htm 

2 sur 5 21/07/2017 19:07 



than tri to make a machin understand complex ethic ques- 

tions, it be base on robot alway seek to keep their option 

open. "empower mean be in a state where you have the 

great potenti influenc on the world you can perceive," ex- 

plain salge. "so, for a simpl robot, thi might be get safe 

back to it power station, and not get stuck, which would limit 

it option for movement. for a more futuristic, human-lik robot 

thi would not just includ movement, but could incorpor a vari- 

eti of parameters, result in more human-lik drives." 

the team mathemat cod the empower concept, so 

that it can be adopt by a robot. while the research origin 

develop the empower concept in 2005, in a recent key de- 

velopment, they expand the concept so that the robot also 

seek to maintain a human' empowerment. "we want the robot 

to see the world through the eye of the human with which it inter- 

acts," explain polani. "keep the human safe consist of the ro- 

bot act to increas the human' own empowerment." 

"in a danger situation, the robot would tri to keep the human 

aliv and free from injury," say salge. "we don't want to be op- 

pressiv protect by robot to minim ani chanc of harm, we 

want to live in a world where robot maintain our empowerment." 

thi altruist empower concept could power robot that ad- 

here to the spirit of asimov' three laws, from self-driv cars, to 

robot butlers. "ultimately, I think that empower might form an 

import part of the overal ethic behaviour of robots," say 

salge. 

stori source: 

materi provid by frontier 

. note: content may be edit for style and length. 

journal reference: 

space sound wave around earth: 
electron whistl while they 
work? 

unusu galaxi in distant univers 

matter & energi 

new type of soft, grow robot 
creat 

evid for the majorana fermion, 
a particl that' it own 
antiparticl 

here' a tip: indent cement 
show uniqu properti 

toward 20-stori earthquake-saf 
build made from wood 

comput & math 

fold robots: No battery, No 
wire, No problem 

manipul electron spin 
without loss of inform 

No more queue at the ladies' room 

mobil control with facial 
gestur 

empow robot for ethic behavior: research have develop a concept call empow... https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/07/170718103528.htm 

3 sur 5 21/07/2017 19:07 



cite thi page: 

frontiers. "empow robot for ethic behavior: research 

have develop a concept call empower to help robot and 

human to work and live side-by-sid safe and effectively." sci- 

encedaily. sciencedaily, 18 juli 2017. <www.sciencedaily.com/re- 

leases/2017/07/170718103528.htm>. 

christoph salge, daniel polani. empower As replace- 

ment for the three law of robotics. frontier in robot 

and ai, 2017; 4 doi: 10.3389/frobt.2017.00025 

1. 

mla apa chicago 

relat stori 

for they know not what they do: studi on the robot of 
office, servic profess 

nov. 2, 2016 — robots, common in manufactur jobs, increas- 

ingli spread to offic professions. humanoid or human-lik robot 

alreadi perform task in hotels, in stores, and in restaurants. they 

cook, serve, or ... read more 

soft-bodi robots: actuat inspir by muscl 

june 1, 2016 — To make robot more cooper and have them 

perform task in close proxim to humans, they must be softer 

and safer. A new actuat gener movement similar to those 

of skelet muscl use ... read more 

carri a tabl togeth with a semi-coop 
robot 

june 19, 2015 — from a robot' perspective, human might be 

consid a nuisance: when robot and human have to work to- 

relat term 

humanoid robot 

industri robot 

robot surgeri 

nanorobot 

robot 

altruism 

bioethic 

narciss 

empow robot for ethic behavior: research have develop a concept call empow... https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/07/170718103528.htm 

4 sur 5 21/07/2017 19:07 



about thi site | editori staff | award & review | contribut | advertis | privaci polici | term of use 

copyright 2017 sciencedaili or by third parties, where indicated. all right control by their respect owners. 

content on thi websit be for inform only. It be not intend to provid medic or other profession advice. 

view express here do not necessarili reflect those of sciencedaily, it staff, it contributors, or it partners. 

gether, it often lead to problems. research want to teach ro- 

bot how to interact with ... read more 

collis with robots, without risk of injuri 

juli 8, 2014 — teamwork between human and robot will be the 

motto of the future. but robot may not injur human at all. when 

do contact caus an injury, though? research be explor 

thi for the first ... read more 

free subscript 

get the late scienc news with 

sciencedaily' free email 

newsletters, updat daili and 

weekly. Or view hourli updat 

newsfe in your rss reader: 

email newslett 

rss feed 

follow Us 

keep up to date with the late 

news from sciencedaili via social 

networks: 

facebook 

twitter 

google+ 

linkedin 

mobil app 

get the late news from 

sciencedaili via our free mobil 

apps, avail for download on 

the follow platforms: 

iphone/ipad 

android 

have feedback? 

tell u what you think of 

sciencedaili -- we welcom both 

posit and neg comments. 

have ani problem use the site? 

questions? 

leav feedback 

contact Us 

empow robot for ethic behavior: research have develop a concept call empow... https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/07/170718103528.htm 

5 sur 5 21/07/2017 19:07 


