






































exoskeleton debut at ford factori 


exoskeleton debut at ford factori 

charli osborn 

screen-shot-2018-08-07-at-09-54-41.jpg 
ford 

follow success trials, ford will now offer employe the use of exoskeleton to reduc the strain of 
factori work. 

despit the emerg of industri 4.0, smart factories, sensors, and data analytics, much of the heavy-duti 
oper of today' industri and manufactur still reli heavili on human input. 

over time, the physic demand of such work can caus injury, muscl stress, and accidents. 

however, ford hope that by augment our bodies, exoskeleton may be abl to reduc some of the strain. 

last year, the US automak begin trial at select factori that revolv around the use of the eskovest, an 
exoskeleton design by ekso bionics. 

the compani describ itself a a "lead develop of exoskeleton solut that amplifi human potenti 
by support or enhanc strength, endurance, and mobil across medical, industri and defens 
applications," and when it come to ford, strength, and endur be the top priorities. 

accord to ford, the firm' assembl line workforc lift their arm dure overhead task roughli one 
million time per year -- which, at that rate, result in substanti risk for fatigu and upper-bodi injuries. 

pursu new career height with 65 hour of train in salesforce, one of today' most in-demand skills. 

In order to combat the problem, ford task ekso bionic with develop an exoskeleton to reduc the risk 
of work-rel medic problems. 

the exoskeleton creat for the task elev worker' arm dure overhead tasks, and while allow 
wearer to move their arm freely, also provid up to 15 pound of life assist and support per arm. 

the high the wearer have to reach, the more support be offered. 

the exoskeleton can be adjust for user between 5 and 6.4 foot tall, and a the devic be mechanical, no 
batteri pack or heavi gear be required, keep the devic lightweight. 

techrepublic: 4 way wearabl can benefit your workforc 

ford pilot the eksovest in two US plant success and now plan to launch the exoskeleton in facil 
worldwide. 

As report by engadget, the eksovest will be offer to employe at 15 factories. 

see also: Is there a market for thi wearabl robot for skiers? 

while it be onli a total of 75 skeleton that be on offer, which will onli impact a small part of the assembl 
line, thi should reduc the physic strain felt by staff work on overhead tasks. 

A small project it may be, but it do show that ford be keen to reduc worker injuri -- and long term, thi 
might onli be the begin for the use of exoskeleton in factori globally. 

cnet: brace yourself: suitx industri exoskeleton amplifi human strength 

"our goal have alway be to keep the work environ safe and product for the hardwork men and 
woman we reli on across the globe," say bruce hettle, ford group vice president, manufacturing, and labor 
affairs. "invest in the late ergonom research, assembl improv and lift-assist technolog have 
help u design effici and safe assembl lines, while maintain high vehicl qualiti for our customers." 

previou and relat coverag 

exoskeleton debut at ford factori https://www.zdnet.com/article/ford-to-give-factory-employees-exoskeletons/ 

1 sur 2 13-08-18 à 18:51 



sarco form exoskeleton technic advisori group 
thi be the smartest robot compani in the world (and soon to be one of the most important) 
robot suit now have amazon echo integr 

exoskeleton debut at ford factori https://www.zdnet.com/article/ford-to-give-factory-employees-exoskeletons/ 

2 sur 2 13-08-18 à 18:51 


