






































faster big-data analysi with world-class pattern mine technolog 


faster big-data analysi with world-class pattern mine 
technolog 

faster big-data analysi with world-class pattern mine technolog 

- expect to be util in variou industri includ the financ and IT sector - 

A research team lead by professor min-soo kim from depart of inform and commun 
engin develop ‘gminer’ technolog that can analyz big data pattern at high speed. gminer 
technolog exhibit perform up to 1,000 time faster than the world’ current best pattern mine 
technology. 

fig 1. multipl asynchron gpu stream of gminer 

pattern mine technolog identifi all import pattern that appear repeatedli in the big data of variou 
field such a buy good at mega-marts, bank transactions, network packets, and social networks. thi 
technolog be wide use in variou industri for purpos such a determin the locat of product on 
mega-mart shelf or recommend credit card that match the usag pattern of consum of differ 
ages. 

the grow import of pattern mine have lead to the develop of thousand of pattern mine 
technolog over the past 20 years; however, due to the increas length of big data patterns, which 
increas the number of analyt pattern exponentially, exist mine technolog be hinder in 
their analysi of data of more than ten gigabyt (gb) becaus they fail to complet their analysi due to 
insuffici comput memori or take too much time. 

tradit pattern mine technolog first found medium-length pattern and store them in memory. 
when seek a pattern that be longer than medium-length, they use a method of find final pattern in 
comparison to a medium-length pattern that have be previous saved. 

fig 2. data flow of gminer use multipl gpu 

however, gminer technolog develop by the research team have succeed in fundament solv the 
problem of exist technolog by propos anti-intuit techniqu that combin the temporarili 
calcul medium-length pattern use the thousand of core on graphic process unit (gpu) to 
calcul the ultim length of patterns. 

gminer technolog complet solv the chronic problem of insuffici memori suffer by convent 
technolog by not store an exponenti number of medium-length pattern in memory. In addition, it 
solv the slow speed problem by stream data from the main memori to the gpu while simultan 
seek pattern use the high comput perform of the gpu. 

faster big-data analysi with world-class pattern mine technolog https://en.dgist.ac.kr/site/dgist_eng/menu/508.do?siteid=dgist_eng&sna... 

1 sur 2 09-07-18 à 21:28 



fig 3. speed-up ratio when use multipl gpu for gpu-bas method 

gminer technolog show analysi perform that be a minimum of 10 time to a maximum of 1,000 
time faster than convent distribut and parallel technolog that analyz data by use up to dozen 
of gener home comput that have a singl gpu per computer; thus, it can analyz big data on a larg 
scale than exist technologies. It also show excel expans perform that improv perform 
in proport to the number of gpus. 

professor kim said, “we have secur fundament technolog that can analyz big data pattern at high 
speed without ani problem in memori for big data accumul in a varieti of industries. By solv 
problem where pattern mine technolog be not properli appli to big data due to lack of memori and 
slow speed, thi new technolog can be util in help compani to make effici decis by analyz 
big data pattern in variou sector includ the finance, retail, it, and bio-rel sectors.” 

thi research outcom be publish in the may 9 issu of inform sciences, the most authorit 
intern journal in the field of inform science. 

for more information, pleas contact: 

professor min-soo kim 

depart of inform and commun engin 

daegu gyeongbuk institut of scienc and technolog (dgist) 

e-mail: mskim@dgist.ac.kr 

associ link 

research paper on journal of advanc health care materi 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2018.01.046 

journal refer 

kang-wook chon, min-soo kim, et al., “gminer: A fast gpu-bas frequent itemset mine method for 
large-scal data,” inform scienc may 2018. 

faster big-data analysi with world-class pattern mine technolog https://en.dgist.ac.kr/site/dgist_eng/menu/508.do?siteid=dgist_eng&sna... 

2 sur 2 09-07-18 à 21:28 


