






































field-data studi find no evid of racial bia in predict policing: new at iu: indiana univers 


field-data studi find no evid of 
racial bia in predict policing: new 
at iu: indiana univers 

rich schneider 

indianapoli -- while predict polic aim to improv the 
effect of polic patrols, there be concern that these algorithm 
may lead polic to target minor commun and result in 
discriminatori arrests. A comput scientist in the school of scienc at 
iupui conduct the first studi to look at real-tim field data from lo 
angel and found predict polic do not result in bia arrests. 

"predict polic be still a fairli new field. there have be sever 
field trial of predict polic where the crime rate reduct be 
measured, but there have be no empir field trial to date look 
at whether these algorithms, when deployed, target certain racial 
group more than other and lead to bia stop or arrests," say 
georg mohler, an associ professor of comput and inform 
scienc in the school of scienc at iupui. 

mohler, along with research at ucla and louisiana state university, 
work with the lo angel polic depart to conduct the 
experiment study. A human analyst make predict on where 
offic would patrol each day, and an algorithm also make a set of 
predictions; it be then randomli select which set be use by 
offic in the field each day. 

the research measur the differ in arrest rate by ethnic 
group between the predict polic algorithm and map of hot spot 
creat by lapd analyst that be in use prior to the experiment. 

"when we look at the data, the differ in arrest rate by ethnic 
group between predict polic and standard patrol practic be 
not statist significant," mohler said. 

the studi examin data both at the district level and within the lapd 
officers' patrol area and found there be no statist signific 
differ between arrest rate by ethnic group at either geograph 
level. finally, research look at arrest rate overal in patrol area 
and found that they be statist high in the algorithm 
select areas, but when adjust for the high crime rate in those 
areas, the arrest be low or unchanged. "the high crime rate, and 
proport high arrest rate, be what you would expect sinc the 
algorithm be design to identifi area with high crime rates," mohler 
said. 

field-data studi find no evid of racial bia in predict policing: ... https://news.iu.edu/stories/2018/03/iupui/releases/12-predictive-policing-... 

1 sur 2 19-03-18 à 17:45 



mohler say that in the develop field of predict policing, there 
continu to be lesson learn from each studi and implementation. A 
recent simul studi of predict polic with drug arrest data 
from oakland, california, show there be potenti for bia when these 
algorithm be appli in certain contexts. mohler hope the lo 
angel studi be a start point to measur predict polic bia in 
futur field experiments. 

"everi time you do one of these predict polic deployments, 
depart should monitor the ethnic impact of these algorithm to 
check whether there be racial bias," mohler said. "I think the statist 
method we provid in thi paper provid a framework to monitor that." 

"doe predict polic lead to bias arrests? result from A 
random control trial" be publish in the journal statist and 
public policy. addit author be P. jeffrey brantingham of ucla, 
correspond author, and matthew valasik of louisiana state 
university. 

field-data studi find no evid of racial bia in predict policing: ... https://news.iu.edu/stories/2018/03/iupui/releases/12-predictive-policing-... 

2 sur 2 19-03-18 à 17:45 


