












































focal versu distribut tempor cortex activ for speech sound categori assign 


focal versu distribut tempor cortex activ for 
speech sound categori assign 
sophi boutona,b,c,1, valérian chambona,d, rémi tyranda, adrian G. guggisberge, margitta seecke, sami karkarf, 
dimitri van de villeg,h, and anne-lis girauda 

adepart of fundament neuroscience, biotech campus, univers of geneva,1202 geneva, switzerland; bcentr de recherch de l′institut du 
cerveau et de la moell epinière, 75013 paris, france; ccentr de neuro-imageri de recherche, 75013 paris, france; dinstitut jean nicod, cnr umr 8129, 
institut d’étude de la cognition, école normal supérieure, pari scienc et lettr research university, 75005 paris, france; edepart of clinic 
neuroscience, univers of geneva – geneva univers hospitals, 1205 geneva, switzerland; flaboratoir de tribologi et dynamiqu de systèmes, école 
central de lyon, 69134 ecully, france; gcenter for neuroprosthetics, biotech campus, swiss feder institut of technology, 1202 geneva, switzerland; 
and hdepart of radiolog and medic informatics, biotech campus, univers of geneva, 1202 geneva, switzerland 

edit by nanci kopell, boston university, boston, ma, and approv decemb 29, 2017 (receiv for review august 29, 2017) 

percept and word can be decod from distribut neural activ 
measures. however, the exist of widespread represent 
might conflict with the more classic notion of hierarch 
process and effici coding, which be especi relev in 
speech processing. use fmri and magnetoencephalographi dur- 
ing syllabl identification, we show that sensori and decision 
activ coloc to a restrict part of the posterior superior 
tempor gyru (pstg). next, use intracort recordings, we 
demonstr that earli and focal neural activ in thi region 
distinguish correct from incorrect decis and can be machine- 
decod to classifi syllables. crucially, signific machin decod 
be possibl from neuron activ sampl across differ 
region of the tempor and frontal lobes, despit weak or absent 
sensori or decision-rel responses. these find show that 
speech-sound categor reli on an effici readout of focal 
pstg neural activity, while more distribut activ patterns, 
although classifi by machin learning, instead reflect collater 
process of sensori percept and decision. 

categor percept | speech sound | encod | decod | 
multivari pattern analysi 

the discoveri of spatial distribut cortic representations,exploit for “mind reading,” in all domain of cognit 
neurosci dure the past decad (1–5) rais fundament 
issu about the natur of neural cod in the human brain. 
these findings, show that the stimulu present in our envi- 
ronment or mental evok be repres in distribut 
neural activity, be lead scientist even to reconsid the no- 
tion of local comput units, such a canon microcircuit 
(6, 7). however, whether all the inform that be encod and 
decod in our brain contribut to our perceptu represen- 
tation and our decis remain an import issu in neuro- 
science. the relev of thi question be exemplifi by the 
extrem scatter and redund of word-mean represen- 
tation throughout the brain that be recent show use voxel- 
wide model of fmri data (8). decod model probe 
multidimension statist depend between experiment 
condit or stimulu featur and spatiotempor activ pat- 
tern distribut across voxels/neuron popul requir 
care interpret (9–11). distribut neural activ pattern 
could be take to indic either that the inform they 
contain be critic to cognit oper or simpli that they 
could be use a such, e.g., for stimulu categor (12). 
however, the sensit of decod model appli to neuro- 
physiolog data and the multidimension featur they reli on 
to give posit result do not necessarili parallel the capac of 
our brain to make use of these neural pattern and multidi- 
mension featur in specif task (11, 13–15). data-driven 
result aris from multivari decod model might lead 
u to conclud that spatial distribut activ pattern be use 
for perform cognit oper when in fact they might onli 

follow from these operations, reflect associ processes, or 
aris from process redundancy. thi concern be relev at ani 
scale, consid that the implicit assumpt behind multivar- 
iat decod method be that there be function mean in the 
geometri of the decod pattern, whether thi pattern be deco- 
ded across individu neuron or across voxel contain sever 
hundr thousand neurons. 
interpret broadli distribut spatial map for speech 

sound can be particularli difficult. unlik visual stimuli, whose 
ident reli heavili on spatial encoding, speech sound ident 
reli mainli on tempor encod (16, 17). despit the rele- 
vanc of hierarch tempor process in speech percept 
(18), wide cortex coverag with fmri and more recent with 
electrocorticographi (ecog) indic (i) that the origin 
acoust speech signal can be reliabl reconstruct from broadli 
distribut high-frequ neural activ sampl cross-region 
throughout the superior tempor lobe (19–21) and (ii) that local 
phonemic-ident inform in speech be poorli encod by 
tempor resolv neural activ (2) but be fine repres 
by distribut cortic pattern cover a signific portion 
of the left tempor lobe (1). becaus optim decod occur 
when redund inform from contigu but function 
distinct territori be pool together, assign perceptu rele- 
vanc to such large-scal represent be ultim tricki and 

signific 

when listen to speech, phonem be repres in a dis- 
tribut fashion in our tempor and prefront cortices. how 
these represent be select in a phonem decis con- 
text, and in particular whether distribut or focal neural in- 
format be requir for explicit phonem recognition, be 
unclear. We hypothes that focal and earli neural encod of 
acoust signal be suffici inform to access speech sound 
represent and permit phonem recognition. We test thi 
hypothesi by combin a simpl speech-phonem categoriza- 
tion task with univari and multivari analysi of fmri, 
magnetoencephalography, intracortical, and clinic data. We 
show that neural inform avail focal in the tempor 
cortex prior to decision-rel neural activ be specif enough 
to account for human phonem identification. 

author contributions: s.b. and a.-l.g. design research; s.b. perform research; s.b., 
v.c., r.t., and a.-l.g. contribut new reagents/analyt tools; s.b., v.c., r.t., and a.-l.g. 
analyz data; s.b., v.c., r.t., a.g.g., m.s., s.k., d.v.d.v., and a.-l.g. write the paper; 
a.g.g. and m.s. recruit the patients; and s.k. design the stimuli. 

the author declar no conflict of interest. 

thi articl be a pna direct submission. 

thi open access articl be distribut under creativ common attribution-noncommercial- 
noderiv licens 4.0 (cc by-nc-nd). 
1to whom correspond should be addressed. email: sophie.l.bouton@gmail.com. 

thi articl contain support inform onlin at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10. 
1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplemental. 

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714279115 pna earli edit | 1 of 10 

N 
EU 

RO 
SC 

IE 
N 
CE 

PN 
A 
S 
PL 

U 
S 

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1073/pnas.1714279115&domain=pdf&date_stamp=2018-01-23 
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 
mailto:sophie.l.bouton@gmail.com 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714279115 


might conflict with the notion that speech sound be first spectro- 
tempor encod in auditori cortex befor be more abstractli 
recod in downstream area (22). accordingly, focal lesion of the 
tempor lobe can select impair differ speech-percept 
process (23), and recent studi in monkey even show that au- 
ditori decision-mak causal reli on focal auditori cortex 
activ (24). 
listen to speech have long be know to elicit brain activ 

across both tempor and frontal cortex (25). whether thi ac- 
tiviti reflect the use of distribut represent of phonem 
a probe with decod model or focal and select hierarchi- 
cal process a probe with encod model be incomplet 
understood. It be question whether all neural activ that 
contribut to spatial distribut patterns, with their specif 
geometry, reflect a neural code use to perform specif cognit 
oper (9, 11, 13), i.e., assign a speech sound to a category, 
or multiple/redund code that be differenti use depend- 
ing on specif task and cognit operations. In other words, 
although multivari pattern analysi and model-bas decod 
techniqu be promis in translat applications, for instanc 
to decod inner speech in aphas patient (26), their interpreta- 
tion in cognit neurosci depend on the neurophysiolog 
relev of the model appli for decod (27). for instance, 
demonstr that a particular stimulu attribut or categori can 
be decod from region neuron activ do not impli that 
the region be perform categor processing. In summary, there 
be a conceptu discontinu between machin and brain decod 
of neuron activity. As an extrem example, demonstr that 
phonem could be classifi use a multivari machine- 
learn scheme appli to primari sensori affer from the 
ear would not mean that the brain have yet decod these signal 
but onli that there is, by definition, suffici inform in thi 
auditori input to support subsequ hierarch decoding. 
use a combin of behavioral, fmri, magnetoence- 

phalographi (meg), and ecog data, we attempt to clarifi thi 
issu by assess the abil of a classifi to decod the stimulu 
categori from neuron respons at variou level in the auditori 
hierarchi and the abil of a linear model to estim from neural 
respons the perceptu process in a paradigm for assign 
speech sound to categories. We found that the assign of 
speech sound to categori reli on focal neural activ pre- 
sent in a circumscrib part of the auditori hierarchy, at specif 
peristimulu times, which be support by the observ that 
the task could not be perform in a patient with a select lesion 
of thi circumscrib region. nevertheless, multivari machin 
decod return posit result from a larg brain network 
includ region where no stimulus-rel evok activ could 
be detected, a find that, in isolation, could suggest that categori 
assign involv a distribut pattern of activity. 

result 
We first explor explicit phonem recognit use a simpl 
syllable-categor task and measur global neural activ 
with fmri and meg in 16 and 31 healthi volunteers, re- 
spectiv (method and SI text). the subject have to decid 
which syllabl they heard in a /ba/ /da/ continuum in which the 
onset valu of the second formant (f2) and the F2 slope linearli 
covari in six step (fig. 1a). these two first experi serv 
to delin at the whole-brain level those brain region that 
be sensit to (i) linear variat of F2 and (ii) perceptu 
decision effort a assess use behavior-bas neg d′ 
valu (figs. 1B and 2a) (method and SI text). critically, be- 
caus the slope of the second formant be steeper for the /da/ than 
for the /ba/ phoneme, we expect the /da/ stimulu to activ a 
larg cortic surfac than the /ba/ stimulu and henc to be 
associ with a strong blood oxygen level-depend 
(bold) effect (si text). both experi converg to show 
that F2 variat be specif track by neural activ in the 
right posterior superior tempor gyru (pstg), while perceptu 
decision effort involv sever region of the bilater inferior 
prefront and posterior temporo/pariet cortex and the right 

anterior tempor pole (figs. 1C and 2B and fig. s2d). these 
activations, in particular the acoust encod of F2 variations, 
remain focal even at a lenient statist threshold (fig. s1). 
the spatial select of the acoust track of F2 be con- 
firm by a second fmri studi in which particip have to 
decid whether they heard /da/ or /ta/. In thi case the morph 
acoust cue be no longer spectral (f2) but tempor (voice- 
onset time, vot). We found that thi acoust cue be encod 
in a restrict region of the left superior tempor gyru (stg) 
and superior tempor sulcu (sts) (si text and fig. s2). In 
short, the right pstg be recruit for encod the slope of the 
second formant in the ba–da continuum, and the left stg/st 
be recruit for encod the durat of the conson part in 
the da–ta continuum, reflect the hemispher domin for 
tempor vs. spectral acoust process (28). 
We use dynam sourc model of the meg data to ex- 

plore the dynam of acoust encod and perceptu decision. 
We found neural correl of F2 paramet encod 120 m 
post stimulu onset in the right pstg. auditori perceptu 
decision-rel activ appear in thi region at 165 m and 
co-occur with a second peak of F2 encod activ at 175 m 
(fig. 2b). In addit to the spectral respons profil within the 
right pstg and left prefront cortex, a granger causal (gc) 
analysi across the two area show that neural activ relat 
to F2 and neg d′ (−d′) correspond to bottom-up encod 
and top-down decod activity, respectively. both analysi be 
associ with neural activ in the high-gamma band for 
F2 variat and in the beta band for −d′, confirm the gener 
implic of these two frequenc rang in bottom-up and top- 
down process (fig. 2c) (29–31). here, we relat decision 
effort with the top-down process, in line with a predict cod 

fig. 1. fmri results. (a) spectrogram of the stimulu continuum between 
syllabl /ba/ and /da/, synthes with a linear increas in f2-paramet 
(1,650:100:2,150 hz). full spectrogram at the extrem of the continuum 
repres /ba/ (left) and /da/ (right) prototyp syllables. spectrogram in the 
middl be center on the F2 parameters. (b) valu for F2 paramet 
(iblue; left), averag d′ (red; center), and percent of syllabl identifi a 
/ba/ (gray; right). data be show a mean ± sem. (c) result of the re- 
gression analysis. (left) percent signal chang in the right pstg. (center, 
right hemisphere) spatial local of F2 paramet for neural encod 
(blue) and d′ (red) in the fmri bold signal, express a beta coefficients. 
signific cluster be found in the right pstg (peak mni coordinates, x, y, 
z = 42, −34, 7, T = 3.21) for the F2 track and in left posterior temporo- 
pariet (x, y, z = −51, −28, 16, T = 4.41) and bilater inferior prefront (x, y, 
z = 45, 17, −5, T = 5.26; x, y, z = −48, 8, 22, T = 5.29) cortex for auditori 
perceptu decision, d′). imag be present at a whole-brain threshold of 
P < 0.001. (right) percent signal chang in the left inferior prefront cortex. 
the bold signal increas with F2 paramet in the right pstg and with 
auditori perceptu decis load in the left inferior prefront region. 

2 of 10 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714279115 bouton et al. 

http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714279115 


view of speech process (32, 33), wherebi the more ambigu 
the acoust input, the strong be the top-down predictions. 
As top-down and bottom-up signal be thought to be predomi- 
nantli associ with neural activ in the beta and gamma band, 
respectively, we probe the domin frequenc of informa- 
tion transfer between the inferior frontal gyru (ifg) and pstg 
use gc. our result confirm that beta activ domin from 
the ifg to the stg and that gamma activ domin in the 
other direct (29, 31, 34, 35). the meg find thu support the 
straightforward scenario in which phonem categor decis 
could aris from a rather focal readout of the region that encod 
the critic sensori cue (f2) by prefront region (36–38). 
have establish the global represent valid of the 

region encod the sensori featur of interest (f2 variations), 
we then sought to examin the respons of these region at a 
finer-grain scale use invas electrophysiology. To maxim 
signal-to-nois ratio and spatial specif in the explor of 
coincid neural respons to F2 and to auditori perceptu 
decision, we acquir intracort eeg (i-eeg) data in three 
epilept patient who togeth have 14 electrod shaft through- 

out the right tempor lobe (70 contacts). among the electrod 
shafts, one penetr the right tempor cortex through 
heschl’ gyru (fig. 3b). the deepest contact of thi auditori 
shaft strictli coloc with the region that fmri detect for 
F2 variat tracking. the patient perform the same syllable- 
categor experi on a ba/da/ga continuum in which the 
onli chang acoust cue be the F2 paramet (fig. 3a). 
behavior result show a good detect of ba and da and a 
slightli less frequent detect of ga (fig. 3c). strong evok 
respons to syllabl be present onli in the auditori shaft and 
be more marked/consist in it two deepest contact (fig. 
3d, top row); the respons be weak to nonexist elsewher 
(fig. 4a, color plots). signific F2 track be consist 
detect in all auditori contact (methods), with strong and 
structur effect in the two deepest one (fig. 3d, middl row). 
fulli consist with the meg results, F2 valu be encod 
by broadband gamma activ (40–110 hz) from about 150 m 
poststimulu onset onward, i.e., 50 m after F2 appear in the 
acoust signal. structur and strong neural activ relat to 
F2 track be not observ in ani of the other contact of the 
same patient (patient 1) (fig. s5). these data suggest that the 

fig. 2. meg results. (a) valu for F2 paramet (blue, left), averag d′ 
(red, center), and percent of syllabl identifi as/ba/ (gray, right); data be 
show a mean ± sem. (b, right-hemisphere) dynam spatial local of 
the neural encod of F2 (blue) and d′ (red) in meg signals, express a 
beta coefficients. onli the bootstrap P = 0.05 signific threshold 
(bonferroni-corrected) activ be represented. the right pstg (in- 
dicat by black arrows) be first activ at 95–120 m for encod 
F2 paramet and then be reactiv for phonem decis at ∼165 ms. 
(c, upper) spectral profil of beta coeffici from regress between 
F2 valu and neural respons in the right pstg (left), and between −d′ 
valu and neural respons in the left inferior prefront area (right). F2 be 
dominantli track by gamma and high-gamma activity, wherea decision 
activ be express in the low beta band. thick black line indic signif- 
icant beta coeffici at P < 0.05 (bonferroni-corrected). (lower) GC result 
between the right pstg and the left ifg. thick black line indic signific 
granger coeffici at P < 0.05 (bonferroni-corrected). shade gray area 
highlight the correspond between beta coeffici and GC peaks: high- 
gamma band for bottom-up activ from the right pstg to the left ifg (left); 
beta band for top-down activ from the left ifg to the right pstg (right). 

fig. 3. i-eeg result in patient 1. (a) spectrogram of /ba/, /da/, and /ga/ 
prototyp stimulu synthes with linear parametr F2 parameters. (b) lo- 
cation of i-eeg contact in patient 1. the auditori shaft label shaft 
1 penetr the right pstg and heschl’ gyrus. the patient have five other 
shaft distribut in the right tempor lobe. bipolar montag from adja- 
cent contact be show in the bottom right figure. (c) percentag of syl- 
labl identif for each categori for the three patients. the shade 
zone indic the sem. the first 20 stimulu be categor a /ba/, the next 
13 stimulu be categor a /da/, and the last 11 stimulu be categor 
a /ga/. (d, top) evok activity, averag across stimuli, on each bipolar 
montag from the deepest contact (number 1) to the most extern contact 
(number 5) in the auditori shaft (shaft 1). (middle) time–frequ repre- 
sentat of beta coeffici from the regress of F2 valu against evok 
activ on each contact of the auditori shaft. signific F2 track be 
found in all contact of the auditori shaft, with strong effect in the two 
deepest contacts. (bottom) time–frequ represent of beta coeffi- 
cient from regress of d′ valu against evok activ on each contact of 
the auditori shaft. decision effect be signific on the third auditori 
contact about 200 m poststimulu onset in the beta band. the vertic dash 
line indic stimulu onset. the horizont dash line indic a chang in 
the scale of the oscillatori power for each time point and each frequency, 
with a 0.5-hz resolut below 20 Hz and a 1-hz resolut abov 20 hz. black 
contour indic signific t test at q < 0.05 (fdr correction). 

bouton et al. pna earli edit | 3 of 10 

N 
EU 

RO 
SC 

IE 
N 
CE 

PN 
A 
S 
PL 

U 
S 

http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 


encod paramet of the discrimin acoust cue be avail- 
abl in the right pstg for syllabl recognition, confirm the 
spatial select for F2 paramet encod in thi region. 
decision effect be global weak in i-eeg signal but 

be signific in the third auditori contact about 200 m 
poststimulu onset in the beta band, in agreement with the meg 
results, and in the deepest auditori contact about 350 m post- 
stimulu onset in the gamma band (fig. 3d, bottom row). be- 
caus both fmri and meg show correl of decision 
effort at sever other locat in the frontal and tempor lobe, 
we broaden the analysi in thi patient to all contact of each 
shaft (fig. s6). perceptu decision-rel effect be weak, 
sporadic, and inconsistent. they be signific befor 500 m 
poststimulu at onli two other locat outsid heschl’ gyrus: 
in the right inferior prefront cortex (shaft 6, contact 1; con- 
sistent with fmri) (fig. 1c) and in the anterior tempor lobe 
(shaft 4, contact 4; consist with meg) (fig. 2b). 
We then sought to address whether focal neural activ could 

afford syllabl categorization. In line with previou find 
base on ecog signal (1, 2), local evok activ from one 
contact be suffici discrimin to permit syllabl catego- 
rizat use a machine-learn algorithm (maximum correla- 
tion coeffici classifier; see methods). decod be possibl 
from all individu auditori contact but work best from the 
deepest one (fig. 4A and fig. s9a). within the other electrod 
shafts, univari decod base on single-contact inform 
be never possible. however, signific multivari decod 
from pool all contact in each shaft be signific for shaft 
1, 2, 3, 4, and 6, even though it includ nonrespons contacts. 
reciprocally, multivari decod be not possibl in the 
tempor pole shaft (shaft 5), even though we detect signifi- 
cant perceptu decision-rel neural activ in thi region 
with fmri and meg. 

We subsequ address the key question whether the in- 
format use by the classifi correspond to that use in the 
human decision process. We examin whether there be a 
tempor correspond between the dynam of decoding, a 
assess by time-resolv classif (39, 40), and the presenc 
of time–frequ neural cue that inform the subject’ per- 
ceptual decision. for thi analysis, to ensur the independ of 
the analyz dataset (si text), we no longer probe the decision 
effort (the search for information, −d′) but the decision out- 
come. We approxim the neural cue that be critic to the 
decision outcom by the differ in the time–frequ re- 
spons of correctli and incorrectli recogn prototyp syllables. 
the correct-minus-incorrect contrast indic the part of the 
neural signal that, if missing, be associ with an erron 
perceptu decision. note that thi contrast matches, a close a 
possible, the output of the maximum-correl coeffici clas- 
sifier, which test the extent to which a linear associ can 
correctli predict syllabl from neural activity. 
signific time–frequ correl of correct classif 

be found onli in the three deepest contact of the auditori 
cortic shaft (fig. s7); they be sporad and inconsist 
elsewher (red frame in fig. S7 show signific activ for t < 
500 ms). In the deepest auditori contact (contact 1 on shaft 1), 
where both F2 track and univari classif be maxi- 
mal (fig. 3 and fig. s8), cue associ with correct perceptu 
decis be present a earli a 150 ms, i.e., befor the first 
signific decod peak at 200 m (fig. 4B and figs. S6 and 
s9b). thi import find show that within 150 m the right 
pstg have encod enough inform about F2 onset fre- 
quenci and slope to inform correct syllabl recognit by the 
subject and that thi inform could be exploit by the 
classifi to distinguish across syllabl (discussion). 

fig. 4. decod in patient 1. (a, right hemisphere) color panel show time–frequ represent of evok activ on each shaft. A strong evok 
respons to syllabl be present onli in the auditori shaft. bar graph show neural decod through univari and multivari classifiers. histogram bar 
number from 1–5 show the univari classifi result base on the activ from each contact of each shaft. the bar at the far right (“all”) show the mul- 
tivari classifi result base on multidimension inform from all contact of each shaft. star abov the black bar signal signific classif accuraci 
for specif contact within each electrod shaft (q < 0.05, fdr-corrected). univari classif be possibl from all auditori contact of shaft 1 overlap 
fmri F2 paramet activ (blue-shad area) but work best in the deepest one. univari classif fail everywher except for these auditori 
contacts, wherea syllabl decod work abov chanc use the multivari approach in shaft 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6. (b, bottom) time–frequ differ 
between correct-minus-incorrect classif comput on contact 1 of shaft 1. black border indic signific differ in neural activ between correct 
and incorrect classif scores, in comparison with a zero-mean normal distribut at q < 0.05, fdr-corrected. (top to bottom) tempor relationship between 
the time cours of machin decod from the deepest auditori contact (top, black line), mean univari classif from all auditori contact (top, gray line), 
and the time–frequ cue use by the subject to make a correct perceptu decis (differ in the time–frequ respons between correctli and in- 
correctli recogn syllables, bottom). the thick gray line show signific result for each time point (signific decod accuracy, q < 0.05, fdr-corrected). 
(middle) cross-correl coeffici between univari decod accuraci and signific correct-minus-incorrect time–frequ clusters. signific effect 
be found in the 60- to 80-hz high-gamma band. the horizont black line indic signific cross-correl coeffici at P < 0.05 (bonferroni-corrected). 

4 of 10 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714279115 bouton et al. 

http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714279115 


critically, the tempor coincid between neural correl 
of respons correct and machin decod (fig. 4b) be onli 
partial. It be fairli good for the first two signific decod 
peak (<200 ms) of both singl auditori contact decod and 
mean univari decod across all auditori contact but be 
poor for the late (and strongest) peak. the first two decod 
peak coincid precis with transient high-gamma activ in 
the 60- to 80-hz rang (signific zero-lag cross-correlation) 
(fig. 4b), in line with the observ make with meg (fig. 2) 
that F2 be specif encod by neural activ in thi fre- 
quenci rang and that 60- to 80-hz activ preced decision 
activ in the left ifg. however, the third decod peak have no 
match time–frequ event in the correct vs. incorrect activ 
profil (fig. 4b). these observ indic that the classifi do 
not systemat captur those neural cue that inform the 
subject’ decision. thus, machin classif and human sub- 
ject do not exploit the same cue locally. presumably, the out- 
come of the mean univari classifi reflect distribut 
inform that be no longer relev for or assimil into 
neuron decis variables. the strong local decod peak 
occur at 370 ms, i.e., more than 250 m late than the first 
correct effect and about 100 m after the last one and like 
reflect postdecision choice-correl neural activity. 
So far, the result indic that the phonem decis be 

inform by focal earli neural activ (<200 ms) that encod 
F2 in sustain multifrequ oscillatori activ (fig. 2). 
however, distribut subthreshold neural activ not detect 
by convent (univariate) analysi of fmri, meg, and 
intracort eeg data also might contribut to syllable-ident 
encoding. We therefor address whether decod be possi- 
ble even from contact where there be no detect F2 and 
from perceptu decision-rel activ (figs. S5 and s6). We 
broaden the analysi to the 14 shaft of the three patients, 
includ two addit patient who have electrod shaft over 
the right tempor lobe (n = 14), and perform time-resolv 
multivari decod from all cortic contact (n = 36). sig- 
nific decod be found at 250, 300, and 600 ms, show 
that syllabl could be decod from broadli distribut activ 
(fig. 5). To address whether the distribut pattern of activ 
be driven by local auditori activity, we perform the same 

analysi without the contribut of the auditori shaft of patient 
1. earli classif (<300 ms) drop below statist sig- 
nificance, but the late classif peak at 600 m remain 
unaffect (fig. 5). thi result demonstr that decod 
remain possibl from cortic contact that show neither f2- 
nor auditori perceptu decision-rel activity. We even 
obtain signific late decod when deep structures, such a 
the amygdala and the hippocampus, be includ in the mul- 
tivari analysi (n = 70 contacts). As each penetr shaft, 
except the auditori one, span function differ territo- 
ries, from the cortex to deeper structures, these find show 
that the possibl of decod neural activ in a multivari 
approach do not allow one to conclud that the region sam- 
plead for decod amount to a meaning neuron represen- 
tation, defin oper in term of a correct perceptu 
categorization. overall, classif analysi from the i-eeg 
data confirm the spatial select of the earli critic in- 
format involv in ba/da/ga syllabl categorization. they also 
show that syllabl classif be possibl from distribut 
activ (figs. 4 and 5) that occur late than the perceptu 
decision-rel effects, a detect with both meg and i-eeg. 
sinc the decod of i-eeg return posit result when 

contact in which no signific neural activ could be detect 
be pool together, we sought to explor the spatial distribut 
of /ba/ and /da/ categori decod use the meg dataset. the 
idea be to determin whether whole-brain decod would be 
restrict to region that show statist signific activa- 
tion with all three approaches, meg (fig. 2), fmri (fig. 1), and 
i-eeg (figs. S5 and s6), or would also be possibl in region that 
do not critic particip in the task. thi analysi be expect 
to provid time-resolv inform to apprais whether decod 
reflect noncrit process downstream of sensori encod and 
earli decision steps. such a find would concur with the i-eeg 
result suggest that decod be possibl from brain region that 
be onli collater involv in the cognit process at stake. 
use whole-brain meg sensor data and a time-resolv 

multivari learn algorithm (maximum correl coeffi- 
cient classifier) (methods) (41), we found that speech sound 
categori could be decod from veri earli brain respons in a 
focal region of the right pstg (fig. 6). when we focu our 

fig. 5. decod in all patients. time cours of the decod accuraci from multivari pattern classif with all shaft (top) and without the auditori 
shaft of patient 1 (middle). earli classif drop below statist significance, while the late classif peak at 600 m remain unaffected. 
(bottom, right hemisphere) locat of shaft (n = 14) from which neural activ be record dure syllabl identif (three patients, fixed-effect 
model). color dot show cluster-level signific from q > 0.10 to q < 0.01 (q-fdr corrected) multivari classif perform on all shafts. dot size be 
proport to q. signific classif be observ at 250, 300, and 600 ms, show that syllabl could be decod from broadli distribut activity. 
At 300 ms, P1 refer to patient 1, and P2 refer to patient 2. 

bouton et al. pna earli edit | 5 of 10 

N 
EU 

RO 
SC 

IE 
N 
CE 

PN 
A 
S 
PL 

U 
S 

http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 


analysi on those sensor that contain signific inform 
about syllabl ident (methods), we found that the activ 
record by the sensor mag 1331 could be categor a earli 
a 100 ms, with up to 78% accuraci (t = 13.01, q < 0.001, cohen’ 
d = 4.7). critically, syllabl ident could also be decod at 
late time points, first at 220 m on the sensor mag 2011 and 
then at 350 m on the sensor mag 0211, with score reach 
63% accuraci (t = 7.17, q < 0.001, cohen’ d = 2.5) and 58% 
accuraci (t = 6.37, P < 0.001, cohen’ d = 2.2), respectively. 
correspond sourc analysi then reveal that the decod 
at 220 m poststimulu onset aros from the left stg and sts, 
two region that be not primarili respons to acoust cue 
track and perceptu decis (fig. 2). sourc analysi further 
show that the decod at 350 m aros from the left ifg and 
thu correspond to late decision effects. together, these 
result show that, while decod be most accur in the region 
that critic encod the acoust inform (the right pstg), 
it be also subsequ possibl from noisier activ in a broad 
left-later network that contain associ inform 
about the select syllable. interestingly, signific decod 
be see again in the right pstg at 500 m poststimulu onset 
with veri high accuraci (89%, t = 15.10, q < 0.001, cohen’ d = 
5.5). thi suggest that inform propag occur across 
the whole languag network between 100 and 500 m contribut 
to improv the qualiti of the categor represent at a 
postdecision stage. 

discuss 
In thi seri of studies, we address whether human listeners’ 
perceptu decis about the ident of speech sound aros 
from distribut represent (42) or whether, follow more 
close the principl of hierarch processing, syllabl cate- 
goriz be inform by the effici readout of a restrict 
cortic region that contain limit but key neural information, 
a recent show in monkey (24). our data converg to show 
that correct decis about speech-sound ident be in- 
form by local and time-limit inform (<300 ms) present 

in the right pstg. even though phonem contrast be most 
often associ with activ of the left stg (43), the right 
stg perform low-level spectral-bas acoust process that be 
relev for speech decod (44, 45) and categor (46, 47). 
note that the right specif of speech-rel oper can 
easili be miss when acoust process be not explicitli or- 
thogon from decision-rel neural activ (48). moreover, 
hemispher domin in speech process depend heavili on 
the task. here, subject be forc to process a singl cue 
(spectral or temporal) to categor ambigu signals, which do 
not happen under natur listen condit in which contextu 
inform and redund acoust cue be available. our find- 
ing confirm that spectral- and time-bas analysi of speech 
sound involv the right and left stg, respect (fig. 1 and fig. 
s8). that we observ tonotop encod of F2 in a region 
contigu to, rather than within, right heschl’ gyru presum 
reflect that the frequenc rang span by F2 be rather limit 
and more extens process in a region special for vocal 
formant (49). our find also confirm that in acoust 
challeng situat such a those use in the current experi- 
mental design, the left ifg be mobil (50) and interact with the 
tempor cortex in sequenti loop of bottom-up and top-down 
process (48, 51–53). importantly, our fmri and meg result 
conjointli show that the focal readout of sensori encod region 
by prefront region account for the decis variabl rel 
to the perceptu state and that the magnitud of neural activ 
associ with sensori process depend on the discrep 
between heard and expect signal (figs. 1C and 2c) (54, 55). 
whether stimulu ident be retriev from focal neural ac- 

tiviti or from distribut activ pattern be a fundament issu 
in neural cod theory. our meg and i-eeg decod result 
both show that the right pstg be critic for perceptu decisions, 
while distribut activ across the frontal and tempor 
cortex reflect the reus of sensori inform for higher-level 
operations, such a extract of meaning, audiovisu integra- 
tion, and so forth. It have repeatedli be observ that behavior 
be explain a well by take the activ of one or a limit set of 
neuron a it be by consid a large-scal popul (56, 57). 
thi puzzl observ be back up by comput model 
show that pool togeth inform from more neuron 
do not improv behavior sensitivity. thi could reflect the 
fact that neuron respons be strongli correl both in- 
trinsic by neural nois and by stimuli, so that the inform 
contain in a neural popul satur a the number of 
neuron increas (58, 59). recently, a combin of experi- 
mental and theoret data suggest that in most case behavior 
be best explain by optim readout of a limit set of neuron 
(60). the author then conclud that the neural code be re- 
dundant and that some area be decod nearli optim while 
other be not read out efficiently. they propos that deacti- 
vate these region should not affect behavior. 
reciprocally, a we test in a brain-damag patient that be 

care select with respect to lesion extent and local (si 
text and fig. s10), deactiv region that be optim decod 
would be expect to impair behavior. the lesion of one of the 
two focal region that we identifi a key for f2-base syllabl 
categor dramat disrupt performance. the impair- 
ment be select to the type of stimulu but not to the type of 
task, a categor of similar syllabl (da/ta) base on tem- 
poral cues, i.e., vot, be spared. thi also be expected, a syl- 
labl categor base on vot specif involv the left 
middl tempor cortex (fig. s2). the select of the impair- 
ment with respect to the acoust materi show that for thi type 
of task there be no distribut rescu system. these behavior 
data in a singl patient remain, of course, nongeneralizable, and 
further lesion data will be necessari to confirm our results. 
moreover, a full demonstr that, even though phonem cat- 
egori be repres in a distribut fashion, focal/earli sensori 
inform be predominantli use to categor speech sound 
would, strictli speak requir show that distribut lesion 
do not impair task performance. thi demonstration, however, 

fig. 6. decod of meg data reveal bilater temporo-front cortex in- 
volvement in speech-sound categorization. (a) percentag of correct 
decod over time for each of the magnetomet (mag 1331, mag 2011, 
and mag 0211) show signific decod activity. On the x axis, zero 
correspond to stimulu onset; on the y axis, 50% indic chanc perfor- 
mance. horizont dark and light gray line indic signific decod 
(q < 0.05, fdr-corrected). (b) sensor topographi depict the averag 
decod respons in magnetomet averag within each of the five 
window of interest. black dot indic the posit of the three magne- 
tomet show signific decod activity. (c) sourc local at key 
decod times. sourc local for meg signal be display on a 
standard cortex at 100, 220, 300, 360, and 500 m poststimulu onset. color 
bar at the right in B and C indic student t-test values. 

6 of 10 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714279115 bouton et al. 

http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714279115 


cannot be performed, becaus at the extreme, if the whole lan- 
guag system be injured, no linguist oper can be achiev at 
all. although, use a varieti of approaches, we tri to collect a 
mani argument a possibl to address how inform be use to 
make perceptu decis about speech sounds, we acknowledg 
that the present studi can be onli partli conclusive. 
critically, however, our result show that a distinct should 

be make between the classif of syllable-induc neuron 
activ by machin learn and the neuron decod make 
by the brain to achiev syllabl categorization. We found that 
distribut noise-level neural information, which do not carri 
reproduc and statist detect inform about the 
sensori cue (f2 parameters) or about the categor decis 
process (61), be nonetheless suffici to inform a classifier. 
while thi confirm previou observ that phonem in- 
format be present in a distribut manner (1, 2), the fact that 
classif be possibl onli on late respons onc the re- 
gion encod the critic acoust cue (f2 slope) be remov 
from the multivari analysi suggest that distribut pho- 
nemic represent reflect the diffus of the inform 
throughout the languag system. while distribut inform 
might be use for late association-typ linguist processes, it 
do not appear necessari for the categor task, a cor- 
rect effect occur focal and earli in time. these find 
show that neuron activ contain inform about speech 
sound categori be not uniformli use for categor these 
sounds. more generally, our find highlight the fact that 
decod algorithms, even if they can make use of distribut 
inform that might reflect a brain state context (57) or 
mental association, do not indic which region be necessari 
or causal for the cognit process at stake—her a categor 
choice. these result henc suggest that distribut inform 
about categori might reflect the redund of noise-level in- 
format in the brain, i.e., associ neural activity, rather 
than a spatial neural code that be access in parallel when 
make a speech-categori perceptu decision. 
categor auditori syllabl be a rel low-level process, 

which in theori could be underpin by distribut represen- 
tations, but in our data thi appear not to be the case. what then 
might be denot by previous observ broadli distribut 
represent map (8) and, in particular, by phonem map 
organ along articulatori featur (62)? most of these im- 
portant find (1, 52, 63) be obtain in natur listen 
conditions. In the work by mesgarani et al. (1), for instance, 
map be drawn from cortic surfac neural activ measur 
150 m after each phonem in connect speech, impli that 
activ at each time point integr the distribut activ of 
sever preced phonem and reflect coarticul and 
contextu associ from the preced words. when pas- 
sive listen to connect speech, there be like no explicit 
serial phonem decod but rather a global readout of senten- 
ces, which like requir superfici access mani phonem 
represent at once. In the same way a a comput keyboard 
space letter to minim interfer when type them, our 
brain might organ the phonem space a a function of how we 
need to retriev them for product (54), i.e., follow a feature- 
base logic. that such organ exist do not impli that they 
be use a such for explicit syllabl recognition, just a read 
word through a keyboard spatial organ would larg be 
suboptimal. while the present find do confirm the exist of 
distribut phonem representations, they also question the use 
our brain make of them in an explicit speech-percept context, 
a phonem recognit do not seem to reli on distribut 
pattern of activity. importantli however, it might be the case that, 
dure natur speech perception, cross-hierarch readout of 
redundant/correl neural activ be genuin exploit a a 
form of trade-off between accuraci of singl phonem identifi- 
cation (focal) and joint access to multipl represent (dis- 
tributed). It will be essenti in the futur to address whether 
suboptim decod of larg neuron popul could be an 
optim way to handl access to multipl representations. 

method 
subjects. twenty-eight healthi subject particip in the meg studi (16 fe- 
males; age range: 22–31 y), and 16 particip in the fmri studi (nine fe- 
males; age range: 22–29 y). i-eeg be record in three epilept patient (one 
female; ages: 44, 25, and 65 y) who underw surgeri for clinic monitor 
and in one patient (female; age: 77 y) who be test behavior 8 mo after 
an ischem stroke. all particip be right-handed, nativ french speaker 
and have no histori of auditori or languag disorders. the experiment 
protocol for the particip in the meg and fmri experi be 
approv by the inserm ethic committe in franc (biomed protocol c07- 
28), and the protocol for studi in epilept and stroke patient be approv 
by the univers of geneva hospit in switzerland (13–224). all particip 
provid write inform consent befor the experiment. 

stimulu synthesi and behavior testing. high-qual speech stimulu be 
synthes use an origin morph method base on a modifi linear 
predict cod (lpc) analysi synthesi scheme (64). use an exponenti 
pole-morph approach, the second formant transit be morph to build 
a linear speech sound continuum between /ba/, /da/, and /ga/ (65, 66). the 
initi (prototypical) /ba/, /da/, and /ga/ syllabl be natur voic signals, 
down-sampl to 16 khz, align on their burst start time, and cut to the 
same length (360 ms). from the lpc analysi of natur voic sounds, the 
formant structur be extract for each prototyp syllable. for resynthesis, 
the excit signal from the lpc analysi be discarded, and an artifici 
excit signal be used. the excit signal consist of a low-pass- 
filter puls train for the voic part, addit white nois for the burst, 
and a small amount of white nois throughout the entir stimulus. the time 
depend of the fundament frequency, f0 = f(t), be a piecewis constant 
and simplifi version of that extract from the origin /ba/ natur voic 
signal. throughout the continuum, the excit signal, the global amplitud 
of the stimulus, and the first and third formant transit be kept constant. 

A six-item /ba/ /da/ continuumwa present to healthi subject and to the 
stroke patient. A longer 48-item continuum, /ba/ /da/ /ga/, be use for test 
epilept patient to obtain more respons around syllabl boundari to 
compar correct and incorrect categorization. note that /ba/ and /da/ cate- 
gori differ onli on the F2 dimensions, and henc process thi singl 
cue be suffici for correct perception. anoth six-stimuli /da/ /ta/ con- 
tinuum be use for both the behavior and second fmri control experi- 
ments. In that continuum, we vari the length of the vot by delet or 
add one or sever voic period in the signal, befor or after the burst, 
use audio editor software. 

task design. auditori stimulu be present use psychophysics-3 toolbox 
and addit custom script write for matlab version 8.2.0.701 (mathworks). 
sound be present binaur at a sampl rate of 44,100 Hz and at a 
comfort hear level individu set befor the experi via earphones. 
befor the experiment, each particip undertook a short session dure which 
the minimum amplitud level lead to 100% categor accuraci be 
estim use an adapt staircas procedure. thi threshold be use to 
transmit the stimulu (mean 30 dB sensat level). each continuumwa deliv 
to particip in two independ session of 240 trial each for fmri record 
and 270 trial each for meg recording. the experi use for epilept pa- 
tient compris 144 trials. 

particip be ask to perform an identif task. each trial com- 
prise one sound (randomli chosen among the 6 or 48 stimulu of the contin- 
uum), follow by 1 s of silence; then, a respons screen with the write 
syllabl “ba” and “da” (in meg, fmri, and behavior sessions) or “ba,” “da,” 
and “ga” (in i-eeg sessions) be displayed. syllabl be randomli display 
from right to left on the screen to prevent motor prepar and persever- 
ativ responses. dure fmri recording, the appear of the respons screen 
be randomli jitter 100, 300, or 500 m after the silenc gap. particip 
indic their respons on the syllabl by press the correspond left or 
right respons button a quickli a possible. subjects’ respons be pur- 
pose delay to avoid tempor overlap between perceptu process and 
motor effect due to button press. respons time henc do not constitut 
relev data. To limit eye movements, subject be ask to fixat the 
central cross and to blink onli after give their motor response. after the 
response, a jitter delay vari from 3 to 5 s lead to the next trial. 

meg record and preprocessing. continu cerebr activ be record 
use an elekta system meg device, with 102 triple-sensor elements, each 
composedof twoplanargradiomet andonemagnetometer.meg signalswer 
record at a sampl rate of 1 khz and be onlin band-pass filter be- 
tween 0.1 and 300 hz. A vertic electro-oculogramwa record simultaneously. 

bouton et al. pna earli edit | 7 of 10 

N 
EU 

RO 
SC 

IE 
N 
CE 

PN 
A 
S 
PL 

U 
S 



beforemeg recording, theheadshap for eachparticipantwa acquiredus a 
polhemu system. after the meg session, an individu anatom mri be 
record [tim-trio; siemens; 9-min anatom t1-weight magnetization- 
prepar rapid gradient-echo (mp-rage), 176 slices, field of view = 256, 
voxel size = 1 × 1 × 1 mm3]. meg data be preprocessed, analyzed, and vi- 
sualiz use datahandl softwar (wiki.cenir.org/doku.php), the brainstorm 
toolbox (67), and custom matlab scripts. A princip compon analysi (pca) 
be perform through singular-valu decomposit function of numer 
recip to correct artifact (low derivation). the first two compon from the 
pca be zeroed, and the signal matrix be recomputed. pca rotat the 
origin data to new coordinates, make the data a flat a possible. the data 
be then epoch from 1 s befor syllabl onset to 1 s after syllabl offset. 
anoth pca be then perform on the epoch data when blink oc- 
curred. pca compon be visual inspect to reject the one captur 
blink artifacts. On average, 2.1 ± 0.7% of trial per particip (mean ± sem) 
be contamin by eye-mov artifact and be correct befor 
further analyses. 

fmri record and preprocessing. imag be collect use a verio 3.0 T 
(siemens) whole-bodi and radio-frequ coil scanner. the fmri bold 
signal be measur use a t2*-weight echoplanar sequenc (repetit 
time = 2,110 ms; echo time = 26 ms; flip angl = 90°). forti contigu slice 
(thick = 3 mm; gap = 15%; matrix size = 64 × 64; voxel size = 3 × 3 × 
3 mm) be acquir per volume. A high-resolut t1-weight anatom 
imag (repetit time = 2,300 ms; echo time = 4.18 ms; T1 = 900 ms; imag 
matrix = 256 × 256; slab thick = 176 mm; spatial resolut = 1 × 1 × 
1 mm) be collect for each particip after function acquisition. imag 
preprocess be perform use spm8 (the wellcom trust centr for 
neuroimaging, univers colleg london, london, www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/ 
spm/). each of the four scan session contain 400 function volumes. 
all function volum be realign to the first one to correct for inter- 
scan movement. function and structur imag be spatial pre- 
process (realignment, normalization, smooth with an 8-mm fwhm 
isotrop gaussian kernel) and tempor process use a high-pass filter 
with a cutoff frequenc of 60 hz. We then check data for electron 
and rapid-mov artifact use the artrepair toolbox (cibsr.stanford.edu/ 
tools/human-brain-project/artrepair-software.html). artifact volum be 
substitut by linear interpol between contigu volum and be ex- 
plicitli model in the follow statist analyses. estim headmov 
be small compar with voxel size (<1 mm); 3.2 ± 0.3% of the volum be 
exclud due to rapid head movement (>1.5 mm/s). 

i-eeg record and preprocessing. electrophysiolog activ be record 
over array of depth electrod surgic implant to identifi epilepsi 
focus. i-eeg be record (ceegraph xl; biolog system corps.) use 
electrod array with eight stainless contact each (electrod diamet = 
3 mm, intercontact space = 10 mm; ad-tech) implant in sever brain 
region in the right hemispher (figs. 3–5). We determin the precis 
electrod shaft locat by coregist a postop comput to- 
mographi scan with a high-resolut anatom mri template. for the 
i-eeg recordings, we use a bipolar montag in which each channel be 
refer to it adjac neighbor. We sampl the i-eeg signal at 1,024 Hz 
for patient 2 and at 2,048 Hz for patient 1 and 3. 

steady-st frequenc spectrum be estim use a standard fourier 
transform from 1 s befor to 1 s after the offset of the stimulus. time–fre- 
quenci power be defin a the single-tri squar amplitud estim of 
complex fourier components. time–frequ analysi be carri out 
use the fieldtrip toolbox for matlab (68). the spectral power of meg 
oscil be estim use a famili of complex morlet wavelets, 
result in an estim of power at each time point and each frequency. We 
restrict the analysi to frequenc between 2 and 150 hz, span the 
whole rang of relev brain rhythms. note that the time–frequ 
transform us frequency-depend wavelet (from three to seven cycl 
per window), with decreas time-window with increas frequency. 

neural encod of parametr information. We regress out singl trial of 
meg, fmri, and i-eeg signal against (i) the acoust dimension, correspond 
to F2 paramet [the onset valu of the second formant (f2) and the F2 slope 
linearli covari in six steps] or to the vot (the voic length befor and after 
the conson burst vari in six steps)], and (ii) the categor difficulti 
dimens correspond to the invers of the discrimin index from signal 
detect theori (−d′). these two dimens be natur orthogon (r = 0.02, 
P > 0.20). A gener linear regress model be carri out separ for each 
dimens (sensori encod and decision effort) along the stimulu and be 
final averag across particip to produc a group-level grand average. 

that approach be adopt to disentangl the neural correl of basic 
bottom-up perceptu process index the track of the acoust cue from 
the neural correl of the categor difficulti reflect the distanc of 
each stimulu from the phonem ident criterion (48, 69). 

fmri: neural encod of parametr information. statist parametr t score 
be obtain from local fmri signal use a linear multipl regress model 
with sensori encod (f2 paramet or vot valu for each condition) and 
decision effort (−d′ valu report by each subject for each trial) a cova- 
riates. regress paramet be estim in everi voxel for each subject, 
and paramet estim then be enter in a between-subject random- 
effect analysi to obtain statist parametr maps. We identifi brain ac- 
tivat show signific contrast of paramet estim with a voxelwis 
(T = 3.21, P < 0.005, uncorrected) and clusterwis (P < 0.05, uncorrected) sig- 
nific threshold. all report activ surviv fals discoveri rate (fdr) 
correct for multipl comparison (P < 0.05) (70). anatom locat be 
determin base on autom anatom labeling. regressor of interest 
be construct by convolv function repres the event with the 
canon hemodynam respons function. for each continuum, a categor 
regressor model the “sound” event use a dirac function time lock to 
syllabl onset. two hierarch orthogon parametr regressor (re- 
fer to a “sensori encoding” and “decision effort” regressors) be 
add to the sound regressor to captur the modul of bold activ a a 
function of F2 variat track and categor difficulty. for illustr 
purpos (fig. 1C and fig. s2c), we use the rfx_plot toolbox (71) to split 
F2 and d′ parametr regressor into six new onset regressor (simpl onset 
regressor without a parametr modulation), each contain all event for a 
particular level of the stimulu continuum. beta weight be reestim for 
each of these six onset regressor and be averag across all subject to get 
the correspond percent of signal change. 

meg: neural encod of parametr information. We first use single-tri 
signal on each sensor to perform parametr regress at success 
time from −0.2 to 1 s follow stimulu onset. for each particip and 
each sensor, we calcul the time cours of beta coeffici and then 
comput cortic current map with brainstorm use the weight 
minimum-norm estim approach, mean that the time seri for each 
sourc be a linear combin of all time seri record by the sensor (72). 
sourc be estim for each subject on the basi of individu mri im- 
ages. after realign and deform of each subject’ cortic surface, 
sourc be project onto the standard montreal neurolog institut 
(mni)/colin27 brain to perform grand mean averages. We then perform 
within-group statist to show the sensit to sensori encod and de- 
cision effort dimensions. note that both of the two transform ap- 
pli to the data (regress and source-projection) captur a linear 
relationship between the observ and the expect data and can thu be 
implement in either order. thi method be use to local the sourc of 
sensori and perceptu decis compon and to demonstr that sen- 
sori and decision process be hierarch organ in time. 

single-trial–evok signal on each sensor be also use to comput 
sourc current map for each trial. the invers oper be gener 
with the default mne paramet and be appli at the single-tri level. 
the estim sourc be morph to the mni brain. We then extract 
single-tri neural activ from region of interest defin accord to 
destrieux’ atla (73) (g_temp_sup-plan_tempo, g_temp_sup-g_t_transv, 
g_front_inf-opercular, g_front_inf-triangul). single-trial–evok respons 
project on these select sourc be use in two ways: 

i) for each participant, we regress out single-tri neural activ to es- 
timat spectral power of the beta coeffici via a standard fourier 
transform. time–frequ analysi be carri out accord to ex- 
actli the same paramet defin in the previou paragraph, i-eeg re- 
cord and preprocessing.w thu estim the trial-to-tri variabl 
in neural signal from region of interest at a give frequenc that de- 
scribe sensori encod or decision effort (t test against zero, P < 
0.05, bonferroni-corrected). 

ii) for each participant, sourc activ in the pstg and in the left ifg be 
use to measur gc. while GC be classic use to ass causal influenc 
between two time series, we here comput GC for nonstationari time 
series, such a oscil neural signal (74, 75). We use a nonparamet- 
ric test by comput a spectral densiti matrix factor techniqu 
on complex cross-spectra, obtain from the continu wavelet trans- 
form of source-reconstruct meg time series. We then assess the 
linear direct influenc between two brain areas, the pstg and 
the left ifg. 

8 of 10 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714279115 bouton et al. 

http://wiki.cenir.org/doku.php 
http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/ 
http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/ 
http://cibsr.stanford.edu/tools/human-brain-project/artrepair-software.html 
http://cibsr.stanford.edu/tools/human-brain-project/artrepair-software.html 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1714279115/-/dcsupplement 
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714279115 


GC be comput twice: 

• from right pstg to left ifg to determin whether activ in the ifg could 
be predict at trial t by includ past activ from both the pstg and 
the ifg. here we assum the inform flow to be bottom-up. 

• from left ifg to right pstg to determin whether activ in the pstg 
could be predict at trial t by includ past activ from both the pstg 
and the ifg. here we assum the inform flow to be top-down. 

becaus we comput GC on nonstationari neural signal (i.e., evok 
activ from reconstruct sources), GC spectrum be obtain in a non- 
parametr manner by use wavelet transform, without go through the 
multivari autoregress model fit (74), and spectral GC be intend 
to reveal a frequency-resolv gc. To do so, we use a spectral matrix fac- 
toriz techniqu on complex cross-spectra obtain directli from 
wavelet transform of the data. wavelet transform be comput at ani 
instant (1-m resolution) of the syllabl durat (360 ms) on a trial-by-tri 
basi for each subject. for each subject, we then comput the mean GC 
across trial and the correspond sd. the origin GC spectrum be stan- 
dardiz to obtain a vector of z-values, one for each frequency. 

We test for signific frequenc peak separ for bottom-up and top- 
down GC direction, directli compar the z-transform vector obtain from 
GC spectrum to a zero-mean normal distribution, and correct for multipl 
comparison with the bonferroni method at P < 0.05. our decis to focu on 
the left ifg be empir motivated. previou paper (e.g., refs. 76–78) have 
show that the left ifg be consist involv in articulatori process dure 
speech percept and also in lexic inform retrieval, both skill that be 
engag when categor ambigu speech sounds, i.e., when the intern 
perceptu decis criterion be difficult to reach, a in the current study. 

meg: decod analyses. decod analysi be perform with the neural 
decod toolbox (79), use a maximum correl coeffici classifi on 
single-trial–induc respons across all meg sensors. data from both 
magnetomet and gradiomet be used. the pattern classifi be 
train on the respons give by the particip and comput the corre- 
lation between meg data and the syllabl identifi (/ba/ or /da/) on each 
trial. more specifically, the classifi be train on 80% of the data, and it 
perform be evalu on the withheld 20% of the test data. the 
split procedur between train and test data be perform 
50 time to reduc the varianc of the perform estimate. the report 
final decod accuraci be the averag accuraci across the 50 decod re- 
sults. classif accuraci be report a the percentag of correct trial 
classifi in the test set averag over all cross-valid splits. 

additionally, an anova base on the second-level test across subject be 
appli to the test data to select those sensor that be significantli sensit 
to syllabl ident at each time point. We then assess statist signific 
use a permut test. To perform thi test, we gener a null distribut 
by run the decod procedur 200 time use data with randomli 
shuffl label for each subject. decod perform abov all point in the 
null distribut for the correspond time pointwa deem signific with 
P < 0.005 (1/200). the first time decod reach significantli abov chanc 
be defin when accuraci be signific for five consecut time points. 
sourc local associ with the decod result be comput from 
evok trial use the mne source-model method (see above). 

i-eeg: neural encod of parametr information. We perform the same 
parametr regress on i-eeg record from patient 1. these analysi be 
do onli on that patient, a he be the onli patient for whom one shaft 
show a signific induc respons to syllabl perception. shaft 1 colo- 
caliz to the site (the right pstg) where spectral cue track be found with 
fmri and meg. We select the five deepest contact on each shaft; those 
contact be locat between the heschl’ gyru and the stg on shaft 1. 
parametr regress be carri out at success times, t, from −0.2 to 1 s 
poststimulu onset, on each select bipolar derivation, i.e., from the deepest 
(1) to the most extern (5) contact. We comput the power in each fre- 
quenci band at each time point of each beta coefficient, with a millisecond 
resolution, similar to the induc power (between 2 and 150 hz, with a 0.5-hz 

resolut below 20 Hz and with a 1-hz resolut abov 20 hz) by appli a 
TF wavelet transform, use a famili of complex morlet wavelet (m = 3–7). 
for each contact, a null distribut be comput by repeat the ident 
regress procedur 1,000 time with shuffl regressors. We use standard 
parametr test (t test against zero) to ass the statist signific of each 
parametr regression. the type 1 error rate (fdr) aris from multipl 
comparison be control for use nonparametr cluster-level statist (80) 
comput across contacts, time samples, and frequencies. We do not need to 
correct for multipl comparison across electrod shafts, a statist test 
be run independ for each contact of each electrod shaft. 

i-eeg: decod analyses. We use a maximum correl coeffici clas- 
sifier [neural decod toolbox (79)] on single-trial–induc responses. the 
classifi be train to classifi the i-eeg data into three categori that 
correspond to the three syllabl identifi by the patient (/ba/, /da/, 
or /ga/). We appli the decod procedur on time seri use a cross- 
valid procedur in which the classifi be train on 90% of the trial 
and be test on the remain 10%. our record consist of three 
repetit of each stimulu condit (48 stimulu from /ba/ to /ga/) for patient 
1 (144 trial to be categorized) and six repetit of each condit (288 trial 
to be categorized) for patient 2 and 3. the cross-valid procedur be 
repeat 1,000 time with a differ split between train and test 
dataset on each iteration, and the result be averag across all iterations. 

We estim single-tri decod of the neuron respons induc by 
differ syllabl use both uni- and multivari classification. the univari 
classif be appli to each bipolar deriv (i.e., to each of the five 
contact of each shaft),wherea themultivari classificationwasperformedon 
neural activ from everi bipolar deriv of one shaft (i.e., on the five 
contact of each shaft, pool together) and then on all bipolar deriv of 
patient 1 (on all contact of the six shafts, pool together), and final on all 
three patient (on all contact of the 14 shafts, pool together). single-shaft 
multivari decod be compar with mean univari decod com- 
put first fromeach contact and thenaveraged. decod accuraci be express 
a the percent of correctli classifi trial in the test set. A null distribut be 
comput by repeat the ident classif procedur 1,000 time with 
shuffl labels. We defin the number of classif repetit with respect 
to the number of multipl comparison do from each contact (fdr-correct 
for univari decod perform on each of the five contacts, time samples, 
and frequencies, fdr-correct formultivari decod perform on each of 
the six shafts, time samples, and frequencies, and fdr-correct formultivari 
decod perform on all shaft together, time samples, and frequencies). 
decod accuraci be consid signific at q < 0.05 if accuraci exceed 
the random classif at two consecut time points. 

i-eeg: correct-minus-incorrect differences. the psychometr identif func- 
tion with percentag report /ba/, /da/, or /ga/ be defin along the cor- 
respond continuum. boundari separ determin the accuraci of 
categor choice: the steeper the slope, the more accur be the perceptu 
decision. patient’ rate along the continuumwer use to split respons into 
correct and incorrect trials. We subsequ comput the differ in neural 
activ from select bipolar deriv between correct and incorrect con- 
dition and then compar it with the zero-mean normal distribut thresh- 
old at q < 0.05 [fdr-correct for multipl comparison on shaft (30 shaft 
test for patient 1), time, and frequenc dimensions]. thi procedur be re- 
peat 1,000 time with shuffl label for correct and incorrect conditions. 

acknowledgments. We thank lorenzo fontolan and clio cost for 
method support and aaron schurger, luc arnal, andrea kleinschmidt, 
david poeppel, virgini van wassenhove, corrado corradi dell’acqua, narli 
golestani, and clio cost for comment and use discuss about earli 
version of thi manuscript. thi work be fund by european research 
council compuslang grant agreement ga260347 and swiss nation fund 
(snf) grant 320030_149319 (to a.-l.g.), snf grant 140332 and 146633 (to 
m.s.), agnec national pour la research (anr) grant anr-10-labx-0087 
iec (institut d’étude de la cognition), anr-10-idex-0001-02 psl* (pari sci- 
enc et lettres) (program “investiss d’avenir”), and anr-16-ce37- 
0012-01 (to v.c.), and snf grant p300p1_167591 (to s.b.). 

1. mesgarani N, cheung C, johnson K, chang EF (2014) phonet featur encod in 

human superior tempor gyrus. scienc 343:1006–1010. 
2. chang ef, et al. (2010) categor speech represent in human superior tempor 

gyrus. nat neurosci 13:1428–1432. 
3. yan Y, et al. (2014) perceptu train continu refin neuron popul 

code in primari visual cortex. nat neurosci 17:1380–1387. 
4. hung cp, kreiman G, poggio T, dicarlo JJ (2005) fast readout of object ident from 

macaqu inferior tempor cortex. scienc 310:863–866. 

5. carota F, kriegeskort N, nili H, pulvermül F (2017) represent similar 
map of distribut semant in left inferior frontal, middl temporal, and 
motor cortex. cereb cortex 27:294–309. 

6. grill-spector K, weiner KS (2014) the function architectur of the ven- 
tral tempor cortex and it role in categorization. nat rev neurosci 15: 
536–548. 

7. pinotsi da, et al. (2017) link canon microcircuit and neuron activity: dy- 
namic causal model of laminar recordings. neuroimag 146:355–366. 

bouton et al. pna earli edit | 9 of 10 

N 
EU 

RO 
SC 

IE 
N 
CE 

PN 
A 
S 
PL 

U 
S 



8. huth ag, de heer wa, griffith tl, theunissen fe, gallant JL (2016) natur speech 
reveal the semant map that tile human cerebr cortex. natur 532:453–458. 

9. ritchi jb, kaplan D, klein C (2017) decod the brain: neural represent and 
the limit of multivari pattern analysi in cognit neuroscience. biorxiv: 
10.1101/127233. 

10. weichwald S, grosse-wentrupm (2017) the right tool for the right question—beyond 
the encod versu decod dichotomy. arxiv:1704.08851. 

11. hebart mn, baker CI (august 4, 2017) deconstruct multivari decod for the 
studi of brain function. neuroimage, s1053-8119(17)30652-3. 

12. eger E, ashburn J, hayn j-d, dolan rj, ree G (2008) fmri activ pattern in 
human loc carri inform about object exemplar within category. J cogn 
neurosci 20:356–370. 

13. anderson ml, oat T (2010) A critiqu of multi-voxel pattern analysis. proceed of 
the 32nd annual meet of the cognit scienc societi (cognit scienc society, 
austin, tx), pp 1511–1516. 

14. dilk dd, julian jb, paunov am, kanwish N (2013) the occipit place area be causal 
and select involv in scene perception. J neurosci 33:1331–1336a. 

15. anderson ML (2015) préci of after phrenology: neural reus and the interact 
brain. behav brain sci 39:1–22. 

16. shamma S, lorenzi C (2013) On the balanc of envelop and tempor fine structur in 
the encod of speech in the earli auditori system. J acoust soc Am 133:2818–2833. 

17. moon ij, et al. (2014) optim combin of neural tempor envelop and fine 
structur cue to explain speech identif in background noise. J neurosci 34: 
12145–12154. 

18. de heer wa, huth ag, griffith tl, gallant jl, theunissen FE (2017) the hierarch 
cortic organ of human speech processing. J neurosci 37:6539–6557. 

19. formisano E, De martino F, bont M, goebel R (2008) “who” be say “what”? brain- 
base decod of human voic and speech. scienc 322:970–973. 

20. ley A, vroomen J, formisano E (2014) how learn to abstract shape neural sound 
representations. front neurosci 8:132. 

21. pasley bn, knight RT (2013) decod speech for understand and treat aphasia. 
prog brain re 207:435–456. 

22. chevillet ma, jiang X, rauscheck jp, riesenhub M (2013) automat phonem 
categori select in the dorsal auditori stream. J neurosci 33:5208–5215. 

23. mirman D, et al. (2015) neural organ of spoken languag reveal by lesion- 
symptom mapping. nat commun 6:6762. 

24. tsunada J, liu ask, gold ji, cohen YE (2016) causal contribut of primat auditori 
cortex to auditori perceptu decision-making. nat neurosci 19:135–142. 

25. rauscheck JP (1998) cortic process of complex sounds. curr opin neurobiol 8: 
516–521. 

26. martin S, et al. (2016) word pair classif dure imagin speech use direct 
brain recordings. sci rep 6:25803. 

27. santoro R, et al. (2017) reconstruct the spectrotempor modul of real-lif 
sound from fmri respons patterns. proc natl acad sci usa 114:4799–4804. 

28. zatorr rj, belin P (2001) spectral and tempor process in human auditori cortex. 
cereb cortex 11:946–953. 

29. fontolan L, morillon B, liegeois-chauvel C, giraud a-l (2014) the contribut of 
frequency-specif activ to hierarch inform process in the human au- 
ditori cortex. nat commun 5:4694. 

30. arnal lh, giraud a-l (2012) cortic oscil and sensori predictions. trend cogn 
sci 16:390–398. 

31. fri P (2015) rhythm for cognition: commun through coherence. neuron 88: 
220–235. 

32. friston kj, trujillo-barreto N, daunizeau J (2008) dem: A variat treatment of 
dynam systems. neuroimag 41:849–885. 

33. Di liberto gm, lalor ec, millman RE (2018) causal cortic dynam of a predict 
enhanc of speech intelligibility. neuroimag 166:247–258. 

34. morillon B, baillet S (2017) motor origin of tempor predict in auditori atten- 
tion. proc natl acad sci usa 114:e8913–e8921. 

35. schoffelen jm, et al. (2017) frequency-specif direct interact in the human 
brain network for language. proc natl acad sci usa 114:8083–8088. 

36. donoso M, collin age, koechlin E (2014) human cognition. foundat of human 
reason in the prefront cortex. scienc 344:1481–1486. 

37. blumstein se, myer eb, rissman J (2005) the percept of voic onset time: An fmri 
investig of phonet categori structure. J cogn neurosci 17:1353–1366. 

38. roger jc, davi MH (2017) inferior frontal cortex contribut to the recognit of 
spoken word and their constitu speech sounds. J cogn neurosci 29:919–936. 

39. marti S, king j-r, dehaen S (2015) time-resolv decod of two process chain 
dure dual-task interference. neuron 88:1297–1307. 

40. king j-r, dehaen S (2014) character the dynam of mental representations: 
the tempor gener method. trend cogn sci 18:203–210. 

41. isik L, meyer em, leibo jz, poggio T (2014) the dynam of invari object recog- 
nition in the human visual system. J neurophysiol 111:91–102. 

42. Du Y, buchsbaum br, gradi cl, alain C (2014) nois differenti impact phonem 
represent in the auditori and speech motor systems. proc natl acad sci usa 
111:7126–7131. 

43. liebenth E, sabri M, beardsley sa, mangalathu-arumana J, desai A (2013) neural 
dynam of phonolog process in the dorsal auditori stream. J neurosci 33: 
15414–15424. 

44. obles J, eisner F, kotz SA (2008) bilater speech comprehens reflect differenti 
sensit to spectral and tempor features. J neurosci 28:8116–8123. 

45. liégeois-chauvel C, giraud K, badier j-m, marqui P, chauvel P (2001) intracerebr 
evok potenti in pitch percept reveal a function asymmetri of the human 
auditori cortex. ann N Y acad sci 930:117–132. 

46. alain C, snyder JS (2008) age-rel differ in auditori evok respons dure 
rapid perceptu learning. clin neurophysiol 119:356–366. 

47. alain C, snyder js, He Y, reink KS (2007) chang in auditori cortex parallel rapid 
perceptu learning. cereb cortex 17:1074–1084. 

48. binder jr, liebenth E, poss et, medler da, ward BD (2004) neural correl of 
sensori and decis process in auditori object identification. nat neurosci 7:295–301. 

49. moerel M, De martino F, formisano E (2014) An anatom and function topog- 
raphi of human auditori cortic areas. front neurosci 8:225. 

50. giraud a-l, et al. (2004) contribut of sensori input, auditori search and verbal 
comprehens to cortic activ dure speech processing. cereb cortex 14: 
247–255. 

51. lee y-s, turkeltaub P, granger R, raizada rd (2012) categor speech process in 
broca’ area: An fmri studi use multivari pattern-bas analysis. J neurosci 32: 
3942–3948. 

52. arsenault js, buchsbaum BR (2015) distribut neural represent of phonolog- 
ical featur dure speech perception. J neurosci 35:634–642. 

53. blank H, davi MH (2016) predict error but not sharpen signal simul mul- 
tivoxel fmri pattern dure speech perception. plo biol 14:e1002577. 

54. bont M, hausfeld L, schark W, valent G, formisano E (2014) task-depend 
decod of speaker and vowel ident from auditori cortic respons patterns. 
J neurosci 34:4548–4557. 

55. sohoglu E, peell je, carlyon rp, davi MH (2012) predict top-down integr of 
prior knowledg dure speech perception. J neurosci 32:8443–8453. 

56. kok P, jehe jfm, de lang FP (2012) less be more: expect sharpen represen- 
tation in the primari visual cortex. neuron 75:265–270. 

57. weichwald S, et al. (2015) causal interpret rule for encod and decod 
model in neuroimaging. neuroimag 110:48–59. 

58. zohari E, celebrini S, britten kh, newsom WT (1994) neuron plastic that un- 
derli improv in perceptu performance. scienc 263:1289–1292. 

59. sompolinski H, yoon H, kang K, shamir M (2001) popul cod in neuron 
system with correl noise. phi rev E stat nonlin soft matter phi 64:051904. 

60. pitkow X, liu S, angelaki de, deang gc, pouget A (2015) how can singl sensori 
neuron predict behavior? neuron 87:411–423. 

61. çukur T, nishimoto S, huth ag, gallant JL (2013) attent dure natur vision 
warp semant represent across the human brain. nat neurosci 16:763–770. 

62. cheung C, hamiton ls, johnson K, chang EF (2016) the auditori represent of 
speech sound in human motor cortex. elif 5:e12577. 

63. correia J, et al. (2014) brain-bas translation: fmri decod of spoken word in 
bilingu reveal language-independ semant represent in anterior tem- 
poral lobe. J neurosci 34:332–338. 

64. kroon P, kleijn WB (1995) linear-predict base analysis-by-synthesi code 
(elsevi science, amsterdam). 

65. ried T, suther RA (2009) vocal tract motor pattern and reson dure constant 
frequenc song: the white-thro sparrow. J comp physiol A neuroethol sen 
neural behav physiol 195:183–192. 

66. goncharoff V, kaine-krolak M (1995) interpol of lpc spectrum via pole shifting. 
proc ieee int conf acoust speech signal process 1:780–783. 

67. tadel F, baillet S, mosher jc, pantazi D, leahi RM (2011) brainstorm: A user-friendli 
applic for meg/eeg analysis. comput intel neurosci 2011:879716. 

68. oostenveld R, fri P, mari E, schoffelen JM (2011) fieldtrip: open sourc softwar 
for advanc analysi of meg, eeg, and invas electrophysiolog data. comput 
intel neurosci 2011:156869. 

69. liebenth E, binder jr, spitzer sm, poss et, medler DA (2005) neural substrat of 
phonem perception. cereb cortex 15:1621–1631. 

70. genoves cr, lazar na, nichol T (2002) threshold of statist map in function 
neuroimag use the fals discoveri rate. neuroimag 15:870–878. 

71. gläscher J (2009) visual of group infer data in function neuroimaging. 
neuroinformat 7:73–82. 

72. hämäläinen ms, ilmoniemi RJ (1994) interpret magnet field of the brain: 
minimum norm estimates. med biol eng comput 32:35–42. 

73. destrieux C, fischl B, dale A, halgren E (2010) automat parcel of human 
cortic gyru and sulcu use standard anatom nomenclature. neuroimag 53:1–15. 

74. dhamala M, rangarajan G, ding M (2008) analyz inform flow in brain net- 
work with nonparametr granger causality. neuroimag 41:354–362. 

75. dhamala M, rangarajan G, ding M (2008) estim granger causal from fourier 
and wavelet transform of time seri data. phi rev lett 100:018701. 

76. lyu B, Ge J, niu Z, tan lh, gao j-h (2016) predict brain mechan in sound-to- 
mean map dure speech processing. J neurosci 36:10813–10822. 

77. yoo S, lee k-m (2013) articulation-bas sound percept in verbal repetition: A 
function nir study. front hum neurosci 7:540. 

78. klein M, et al. (2015) earli activ in broca’ area dure read reflect fast access to 
articulatori code from print. cereb cortex 25:1715–1723. 

79. meyer EM (2013) the neural decod toolbox. front neuroinform 7:8. 
80. mari E, oostenveld R (2007) nonparametr statist test of eeg- and meg-data. 

J neurosci method 164:177–190. 

10 of 10 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714279115 bouton et al. 

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714279115 

