






















































gamespace: An explor visual of the videogam medium 


see discussions, stats, and author profil for thi public at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318505669 

gamespace: An explor visual of the 
videogam medium 

technic report · juli 2017 

doi: 10.13140/rg.2.2.33425.94565 

citat 

0 

read 

15 

6 authors, including: 

some of the author of thi public be also work on these relat projects: 

situat and pragmat stori gener view project 

jame ryan 

univers of california, santa cruz 

36 public 116 citat 

see profil 

all content follow thi page be upload by jame ryan on 18 juli 2017. 

the user have request enhanc of the download file. 

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318505669_gamespace_an_explorable_visualization_of_the_videogame_medium?enrichid=rgreq-1f9d665b187b2868153916393d796a2e-xxx&enrichsource=y292zxjqywdlozmxoduwnty2ottbuzo1mtc1mje4mzkwntg5ndramtuwmdm5odiyotm1nw%3d%3d&el=1_x_2&_esc=publicationcoverpdf 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318505669_gamespace_an_explorable_visualization_of_the_videogame_medium?enrichid=rgreq-1f9d665b187b2868153916393d796a2e-xxx&enrichsource=y292zxjqywdlozmxoduwnty2ottbuzo1mtc1mje4mzkwntg5ndramtuwmdm5odiyotm1nw%3d%3d&el=1_x_3&_esc=publicationcoverpdf 
https://www.researchgate.net/project/situated-and-pragmatic-story-generation?enrichid=rgreq-1f9d665b187b2868153916393d796a2e-xxx&enrichsource=y292zxjqywdlozmxoduwnty2ottbuzo1mtc1mje4mzkwntg5ndramtuwmdm5odiyotm1nw%3d%3d&el=1_x_9&_esc=publicationcoverpdf 
https://www.researchgate.net/?enrichid=rgreq-1f9d665b187b2868153916393d796a2e-xxx&enrichsource=y292zxjqywdlozmxoduwnty2ottbuzo1mtc1mje4mzkwntg5ndramtuwmdm5odiyotm1nw%3d%3d&el=1_x_1&_esc=publicationcoverpdf 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/james_ryan32?enrichid=rgreq-1f9d665b187b2868153916393d796a2e-xxx&enrichsource=y292zxjqywdlozmxoduwnty2ottbuzo1mtc1mje4mzkwntg5ndramtuwmdm5odiyotm1nw%3d%3d&el=1_x_4&_esc=publicationcoverpdf 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/james_ryan32?enrichid=rgreq-1f9d665b187b2868153916393d796a2e-xxx&enrichsource=y292zxjqywdlozmxoduwnty2ottbuzo1mtc1mje4mzkwntg5ndramtuwmdm5odiyotm1nw%3d%3d&el=1_x_5&_esc=publicationcoverpdf 
https://www.researchgate.net/institution/university_of_california_santa_cruz?enrichid=rgreq-1f9d665b187b2868153916393d796a2e-xxx&enrichsource=y292zxjqywdlozmxoduwnty2ottbuzo1mtc1mje4mzkwntg5ndramtuwmdm5odiyotm1nw%3d%3d&el=1_x_6&_esc=publicationcoverpdf 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/james_ryan32?enrichid=rgreq-1f9d665b187b2868153916393d796a2e-xxx&enrichsource=y292zxjqywdlozmxoduwnty2ottbuzo1mtc1mje4mzkwntg5ndramtuwmdm5odiyotm1nw%3d%3d&el=1_x_7&_esc=publicationcoverpdf 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/james_ryan32?enrichid=rgreq-1f9d665b187b2868153916393d796a2e-xxx&enrichsource=y292zxjqywdlozmxoduwnty2ottbuzo1mtc1mje4mzkwntg5ndramtuwmdm5odiyotm1nw%3d%3d&el=1_x_10&_esc=publicationcoverpdf 


gamespace: An explor visual of the videogam medium 

jame ryan, express intellig studio, univers of california, santa cruz 

eric kaltman, express intellig studio, univers of california, santa cruz 

andrew max fisher, game and playabl media, univers of california, santa cruz 

taylor owen-milner, 2K games, novato, california 

michael mateas, express intellig studio, univers of california, santa cruz 

noah wardrip-fruin, express intellig studio, univers of california, santa cruz 

We present gamespace, a visual of the videogam medium a a 3D explor space. gamespac take the 

form of a galaxi of 15,000 stars, where each star repres an exist game and star be posit such that relat 

game be nearer to one another. user may fli around the space, use convent game controls, to explor the 

medium and serendipit discov new games. thi applic be make possibl by a combin of techniqu 

from natur languag process and machin learning, name latent semant analysi and multidimension scaling, 

and build upon our earli work in produc tool for videogam discovery. beyond demonstr an increas 

in user engag rel to our primari exist tool, in thi paper we outlin our design goals, describ our 

develop process, and discu the project along variou dimens of intrigue. gamespac be avail onlin at 

http://gamespace.io. 

addit key word and phrases: visualization, game discovery, game genre, machin learn 

acm refer format: 

jame ryan, eric kaltman, andrew max fisher, taylor owen-milner, michael mateas, and noah wardrip-fruin. 

2017. gamespace: An explor visual of the videogam medium. 1, 1, articl 1 (januari 2017), 18 pages. 

doi: 

1 introduct 

the internet be replet with text about videogames. from in-depth reviews, to walkthrough and faqs, to 

gener descript like those found on wikipedia and mobygames, commun member and profession 

constitut a perpetu wellspr of corpu that be ripe for larger, structur analysi techniques. what if 

we could har the inform emb in that text for game studi analysis? what conclus could 

we reach and what way could we find to illustr new conclus about the game commun and about 

the videogam medium itself? 

As we outlin in section 3, there be an emerg area that do har videogam text corpora, through 

techniqu from natur languag process (nlp) and other areas. In [45], we review thi bodi of work 

and character it approach to game studi a a bottom-up one that can gener novel insight that 

cannot be obtain through more convent top-down methods. additionally, however, we note a critic 

deficit in the exist work take thi new approach: none of the model report in that literatur can be 

2017. technic report ucsc-soe-17-14 

technic report ucsc-soe-17-14 1 

http://gamespace.io 


2 J. ryan et al. 

engag beyond the public describ them, which be troublesom give the complex of machin 

learn model and the result difficulti of adequ describ them. As such, we call for futur 

work in thi area to make it model more understand through visual and interactivity. 

In the spirit of thi call, we have releas a suit of tool and visual that make the model that we 

have built by process videogam text corpu interactive.1 the primari applic in thi suit be 

gamenet, an explor network of nearli 12,000 game that be link to one anoth accord to how 

relat they are, and gamesage, an interfac to gamenet that gener a new node in the network by 

process a user’ idea for a game. 

elsewhere, we have demonstr a number of strength present in our tool suite: gamenet’ related 

judgment be sound [45], gamenet and gamesag expos user to relev game that be unfamiliar to 

them [40, 45], gamenet be a use tool for game scholar [45], and gamesag be a use one for game 

design [40]. We have also learned, however, of opportun to rais the level of engag in these tools. 

In a user studi evalu gamenet and gamesage, for instance, 51% of respond indic that they 

would not be like to use the tool again [40]. 

In the interest of maintain these benefit of our model while provid an interfac to it that be more 

engag for users, we present gamespace, an explor visual of the videogam medium built use 

nlp and machin learning. gamespac take the form of a 3D galaxi of stars, where each star repres 

an exist game and star be place in the space such that relat game be nearer to one another. user 

can fli around the space, use convent game controls, to explor and learn about the medium. each 

game have data attach to it—it wikipedia articl and a youtub video demonstr gameplay—that 

may be engag without leav the space. thi applic be make possibl through a combin of 

techniqu from nlp and machin learning, which we appli to a corpu of over 15,000 videogam articl 

extract from wikipedia. further, gamespac be notabl a a living, publicli (if indirectly) modifi 

visualization—w have set up a system that will automat reder gamespace’ underli model 

periodically, a new descript videogam content be add to wikipedia, to add new game into the space. 

thi mean that users, by describ new game on wikipedia, may caus the set of game includ in 

gamespac to expand accordingly. As we articul again in the next section, our primari goal in develop 

gamespac have be to make a gamenet-lik tool that be more engag to users. In section 6.2, we test 

whether thi goal have be achiev by compar user metric automat collect by both systems. 

generally, we hope that thi project will encourag new explor of the potenti of use machin 

learn and interact visual to engend explor and understand of the videogam medium. 

2 design goal 

our develop of gamespac be structur accord to a number of design goals: 

(1) produc a more engag interfac to our underli nlp model (i.e., one that be more engag 

than gamenet); thi be our core design goal and the subject of our evalu in section 6.2. 

(2) maintain the spontan and serendipit sens of discoveri avail in our earli tools. 

(3) present a fun and sooth experi that be visual and aural appealing. 

1these tool be host onlin at http://gamecip-projects.soe.ucsc.edu. 

technic report ucsc-soe-17-14 

http://gamecip-projects.soe.ucsc.edu 


gamespace: An explor visual of the videogam medium 3 

fig. 1. A wide view of the entir 3D space. each star repres an exist videogame, and star be posit such that 
relat game be nearbi one another. As a result, notic constel of relat game appear. 

(4) directli integr outsid data sources, such a wiki- pedia articl and youtub videos, into the 

tool (wherea gamenet forc user to leav the system to engag these sources); thi promot a 

more contain and cohes experience. 

(5) encourag user to share and discu game that they discov in the space. 

(6) engag the wikipedia commun to provid a mechan for mutual improv of both our 

model and coverag of videogam on wikipedia. 

throughout the paper, we cite these goal when discuss specif design decis that we make in pursuit 

of them. 

technic report ucsc-soe-17-14 



4 J. ryan et al. 

fig. 2. A view toward the interior of gamespace. We sought to evok the aesthet of stargazing. 

3 relat work 

our project here extend the grow bodi of work in which techniqu from machin learn and nlp 

be util to gener new insight about videogam phenomena. thi approach be establish by josé 

zagal and noriko tomuro, who appli cluster analysi and readabl metric to a corpu of 400,000 

game review [52, 54]. later work by other at depaul univers submit the same corpu to sentiment 

analysi [37], and use the result model to fuel a videogam recommend system [30]. In a follow-up to 

the latter project, we built a game recommend system to test the intuit notion that peopl tend to like 

relat game [43]. other work in game studi have appli lexicometry—investig into the frequenc 

of lexic item in a corpus—to game review [49, 53, 55], forum post [3, 22], develop descript [19], 

walkthrough [41], and academ public [31]. anoth recent studi also process text from academ 

public about games, but use a topic model approach [8]. 

In the spirit of thi new approach, we have releas a seri of tool and visual that be fuel 

by nlp techniques. the first, gamenet, be an explor network in which nearli 12,000 game be link 

to the game to which they be most relat [44, 45]. each game’ node in the network also contain a 

summari extract from wikipedia, a well a link to the game’ wikipedia articl and imag and video 

of gameplay. An add-on tool, gamesage, allow user to freeli describ an idea for a game, which it process 

to automat gener a node in gamenet that link the abstract idea to relat exist game [40, 44]. 

gamenet and gamesag be make possibl by a latent semant analysi (lsa) model train on a corpu 

of wikipedia articl about games; gamespac be fuel by a revis to thi model whose deriv we 

describ in section 4. A third tool, gameglobs, visual variou cluster of the 12,000 game in our 

origin lsa model, with integr into gamenet [42]. An addit tool in thi suite, gametree, have not 

yet be released—it visual a hierarch taxonomi of the videogam medium in the form of a radial 

tree built by hierarch agglom cluster [42]. other than our own effort in produc these tool 

and visualizations, we be awar of onli one other project with similar aims: vizmo, a “videogam browser” 

that us a stack area chart to index 600 game accord to visual style and mood [24]. releas just 

befor gamenet, it approach be driven by handcraft metadata attribut rather than machin learn 

(henc it small databas of games). 

At the broader intersect of data visual and video- games, we find project that visualize: content 

pools, a design support for author [16, 47]; player behavior, to provid for player model [11]; broader 

technic report ucsc-soe-17-14 



gamespace: An explor visual of the videogam medium 5 

gameplay activity, for purpos of game analyt [13, 28, 33]; the express rang or possibl space of 

procedur content gener [21, 48]; and even the field of game research itself [31]. our project diverg 

from these effort in that we do not visual videogam phenomenon so much a the medium itself. 

while the area we just outlin visual videogam data, an emerg bodi of work be explor the 

gener of game from open data [4, 7, 14, 15]. first articul in [14], a data game “allow the player(s) 

to explor data that be deriv from outsid the game, by transform the data into someth that can be 

play with” (p. 1). In a sense, gamespac be a data game that transform our lsa model into someth 

playable, though it be not especi gameful. As we discu in section 7.5, we be interest in the idea of 

make data playable, and we have idea for inject more game element into the application. relatedly, 

we would like to refer game studi [27], a game that provid a playabl interfac to the histori of the 

academ studi of game (rather than the medium itself). 

In express visual more broadly, we find that the journalist repertoir have expand to includ 

rhetor visual call data stori [46], and other creativ practition be produc explor 

explan of real-world phenomenon [50]. though our project be less rhetor and simulationist, gamespac 

be in a sens an explor explan of the videogam medium. 

finally, we would like to connect our current project to studi of game genr (e.g., [1, 3, 18, 26]). wherea 

natur most genr typolog partit the space of game top-down, accord to gameplay concerns, we 

proffer an altern bottom-up approach in which genr be a continu notion and game be deem alik 

to the degre that they be describ similarly. gamespac instanti thi notion by posit game 

that be describ more similarli nearer to one anoth in a continu 3D space. In section 7.1, we discu 

thi notion more deeply. 

4 method 

In thi section, we describ our full process pipeline, which proce from the extract of a collect 

of wikipedia articl about game to the deriv of a three-dimension space contain those games. 

additionally, we includ some detail relat to the implement of a game engin for explor the 

deriv space. broadly, our approach can be thought of a work from a simpl premise: game that be 

describ similarli be likely, in fact, similar. 

4.1 corpu extract 

our process begin with the extract of 21,456 wikipedia articl that each pertain to an individu 

game. We found these by scrap wikipedia categori page for each year in the histori of the medium—e.g., 

category:1977 video games—each of which contain link to all the exist articl for game releas 

that year. Of thi full batch, 5,534 game be remov for be less than 250 word in length; in earli 

work, we found that veri short articl be not robust to our method [45]. additionally, we detect and 

remov 663 duplic articles. In the end, our corpu compris 15,259 articles, each rang between 250 

and 10,436 words, with an averag length of 1,118 words.2 In may 2014, we carri out a similar procedur 

to extract 11,829 usabl articl [45]; thi mean that approxim 3,500 more usabl videogam articl 

have appear in the last three years. later, in section 4.6, we discu our plan to automat extract 

2the long articl be for overwatch (2016). 

technic report ucsc-soe-17-14 



6 J. ryan et al. 

and process new articl a they appear. finally, we will note that our entir corpu compris some 17m 

total words. 

4.2 preprocess 

our method of corpu preprocess roughli follow the approach outlin in more detail in [45]: we 

convert all text to lowercase, remov punctuat and miscellan wikipedia artifacts, token 

videogam titl and platform names, remov stop words, carri out lemmatization, and remov word that 

appear in onli a singl document. additionally, thi time around we util an addit preprocess 

step (prior to stopword removal): use the phrase-recognit algorithm of [32] (a implement in the 

phrase modul of the python librari gensim [38]), we automat detect and token multiword 

phrase that appear in our corpus. thi step caused, for example, all occurr of the common videogam 

phrase ‘first person shooter’ to be aggreg into the singl token first person shooter. thi be critic 

becaus latent semant analysis, which we discu next, us a bag of word approach, which mean that the 

occurr of a phrase like ‘first person shooter’ would be insuffici captur a discrete, independ 

occurr of it three compon words. from inform exploration, thi algorithm appear to have work 

veri well at automat recogn common videogam phrases, and it be veri easi to use. We encourag 

scholar in game studi to tri it a a cheap way of investig how peopl talk about games. 

4.3 latent semant analysi 

after preprocess the corpus, we built a co-occurr matrix of it term and documents, normal the 

frequenc count in that matrix use tf–idf weighting, and then submit the normal matrix to latent 

semant analysi (lsa); for more inform on these steps, see [45]. lsa be a classic natur languag 

process method that be often use for automat determin semant related between text 

document [10]. rather than measur direct overlap between the collect of word appear in each 

document, lsa work by factor a co-occurr matrix (bi perform a singular valu decomposit 

[17]). one of the byproduct of thi procedur be a new matrix that have few dimensions, each specifi a 

weight bundl of term that have similar distribut in the corpus. remarkably, thi reduc matrix 

encod inform that may not be present in the origin full matrix. for example, lsa may be abl to 

infer that two term that do not appear togeth in ani document—perhap dialect variant that denot 

the same thing, like ‘gas’ and ‘petrol’—ar in fact highli semant relat [23]. By the same token, it 

may infer the semant related of two document that have no term in common. thi abil to learn 

global associ from local co-occurr be the hallmark of lsa and the reason for it prolong success. 

onc the reduc matrix have be derived, semant related between document can be automat 

calculated. thi be typic do by take the cosin between the documents’ k-dimension lsa vectors, 

where k be the number of dimens in the reduc matrix and ‘lsa vectors’ simpli denot the row in 

that matrix.3 If thi be not intuitive, tri conceiv of an lsa model a a k-dimension space in which 

each document be place at the k-dimension coordin specifi by it lsa vector. In thi space, the 

semant related of two document be reifi a the distanc between the documents’ posit in the 

space—thi distanc be what the cosin represents. In corpu in which each document pertain to a specif 

3follow an empir investig carri out in earli work [45], we select a k valu of 207 for our lsa model. 

technic report ucsc-soe-17-14 



gamespace: An explor visual of the videogam medium 7 

fig. 3. gamespace’ nebula of race games, annot for it variou compon clusters. the variant of multidimension 
scale that we utilize, t-sne, build tight cluster of relat object and then attempt to posit those cluster accord 
to how relat they be to one another. 

individu concept, such a a corpu compris encyclopedia entries, these related score can reason 

be util a a measur of the related of the concept themselves. In our project, we util thi notion 

to operation the related of document describ game a the related of the game themselves. 

As such, onc lsa have completed, we may take ani pair of game in our corpu and automat comput 

a score indic how relat the game are. 

In our earli work, the process stop there and we make our high-dimension lsa model explor 

through gamenet [45] and gamesag [40]. As we describ next, the current project take thing a step 

further by deriv a lower-dimension approxim of our lsa model, for the purpos of produc a 

more engag visualization. 

4.4 multidimension scale 

after use lsa to deriv a 207-dimension space, we use a variant of multidimension scale to produc 

a three-dimension approxim of that space. wherea dimension reduct in techniqu like lsa be 

about har underli structur that may be hidden in nativ data, multidimension scale aim to 

produc lower-dimension approxim of high-dimension space pure for the purpos of visual 

[9]. As such, it be not uncommon to first submit data to a techniqu like lsa befor then appli a variant 

of multidimension scaling. At a high-level, multidimension scale tend to work someth like this. 

first, a set of object (in our case, the game in our corpus) be randomli distribut in a k-dimension 

space (in our case, k = 3). the space then evolv over a seri of step where, on each step, each object be 

abl to move in the direct that will take it closest to the object it be relat to (in our case, in term of 

cosin similar in our lsa space) and farthest from the object it be not relat to. the last step occur 

when no object wish to move anymore. 

technic report ucsc-soe-17-14 



8 J. ryan et al. 

fig. 4. A gamespac user locat and select the chri crawford game gossip (a). thi allow her to view it wikipedia 
articl (b) or watch a gameplay video (c), in place, without leav the space. additionally, she may tweet out a special 
link that provid a portal to the game’ posit in the space (d). 

specifically, we use a variant of multidimension scale call t-distribut stochast neighbor emb 

(t-sne) [29], which have found widespread use sinc it introduct in 2008 [51]; the particular implement 

that we use be includ in the python scikit-learn librari [35]. We submit a matrix of pairwis affin 

(cosin similar between game in our lsa space) to the techniqu use the follow hyperparamet 

values: perplexity=30.0, learn rate=200.0, earli exaggeration=4.0. our model converg after 364 

iterations, with an error of 4.55. later, in section 6.1, we discu how we valid our eventu three- 

dimension space by compar it against one deriv through variou techniqu and hyperparamet 

configurations. 

4.5 app implement 

after deriv our 3D space, we built a web applic that allow user to explor it—thi be gamespace. 

for rendering, we use three.js, a javascript librari for 3D graphic [6]. the applic itself be deploy 

use the python web framework flask [20]. additionally, in pursuit of the third design goal in section 2, 

we devot hundr of person hour to sound design and visual polish. 

technic report ucsc-soe-17-14 



gamespace: An explor visual of the videogam medium 9 

4.6 recur updat 

new game will be add into gamespac automat (and periodically) a new content appear on 

wikipedia. We have set up a process that will scrape wikipedia at recur interv in search of new 

videogam articles—i.e., altogeth new articles, or articl that have be expand beyond 250 words— 

which will then be automat process and add into the 3D space. specifically, newli extract 

articl be add into the corpus, which trigger deriv of an updat lsa model, which be use to add 

new game into the application. As an ad hoc method, game will be place in the 3D space next to their 

near neighbor in the high-dimension lsa space. At less frequent intervals, we may carri out md from 

scratch, though thi could becom disrupt to user who becom familiar with the space’ topology.4 In 

section 7.4, we discu how thi recur process make gamespac a live visualization, which we hope 

will encourag authorship of new videogam articl on wikipedia. 

5 gamespac 

gamespac visual the videogam medium a a 3D space that user can explor use convent game 

controls. It have a space theming: the medium be a galaxi of stars—shown in figur 1 and 2—each of which 

repres an exist videogame. As describ in section 4.4, game be posit in the space such that 

relat game be near one another. A byproduct of this, when render a a galaxy, be that cluster of 

relat game form constellation-lik structures, which themselv may combin to compos larg nebula 

correspond to conventon notion of game genr or subgenre. To illustr this, figur 3 show the 

race nebula, with it variou compon cluster annotated. 

5.1 afford 

A user can freeli move about the space by flying, and at ani point she be near enough to a game, she can 

click on it to select it. thi notion of unconstrain movement in the space be meant to support the second 

design goal that we list in section 2, which be to encourag spontan and serendipit discovery. upon 

select a game, the camera lock into orbit around the star and display the game’ name and year of 

releas (see figur 4a). additionally, the user may view the game’ wikipedia articl (figur 4b) or watch 

a video of it gameplay (figur 4c)—critically, she can do thi in place, without have to leav the space, 

which satisfi the fourth design goal that we list in section 2. finally, an icon be provid that, when 

clicked, gener a draft of a tweet contain a special link that may be use to transport directli to 

the select game upon start the applic (figur 4d). the latter afford be meant to engend 

discuss around interest game that user may find in the space—th fifth design goal that we list in 

section 2. 

6 valid and evalu 

In thi section, we valid gamespac in two ways. first, we describ the process by which we select a 

particular variant of multidimension scale that produc a space with desir characteristics. second, 

4rederiv an md model with a differ random seed, let alon a new object and affinities, can produc an entir 
differ space. 

technic report ucsc-soe-17-14 



10 J. ryan et al. 

fig. 5. our eventu 3D space (c) along with some earli experiments. use metric md with a euclidean distanc metric 
produc a hollow sphere (a); thi be an artifact of use euclidean distanc on certain datasets. most md techniqu 
be suscept to a dens cluster of object around the origin point, a see in the space deriv use local linear 
emb (b). our final space be deriv use t-stochast neighbor embedding, which be know for avoid thi 
shortcoming. 

we compar user metric automat collect by both gamespac and our earli tool, gamenet, to 

support the notion that the new tool be more engag for user (which be our core design goal). 

6.1 select a space 

As explain in section 4.4, gamespac be critic enabl by the use of multidimension scale to reduc 

our 207-dimension lsa model (describ in section 4.3) to a 3D space that may be visualized. In thi 

section, we we will explain how we select our eventu space. 

6.1.1 method. To explain how we settl on our deriv space, we must first explain more about 

the purpos and practic of mds. wherea techniqu like lsa be meant to uncov hidden pattern 

in high-dimension data, md be all about har the innat sensemak capac of the human 

visual process system—a good md model be simpli one that make immedi sens to human when 

visualized. As such, the process of select an md configur (i.e., the specif variant to use, and it 

hyperparamet values) be typic do through inform explor [51]. our particular method entail 

set up configurations, deriv space use them, render those space in our game engine, fli 

around them, and inform valid the placement of game use our knowledg of the medium (and 

research unknown games, if necessary). 

6.1.2 results. dure our explor period, we experi with 3D space that have undesir 

characterist that be eventu elimin in our final space. for instance, use metric md [2] with 

a euclidean distanc metric produc a hollow sphere, show in figur 5a. one artifact of euclidean 

distanc be that it be sensit to vector norms—for a give vector, thi be character by it distanc from 

the origin point (a vector with 0 for each dimens value). In our case, all the game in our model have 

lsa vector that be roughli equidist from the model’ origin point, and thi be what the result 3D 

space captured. but we do not care about distanc from the origin so much a where exactli the game be 

technic report ucsc-soe-17-14 



gamespace: An explor visual of the videogam medium 11 

posit in the high-dimension space of our lsa model, and so cosin similar (which captur the 

latter) prof to be the good distanc metric for our purposes. after settl on cosin similar a our 

distanc metric, we tri a number of md variants. mani of the classic techniqu in thi area, however, 

be suscept to a particular issue: object tend to cluster dens around the origin point of the deriv 

space, a in the space deriv by local linear emb [39] show in figur 5b.5 thi be becaus most 

md variant attempt to simultan move object toward similar object and away from dissimilar 

ones—if thi be not feasibl for a give object (sinc there be onli three ax for movement), all prospect 

movement of it in the space becom equal (un)appealing, and the object stay rel put near the 

origin point. A core appeal of t-sne, the techniqu we end up using, be that it overcom thi defici 

by ignor dissimilar to focu onli on object similarity—i.e., it favor the preserv of local structur 

over global structur [29]. specifically, it seek to maintain (in the low-dimension space) neighborhood 

that exist in the high-dimension space, and then work to posit those neighborhood accord to how 

relat they be to one another. the result, a see in figur 5c, be that relat object cluster together, 

and relat cluster may themselv cluster togeth (a in the race nebula in in figur 3), but with the 

unavoid drawback that unrel cluster may be posit nearbi one another. In the end, we care 

more about relat game appear near one anoth than unrel game appear far apart, and so 

t-sne produc the most appeal space. As for the particular hyperparamet valu that we chose, we 

again make decis through inform exploration, follow the suggest of [51]. 

6.2 assess engag 

As note in section 2, our primari goal in creat gamespac be to maintain the benefit of visual 

model built by appli lsa to text about games—benefit that we have valid elsewher in evalu 

of gamenet and gamesag [40, 45]—while critic boost the level of user engagement. specifically, we 

sought to creat a new tool that would be more engag to user than our primari exist tool, gamenet 

[45].6 In thi section, we compar gamenet and gamespac in term of user engagement. 

6.2.1 method. In the research commun that build and develop web applications, there be a belief 

that evalu instrument such a interview or questionnair be too subject to provid a reliabl 

measur of user engag [25, 36]. the idea be that user have troubl self-report engagement, and so 

two altern object approach be advoc [25]. the first approach util biometr instrument 

such a eye track and heart-rat monitor to discern signal that be know to be associ with 

engagement. while thi approach can be effective, it be costli and onli feasibl for studi with small samples. 

the second approach, which be more frequent taken, be to remot track user behavior in the wild and then 

analyz the telemetri data use valid metric for measur user engagement. here, common metric 

includ session duration, user return rate, and number of click [25, 36]. both gamenet and gamespac 

track user behavior, but unfortun onli gamespac log thi behavior use a notion of user, which 

make a comparison of user return rate impossible. moreover, the applic be differ enough in kind 

that it do not make sens to compar click behavior. As such, we be left with one metric—fortun an 

5thi space be use for an initi prototyp of gamespac that be report in [42]. 
6note that we view gamesag a an altern interfac to gamenet, mean both system integr into a singl tool 
call gamenet. moreover, session with either tool be log into the same database. 

technic report ucsc-soe-17-14 



12 J. ryan et al. 

applic session session durat 

mean (standard deviation) 

gamenet 32,077 73.4s* (290.7s) 

gamespac 7,358 109.2s* (144.4s) 

tabl 1. A comparison of user engag between gamenet and gamespace: gamespac user session be significantli 
longer on averag (p < 0.0001). 

import one, session duration—though compar thi across the tool requir u to first oper 

defin a notion of session durat in each application. A primari issu here be that gamenet do not detect 

when user exit the tool. given this, we defin a gamenet session a termin on the last user event 

befor five or more minut of inactivity. gamespac do detect user exit it, but user may leav the 

applic idle. To support a fair comparison, we defin gamespac session a also termin on the 

last user event befor five or more minut of inact (or upon exit of the application, naturally). use 

these definit of session length, we compar mean across the applic use a standard left-tail 

z-test, sinc sampl size be larg for both tools. 

6.2.2 results. our result be show in tabl 1. We found that gamespac user session be on averag 

signific longer than gamenet user session (M = 109.2 vs. 73.4 seconds; z = −1.64, p < 0.0001). As 
session durat be both intuit and convent [25, 36] a metric for evalu web applic for 

their level of user engagement, these result indic that gamespac improv upon gamenet in thi area. 

thi suggest that our core design goal, articul in section 2, have be satisfied. 

7 discuss and futur work 

In thi section, we wrap up the paper with discuss of gamespac and our larg project in the context of 

variou pertin or interest concerns. additionally, we forecast potenti avenu for futur work and 

collaboration. 

7.1 similar versu related 

instead of use a notion of game like that be base pure on gameplay, we use one that take into account 

ani aspect of broader videogam ontolog that may show up in a wikipedia article: designer, developer, 

publisher, platform, critic reception, theme, and so forth. In [43], we articul thi model of game likeness, 

which we call game relatedness, a a bottom-up altern to commerci game genre. As we explain more 

deepli in that paper, our idea be influenc by the distinct in comput linguist between semant 

similar and semant related [5]. concept that be semant similar be strongli alik in form or 

meaning—for instance, mous and rat, hot and warm—wherea concept that be semant relat may 

be so due to ani type of association—e.g., mous and cheese, hot and volcano. As such, semant similar 

actual repres a special case of the more gener notion of semant relatedness, which be to say that 

all concept that be semant similar be also semant related, but not vice versa. follow thi 

distinct (and terminology), we consid game whose gameplay be alik to be similar game (and thu also 

technic report ucsc-soe-17-14 



gamespace: An explor visual of the videogam medium 13 

fig. 6. game genr a a continu space. super 3D noah’ ark (1994) be place between christian game and animal- 
keep games, for obviou reasons, and it be also near hunt games—a a wolfenstein 3D clone, it be mechan a 
first-person shooter, like most hunt examples. 

relat games), whereas, a we have explained, relat game be not necessarili alik in term of gameplay, 

but share other ontolog features. We note that it be similar to lindsay grace’ posit model contain 

both game type (similar gameplay) and game genr (similar content and theme) [18], except that it extend 

to includ all possibl associ featur in a singl heterogeneous, infinit extens set of dimensions. 

semant related be sometim talk about (and measured) in term of the likelihood that one concept 

will call to mind the other [34], and so anoth way of understand game related be that it be a notion 

of how like it be that one game will evok the other in the mind of a player who be familiar with both. thus, 

in gamespace, game be posit such that they may call their neighbor to mind. 

7.2 game genr a a continu space 

beyond associ game accord to ani and all featur that may overlap, our approach be novel in 

that it repres game genr a a continu space. In most typologies, genr be discrete, mean game 

can onli have binari associ with one another: they have a genr in common, or they do not. In our 

approach, game be alik to the degre that they be describ similarly. becaus gamespac translat 

such affin between game a distanc in 3D space, it liter render the notion of genr a a continu 

space. A game’ genr identity, then, can be thought of in variou ways: it exact coordin in the space, 

it placement in ani appar constellations, or the result of triangul between all the game that be 

nearbi it. figur 6 nice illustr these concern use the case of super 3D noah’ ark (1994), which be 

posit in gamespac between christian games, animal-keep games, and hunt games.7 further, 

when genr be a continu space, physic isol reifi conceptu obscurity, a illustr in figur 

7if the proxim of hunt game seem unfitting, consid that super 3D noah’ ark be actual a wolfenstein 3D clone, 
make it (mechanically) a first-person shooter (like most hunt games). 

technic report ucsc-soe-17-14 



14 J. ryan et al. 

fig. 7. one of the most isol game in gamespace. In our approach, physic isol reifi conceptu obscurity, and 
thi sport game about cultur heritage, with playabl halftim show and educ content, fit the bill. it closest 
neighbor be other american footbal games, but it be off by itself. 

7. relatedly, empti spot in the space might be see a constitut unexplor design space—on fun 

project that we have consid would enabl the gener of synthet wikipedia articl from arbitrari 

coordin in gamespace. 

7.3 videogam embed 

A hot area of research in the digit human and in comput linguist more broadli util 

word embeddings. thi approach belong to the larg class of techniqu call distribut semantics, of 

which lsa be a classic example. with word embeddings, the mean of individu word (or phrases) 

be repres a vector that be deriv accord to the words’ distribut across a larg corpu of 

text. here, we repres game a vector that be deriv accord to the how the game be describ 

in a larg corpus—thi could be character a a videogam embed approach. In the area of word 

embeddings, the hottest techniqu be call word2vec [32]. In current unpublish earli exploration, we 

have encount some impress result from a word2vec model that we train on text about videogames, 

which allow for arithmet queri whose operand be videogam concepts. our favorit exampl be a queri 

super mario bros− bowser + legend of zelda, for which our model return gannon. We hope to eventu 
releas a tool that make thi model interactive, but in the meantim we encourag other to explor the 

applic of word2vec to videogam text. 

7.4 A live visual 

In section 4.6, we outlin our recur process that will automat caus new game to be add 

into gamespac a new descript content appear on wikipedia—thi will make gamespac a live 

technic report ucsc-soe-17-14 



gamespace: An explor visual of the videogam medium 15 

visualization, specif one that grow and evolv organ a the set of wikipedia articl describ 

videogam grow and evolves. while we gener find thi notion to be intriguing, we specif hope that 

thi will help to encourag authorship of descript content about videogam on wikipedia. for instance, 

if a user discov that a particular game be not in gamespace, she can author a wikipedia articl for it, 

which will caus the game to automat be add into the space. thi feedback loop would mutual 

improv both our model and wikipedia coverag of videogames, which correspond to the last design goal 

that we list in section 2. 

7.5 make data playabl 

while gamespac be clearli explorable, our goal for it be to be a playabl visual of the videogam 

medium. toward this, we have bound user afford to convent game controls, adapt UI and 

UX pattern from game design (e.g., we devot energi to sound design), and gener tri to make 

the experi feel like play a game. still, however, gamespac be not quit a game. look ahead 

to the futur of the application, and to a potenti futur with relat applications, we wonder what a 

truli playabl visual of the medium—a game about games—would look like. one idea for make 

gamespac more game would be to introduc a progress system: achiev that unlock badg (e.g., 

one for find the old game in the model) or even new afford (e.g., find the old game allow 

the user to filter the space by year of release). In section 7.7, we outlin some idea for new afford that 

we hope to eventu implement in gamespace, and these could potenti be integr into a progress 

system. more broadly, we be interest in the idea of make data playable. In section 3, we outlin data 

games—gam that be automat gener from open data—and explor explanations—rhetor 

interact visual that explain real-world phenomena. when we say ‘make data playable’, we 

refer to a gener area that includ these approach and ani other that make the act of explor and 

understand data (or complex models, more broadly) more playful.8 In particular, we would like to see 

more project in game studi that produc explorable—or, good yet, playable—byproducts. 

7.6 visual physic collect 

An interest extens of thi project could visual physic videogam collections, like librari hold 

or extens person collections, a 3D explor spaces. for example, a librari patron could fli around her 

library’ hold to select the game that she will borrow next. In earli work, we discuss the prospect 

of a version of gamenet whose model be restrict to includ onli game present in stanford university’ 

cabrineti collect [12]. 

7.7 new afford 

We be current consid whether to includ a number of new affordances. An initi prototyp of 

gamespac includ a search bar, which allow user to search through the game in the model to teleport 

directli to a select game’ location. We found that thi do not encourag serendipit exploration—on 

of our design goal list in section 2—and so we remov it. mani user have request it recently, though, 

so we may choos to reimplement it. instead of it trigger teleportation, however, we may instead have 

8we note that there be of cours a subtl distinct between boost play and gamefulness, but, give our current 
stage of exploration, we do not believ it be not worth dive into here. 

technic report ucsc-soe-17-14 



16 J. ryan et al. 

it trigger a flythrough of the space that end at the search result. that way, the user still receiv some 

context for the locat of the result, help support serendipit exploration. As allud to in section 

7.5, search could possibl be integr into a progress system, mean that the afford would be 

unlock through a gameplay achievement. other possibl afford we have consid would util 

structur data that we have about the game in our model. for instance, a scrubber UI element could be 

use to filter the game in the space by their year of release, e.g., allow a user to explor onli the space of 

game releas through 1979. the same could be do for other featur such a releas platform, developer, 

or publisher. A more ambiti new afford would allow user to collabor label constel of 

games, result in someth that look like figur 3. here, we would need a mechan for determin 

which label appear for whom, and where, but someth like a friend system or vote system could 

potenti work. whether these new addit (or one discuss in section 7.8) be implement will 

depend on whether we (or new collaborators) can find the time and energi to return to develop on thi 

project. We would also like to note that we be open to idea for new afford that reader may have. 

7.8 new visual featur 

We have also consid a number of possibl new visual features, which we may or may not implement 

in the future. while all game in the space be current the same size, we could repres more import 

game use larg stars—here, the open question be how to automat determin the import of a 

game. one possibl solut be operation import a the length of a game’ wikipedia articl or 

a the number of articl that link back to it article; of course, thi would be prone to issu relat to 

wikipedia author practices, but it could potenti work well enough for our purposes. We have also 

consid the prospect of use color and hue semant (e.g., to cue a game’ releas platforms), but 

thi could damag the game’ calm visual aesthetic. beyond data about the game themselves, we could 

also visual data about how user explor the space, sinc we be automat collect coordin 

at regular interv for all session with the application. for instance, we could captur the path that (a 

subset of) user have take through the space a vapor trail that be visual in anoth user’ session. 

beyond visualization, we be current analyz thi user data and be open to collabor with anyon 

who would like to conduct their own analyses. 

7.9 visual other domain 

our method could easili be appli to other domains. We be current conceiv of a seri of relat 

visualizations, and we be interest in brainstorm with prospect collaborators. 

8 acknowledg 

thi project be make possibl in part by institut of museum and librari servic grant lg-06-13-0205-13. 

refer 

[1] espen aarseth, solveig mari smedstad, and lise sunnan̊a. 2003. A multidimension typolog of games. In proc. 

digra. 

[2] hervé abdi. 2007. metric multidimension scale (mds): analyz distanc matrices. encyclopedia of measur 

and statist (2007), 1–13. 

[3] domin arsenault. 2009. video game genre, evolut and innovation. eludamo 3, 2 (2009), 149–176. 

technic report ucsc-soe-17-14 



gamespace: An explor visual of the videogam medium 17 

[4] gabriella AB barros, antonio liapis, and julian togelius. 2016. play with data: procedur gener of adventur 

from open data. In proceed of the intern joint confer of digra and fdg. 

[5] alexand budanitski and graem hirst. 2006. evalu wordnet-bas measur of lexic semant relatedness. 

comput linguist 32, 1 (2006). 

[6] ricardo cabello. 2010. three.js. (2010). https://github.com/mrdoob/three.js. 

[7] andrew borg cardona, ask walter hansen, julian togelius, and mari gustafsson friberger. 2014. open trumps, a 

data game. In proc. foundat of digit games. 

[8] samuel coavoux, manuel boutet, and vincian zabban. 2016. what We know about games: A scientometr approach 

to game studi in the 2000s. game and cultur (2016). 

[9] trevor F cox and michael AA cox. 2000. multidimension scaling. crc press. 

[10] scott C. deerwester, susan T dumais, thoma K. landauer, georg W. furnas, and richard A. harshman. 1990. 

index by latent semant analysis. jasi 41, 6 (1990). 

[11] ander drachen, alessandro canossa, and georgio N yannakakis. 2009. player model use self-organ in 

tomb raider: underworld. In proc. comput intellig and games. ieee, 1–8. 

[12] glynn edwards, eric kaltman, jame owen ryan, timothi hong, and noah wardrip-fruin. 2015. augment 

explor of librari videogam hold by techniqu from comput linguistics. In societi of american 

archivist science, technology, and healthcar roundtable. 

[13] M seif el-nasr, ander drachen, and alessandro canossa. 2013. game analytics. new york, sprint (2013). 

[14] mari gustafsson friberg and julian togelius. 2012. gener game content from open data. In proc. foundat 

of digit games. 

[15] M gustafsson friberger, julian togelius, A borg cardona, michel ermacora, ander mousten, M møller jensen, V 

tanase, and ulrik brøndsted. 2013. data games. In proc. procedur content generation. 

[16] jacob garbe, aaron A reed, melani dickinson, noah wardrip-fruin, and michael mateas. 2014. author assist 

visual for ice-bound, a combinatori narrative.. In proc. foundat of digit games. 

[17] gene H golub and christian reinsch. 1970. singular valu decomposit and least squar solutions. numer. math. 

14, 5 (1970), 403–420. 

[18] lindsay grace. 2005. game type and game genre. (2005). 

[19] lindsay D grace. 2014. A linguist analysi of mobil games: verb and noun for content estimation. In proc. 

foundat of digit games. 

[20] miguel grinberg. 2014. flask web development: develop web applic with python. o’reilli media, inc. 

[21] britton horn, steve dahlskog, noor shaker, gillian smith, and julian togelius. 2014. A compar evalu of 

procedur level gener in the mario AI framework. In proc. foundat of digit games. 

[22] magnu johansson, harko verhagen, and yubo kou. 2015. I Am be watch By the tribunal: trust and control in 

multiplay onlin battl arena games. (2015). 

[23] thoma K landauer and susan T dumais. 1997. A solut to plato’ problem: the latent semant analysi theori of 

acquisition, induction, and represent of knowledge. psycholog review 104, 2 (1997). 

[24] jin Ha lee, sungsoo ray hong, hyerim cho, and yea-seul kim. 2015. vizmo game browser: access video game 

by visual style and mood. In proc. chi. 

[25] janett lehmann, mounia lalmas, elad yom-tov, and georg dupret. 2012. model of user engagement. In proc. 

user modeling, adaptation, and personalization. springer, 164–175. 

[26] jonathan lessard. 2014. game genr and high-level design pattern formations. In proc. foundat of digit 

games. 

[27] jonathan lessard and pippin barr. 2016. game studies. http://www.pippinbarr.com/games/press/sheet.php?p= 

game studi 

[28] yun-en liu, erik andersen, richard snider, seth cooper, and zoran popović. 2011. feature-bas project for 

effect playtrac analysis. In proc. foundat of digit games. 

[29] lauren van der maaten and geoffrey hinton. 2008. visual data use t-sne. journal of machin learn 

research 9, nov (2008), 2579–2605. 

[30] michael meidl, steven lytinen, and kevin raison. 2014. use game review to recommend games. proc. game and 

nlp (2014). 

[31] edward melcer, T nguyen, zhengx chen, alessandro canossa, magi seif el-nasr, and katherin isbister. 2015. 

game research today: analyz the academ landscap 2000-2014. proc. foundat of digit game (2015). 

[32] toma mikolov, ilya sutskever, kai chen, greg S corrado, and jeff dean. 2013. distribut represent of word 

and phrase and their compositionality. In proc. neural inform process systems. 3111–3119. 

technic report ucsc-soe-17-14 

http://www.pippinbarr.com/games/press/sheet.php?p=game_studi 
http://www.pippinbarr.com/games/press/sheet.php?p=game_studi 


18 J. ryan et al. 

[33] truong-huy D nguyen, magi seif el-nasr, and alessandro canossa. 2015. glyph: visual tool for understand 

problem solv strategi in puzzl games.. In proc. foundat of digit games. 

[34] serguei VS pakhomov, lynn eberly, and david knopman. 2016. character cognit perform in a larg 

longitudin studi of age with computer semant index of verbal fluency. neuropsychologia 89 (2016), 42–56. 

[35] F. pedregosa, G. varoquaux, A. gramfort, V. michel, B. thirion, O. grisel, M. blondel, P. prettenhofer, R. weiss, 

V. dubourg, J. vanderplas, A. passos, D. cournapeau, M. brucher, M. perrot, and E. duchesnay. 2011. scikit-learn: 

machin learn in python. journal of machin learn research 12 (2011), 2825–2830. 

[36] eric T peterson and joseph carrabis. 2008. measur the immeasurable: visitor engagement. web analyt 

demystifi 14 (2008), 16. 

[37] kevin raison, noriko tomuro, steve lytinen, and josé P zagal. 2012. extract of user opinion by adjective-context 

co-clust for game review texts. In proc. advanc in nlp. 

[38] radim řeh̊uřek, petr sojka, and others. 2010. softwar framework for topic model with larg corpora. (2010). 

[39] sam T rowei and lawrenc K saul. 2000. nonlinear dimension reduct by local linear embedding. scienc 

290, 5500 (2000), 2323–2326. 

[40] jame ryan, eric kaltman, timothi hong, katherin isbister, michael mateas, and noah wardrip-fruin. 2016. gamenet 

and gamesage: videogam discoveri a design insight. In proc. digra–fdg. 

[41] jame ryan and sergiy ravnyago. 2016. A typolog of verb cull from 23,000 videogam walkthroughs. In proc. 

digra–fdg. 

[42] jame owen ryan, eric kaltman, andrew max fisher, timothi hong, taylor owen-milner, michael mateas, and noah 

wardrip-fruin. 2015. large-scal interact visual of nearli 12,000 digit games. In proc. foundat of 

digit games. 

[43] jame owen ryan, eric kaltman, timothi hong, michael mateas, and noah wardrip-fruin. 2015. peopl tend to like 

relat games. In proc. foundat of digit games. 

[44] jame owen ryan, eric kaltman, michael mateas, and noah wardrip-fruin. 2015. tool for videogam discoveri built 

use latent semant analysis. In proc. foundat of digit games. 

[45] jame owen ryan, eric kaltman, michael mateas, and noah wardrip-fruin. 2015. what We talk about when We 

talk about games: bottom-up game studi use natur languag processing. In proc. foundat of digit 

games. 

[46] edward segel and jeffrey heer. 2010. narr visualization: tell stori with data. ieee transact on 

visual and comput graphic 16, 6 (2010), 1139–1148. 

[47] emili short. 2016. visual procgen text. https://emshort.blog/2016/06/13/visualizing-procgen-text/. (13 june 

2016). 

[48] adam M smith and michael mateas. 2011. answer set program for procedur content generation: A design space 

approach. ieee transact on comput intellig and AI in game 3, 3 (2011), 187–200. 

[49] björn str̊åat and harko verhagen. 2015. top versu bottom: game evalu from an expert or player perspective.. 

In proc. foundat of digit games. 

[50] bret victor. 2011. explor explanations. https://emshort.blog/2016/06/13/visualizing-procgen-text/. (10 march 

2011). 

[51] martin wattenberg, fernanda viégas, and ian johnson. 2016. how to use t-sne effectively. distil (2016). 

http://distill.pub/2016/misread-tsne. 

[52] josé P zagal and noriko tomuro. 2010. the aesthet of gameplay: A lexic approach. In proc. academ mindtrek 

conference. 

[53] josé pablo zagal and noriko tomuro. 2013. cultur differ in game appreciation: A studi of player game reviews.. 

In proc. foundat of digit games. 

[54] josé P zagal, noriko tomuro, and andriy shepitsen. 2011. natur languag process in game studi research: An 

overview. simul & game (2011). 

[55] miaoqi zhu, fan zhao, xiaowen fang, and christoph moser. 2016. develop playabl heurist base on noun 

and adject from onlin game reviews. intern journal of human–comput interact (2016), 1–13. 

technic report ucsc-soe-17-14 

view public statsview public stat 

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318505669 

abstract 
1 introduct 
2 design goal 
3 relat work 
4 method 
4.1 corpu extract 
4.2 preprocess 
4.3 latent semant analysi 
4.4 multidimension scale 
4.5 app implement 
4.6 recur updat 

5 gamespac 
5.1 afford 

6 valid and evalu 
6.1 select a space 
6.2 assess engag 

7 discuss and futur work 
7.1 similar versu related 
7.2 game genr a a continu space 
7.3 videogam embed 
7.4 A live visual 
7.5 make data playabl 
7.6 visual physic collect 
7.7 new afford 
7.8 new visual featur 
7.9 visual other domain 

8 acknowledg 
refer 

