






































inequ and household debt: new evid | vox, ceprâ•ž polici portal 


column video vox vox talk public peopl debat event about 

vox cepr' polici portal 
research-bas polici analysi and commentari from lead economist 

creat account | login | subscrib 

7 A A 

relat 

doe inequ lead to a financi crisis? 
michael bordo, christoph meissner 

inequality, leverag and crisi 
romain rancière, michael kumhof 

econom inequ dure recess 
jonathan heathcote, gianluca violante, fabrizio 
perri 

greater inequ and household borrowing? new 
evid from household data 

olivi coibion, yuriy gorodnichenko, marianna kudlyak, john mondragon 29 januari 2014 

one popular explan for the increas in US household debt in the year befor the subprim mortgag 

crisi be that household with stagnat incom borrow more to ‘keep up with the joneses’. thi column 

present recent research that question thi explanation. low-incom household in high-inequ region in 

fact borrow rel littl compar to similar household in low-inequ regions. A theoret model in 

which great local incom inequ facilit the screen of loan applic make predict that be 

consist with the data. 

the financi crisi of 2008–09 be preced by an 
except rise in borrow by US households, 
account for primarili by a rise in mortgag debt. 
there be two main view about the sourc of thi 
‘great leveraging’: 

the rise in borrow reflect ‘credit supply’ 
factors. 

olivi coibion 
assist professor, UT austin 

yuriy gorodnichenko 
associ professor in the 

depart of economics, 

univers of california – berkeley 

marianna kudlyak 
economist, feder reserv bank 

By topic By date By read By tag 

inequ and household debt: new evid | vox, cepr’ polici portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evid 

1 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31 



propon point to progress in inform technolog (sanchez 2009) and rise financialis of 
debt (especi mortgages) a increas the suppli of credit, particularli to low-incom and high- 
risk household (drozd and serrano-padi 2013). 

the rise be driven by polit motiv for expand credit supply. 

for example, rajan (2010) argu that, in respons to rise incom inequality, credit be make 
increasingli avail to lower-incom group to support their consumpt level in the face of 
stagnant incomes. 

accord to the second view (‘demand for credit’), there be a rise in the demand for borrow on 
the part of US households, especi low-incom households. one possibl motiv for rise 
demand for borrow again stem from rise incom inequality. specifically, high consumpt 
on the part of wealthi household could have increas the demand for borrow by lower-incom 
household in their attempt to ‘keep up’ with their wealthier neighbours. indeed, there be a posit 
correl between incom inequ in the US and household debt rel to gdp a illustr in 
figur 1 below. the correl be certainli consist with the possibl of a causal relationship 
run from inequ to household borrowing. 

new evid on inequ and debt 

In a recent work paper (coibion et al. 2014), we examin the link between inequ and 
household borrowing. In particular, we investig whether borrow pattern on the part of low-, 
middle- and high-incom household differ depend on the level of local incom inequality. To 
measur both debt and inequality, we use uniqu data from the new york feder reserv bank 
consum credit panel/equifax which provid comprehens debt measur for million of US 
household sinc 1999, includ detail decomposit of debt by type. becaus thi dataset 
do not includ household income, we use the relationship between household debt and income, 
condit on observ household characteristics, in the survey of consum financ to predict 
initi household incom in 2001. from these imput level of income, we construct measur of 
local inequ (which be highli correl with altern measur of local inequ construct 
from either censu or ir incom data) at the zip code, county, and state levels, a well a 
measur of household debt-to-incom ratios. 

figur 1. inequ and debt in the US 

trilemma redux: evid 
from emerg market 
economi 

risk, return, and skill in the 
portfolio of the wealthi 

transit to clean 
technolog 

econom of the populist 
backlash 

china’ wto entri benefit 
US consum 

introduc voxdev 

globalis and execut 

of richmond 

john mondragon 
phd candid in the econom 

department, UC berkeley 

don't miss 

obstfeld, ostry, qureshi 

bach, calvet, sodini 

acemoglu, akcigit, hanley, kerr 

rodrik 

amiti, dai, feenstra, romali 

editor 

inequ and household debt: new evid | vox, cepr’ polici portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evid 

2 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31 



source: coibion et al. (2014). the figur plot the incom share of the top 5% of US household (source: irs) and the 

ratio of household (and non-profit) total liabil to gdp (source: feder reserve). 

figur 2 below plot county-level inequ across the US from 2001. inequ be on averag 
high in the southern states, a well a california and the pacif northwest. midwestern states, in 
contrast, stand out for have some of the low level of inequ on average. the map also 
show that inequ tend to be high in larg citi than in more rural areas. there be even 
great region heterogen in inequ at the zip code level – the standard deviat of 
inequ at the zip code level be twice a high a at the state or counti level. 

To ass how borrow pattern differ with local inequ levels, we characteris the evolut 
of household debt levels, rel to initi incom levels, across incom group in area with 
differ level of incom inequality. our main find be that low-incom household in high- 
inequ region borrow rel less than similar household in low-inequ regions. We 
illustr thi in figur 3 below, which plot non-parametr estim of the evolut of household 
debt-to-incom ratio across the 2000 for ‘low-income’ and ‘high-income’ household live in low- 

compens 

econom and polici in the 
age of trump 

keller, olney 

bown 

event 

shadow banking: financi 
intermedi beyond bank 
14 - 15 septemb 2017 / 
helsinki, finland / suerf - 
the european money and 
financ forum and bank of 
finland 

corpor financ theori 
symposium 
15 septemb - 16 januari 
2017 / cambridg / cambridg 
judg busi school 

imf eighteenth jacqu 
polak annual research 
conference: the global 
financi cycl 
2 - 3 novemb 2017 / 
washington dc, usa / 
intern monetari fund 

snb research conference: 
monetari polici design, 
conduct and effect 
22 - 23 septemb 2017 / 
zurich, switzerland / the swiss 
nation bank 

call for papers: adbi-world 
economi workshop on 
global and the 
environ 
26 - 27 septemb 2017 / 
tokyo, japan / asian 
develop bank institut 

inequ and household debt: new evid | vox, cepr’ polici portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evid 

3 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31 



inequality, medium-inequality, or high-inequ zip code rel to those of ‘medium-income’ 
households. while the differ across inequ region for high-rank household be small, 
low-rank household display much larg differ in debt accumul pattern across low- 
and high-inequ regions, reach around 15% of initi incom level by 2008. these 
differ be precis the opposit of what one would have expect if ‘keep up with the 
joneses’ drove the rise in household debt dure the 2000s. As we document in the text, these 
result surviv an extens array of robust checks. 

figur 2. inequ across US counti 

source: coibion et al. (2014). the figur plot inequ in 2001 at the counti level. darker counti be more unequal, 

with each bin repres a quintil of the distribut across counties. 

figur 3. debt accumul across household and local inequ 

@voxeu 

rss feed 

weekli digest 

cepr polici research 

discuss paper insight 

homeownership of 
immigr in france: 
select effect relat to 
intern migrat flow 
gobillon, solignac 

climat chang and long- 
run discount rates: 
evid from real estat 
giglio, maggiori, stroebel, 
weber 

the perman effect of 
fiscal consolid 
summers, fatá 

demograph and the 
secular stagnat 
hypothesi in europ 
favero, galasso 

QE and the bank lend 
channel in the unit 
kingdom 
butt, churm, mcmahon, 
morotz, schanz 

subscrib 

inequ and household debt: new evid | vox, cepr’ polici portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evid 

4 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31 



source: coibion et al. (2014). the figur show non-parametr estim of the evolut of debt to initi incom ratio for 

household in differ incom group live in region with differ level of inequality. the dot line show the 95%- 

confid interval. 

becaus our data provid disaggreg inform on household debt, we ass the link 
between local inequ and differ form of debt: mortgag debt, auto debt, and credit-card debt. 
We find strong evid that low-incom household in high-inequ region borrow less in 
term of both mortgag and auto debt than those in low-inequ regions. A uniqu featur of the 
data be that we have inform on both credit-card balanc and credit-card limits. thi be 
particularli use becaus the latter can be interpret a larg repres credit supply, 
wherea the former primarili reflect the demand for credit. We find that low-incom household in 

inequ and household debt: new evid | vox, cepr’ polici portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evid 

5 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31 



high-inequ region saw their credit limit rise by less than those in lower-inequ region – a 
be the case with mortgag and auto debt. At the same time, no econom signific differ 
be observ in term of credit card balances. thi contrast point to supply-sid factor a be at 
the root of the differenti debt accumul pattern in the data. 

incom inequ and credit ration 

We present a model that provid one potenti supply-sid explan for whi differenti 
borrow behaviour could be relat to region inequality. each region be compos of two type 
of households, such that ‘high-type’ household have high incom on averag than ‘low-type’ 
households, and be also less like to (exogenously) default on debt. bank in each region lend to 
these households, but do not observ households’ type – onli their incom and anoth signal 
correl with the underli type. the key mechan in the model be that a local incom 
inequ rises, bank treat an applicant’ incom a an increasingli precis signal about their type, 
and therefor target lend toward higher-incom household on average. We show how the latter 
can be accomplish via differenti reject rate (in monopoli bank settings) or differenti 
interest rate (in competit bank settings). In both cases, bank will make credit more readili 
access (or cheaper) to high-incom household when local inequ be higher, becaus the 
latter impli that incom be a more precis signal of applic types. 

We test these addit theoret predict use detail mortgag applic inform from 
the publicli avail home mortgag disclosur act data. these data track mortgag applic 
a they go through the origin process, and contain inform on applic – includ their 
income, the amount of the loan requested, their locale, and whether the loan be deni or originated. 
We document that high-incom household in high-inequ region be both less like to be 
deni and less like to be charg high interest rate than their counterpart in low-inequ 
regions, precis a suggest by the theory. thus, both theoret predict from the model be 
confirm in the data. 

conclus 

In summary, we document a systemat relationship between local inequ and differenti 
borrow pattern across richer and poorer household in the US that contradict predict 
base on ‘keep up with the joneses’ motives. We argu that these result can instead be 

inequ and household debt: new evid | vox, cepr’ polici portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evid 

6 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31 



explain through an inform channel. applicants’ incom be a strong signal of their 
underli qualiti when local inequ be high, so bank be like to channel rel more credit 
to low-incom applic when the level of local inequ be low. the absenc of ‘keep up with 
joneses’ effect support the notion that the growth in household borrow dure the mid-2000 
be driven in larg part by credit suppli expans target at lower-incom households. 

however, to the extent that thi expans in the suppli of credit to lower-incom household be 
unlik to continu (for exampl if it reflect a one-tim securitis of household debt), our 
result suggest that a continu of recent trend toward rise inequ be like to reduc access 
to credit for lower-incom households. becaus limit access to credit restrict households’ abil 
to smooth their consumpt and engag in long-term invest (e.g. send child to college, 
retrain for differ careers) that like have posit societ externalities, such differenti access 
to credit could ultim have neg long-term consequ and import polici implications. 

disclaimer: the view express here be those of the author and do not reflect those of the 
feder reserv bank of richmond or the feder reserv system or ani other institut with 
which the author be affiliated. 

refer 

coibion, olivier, yuriy gorodnichenko, marianna kudlyak, and john mondragon (2014), “doe 
greater inequ lead to more household borrowing? new evid from household data”, 
nber work paper 19850. 

drozd, lukasz A and ricardo serrano-padi (2013), “model the credit card revolution: the 
role of debt collect and inform bankruptcy”, feder reserv bank of philadelphia work 
paper 13-12. 

rajan, raghuram G (2010), fault lines: how hidden fault line still threaten the world economy, 
princeton, nj: princeton univers press. 

sanchez, juan M (2009), “the IT revolut and the unsecur credit market”, feder reserv 
bank of richmond work paper 09-4. 

inequ and household debt: new evid | vox, cepr’ polici portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evid 

7 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31 



7 A A 

topics: financi market poverti and incom inequ 

tags: us, inequality, debt, credit rationing, subprim mortgag crisi 

relat 

doe inequ lead to a financi crisis? 
michael bordo, christoph meissner 

inequality, leverag and crisi 
romain rancière, michael kumhof 

econom inequ dure recess 
jonathan heathcote, gianluca violante, fabrizio perri 

23,304 read 
printer-friendli version 

inequ and household debt: new evid | vox, cepr’ polici portal http://voxeu.org/article/inequality-and-household-debt-new-evid 

8 sur 8 14/08/2017 19:31 


