









































incom inequ in the process of econom develop 


research report 
kansantaloustieteen tutkimuksia, no. 125:2011 

dissertation oeconomica 

tuoma malinen 

incom inequ IN the process OF 
econom development: AN empir 

approach 

isbn: 978-952-10-7223-9 (nid) 
isbn: 978-952-10-7224-6 (pdf) 

issn: 0357-3257 





content 

1 introduct 1 
1.1 background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 
1.2 incom inequality: the wisdom of econom thought and global 

trend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 
1.2.1 what determin the divis of product among the 

factor of land, labor, and capital? . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 
1.2.2 measur incom inequ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 

1.3 the process of incom variat and the distribut of incom 11 
1.4 theoret effect of incom inequ on econom growth . 13 

1.4.1 the origin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 
1.4.2 modern theori . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 

1.5 analyz panel data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 
1.5.1 basic estim of panel data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 
1.5.2 estim in cointegr panel data . . . . . . . . . . 21 

1.6 contribut of the thesi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 
1.6.1 the effect of incom inequ on econom growth in 

the short run . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 
1.6.2 the long-run relationship between incom inequ 

and econom develop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 
1.6.3 the relationship between inequ and save . . . . 26 

A random walk and i(1) nonstationari process 37 

2 inequ and growth: anoth look at the subject with a 
new measur and method 39 
2.1 introduct . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40 

i 



2.2 the theoret effect of inequ on growth . . . . . . . . . . 42 

2.2.1 credit market imperfect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 

2.2.2 polit economi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 

2.2.3 unrest relat to social polici . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 

2.2.4 save rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 

2.3 summari of the main problem encount in the field of studi 44 

2.3.1 problem with the deining and squir (1996) gini 
index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44 

2.3.2 estim of group-rel elast . . . . . . . . . 48 

2.4 data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50 

2.5 estim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50 

2.6 conclus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59 

B countri list 65 

3 estim the long-run relationship between incom inequal- 
iti and econom develop 67 

3.1 introduct . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68 

3.2 the main theoret relationship between inequ and growth 70 

3.2.1 the incom approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70 

3.2.2 the credit-market imperfect and combin approach 71 

3.2.3 the polit economi approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72 

3.3 time seri analysi of panel data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73 

3.3.1 data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73 

3.3.2 unit root test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74 

3.3.3 cointegr test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77 

3.4 estim of the cointegr coeffici of inequ . . . . 82 

3.4.1 estim and infer in cointegr panel . . . . 82 

3.4.2 estim result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83 

3.4.3 estim of incom group-rel elast of growth 85 

3.5 conclus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91 

C panel unit root test 99 

ii 



D pedroni’ and banerje & carrion-i-silvestre’ panel cointe- 
gration test 101 

E panel dol and panel dsur estim 105 

e.1 panel dol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105 

e.2 panel dsur . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106 

F countri list 107 

4 incom inequ and savings: a reassess of the rela- 
tionship in cointegr panel 111 

4.1 introduct . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112 

4.2 theoret and empir consider . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114 

4.3 data and unit root test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117 

4.3.1 data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117 

4.3.2 unit root test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121 

4.4 cointegr test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123 

4.4.1 test with the whole data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123 

4.4.2 test for the cointegr rank . . . . . . . . . . . . 127 

4.5 estim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132 

4.6 conclus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137 

G panel cointegr test by banerje and carrion-i-silvestr 
(2006) 147 

H panel trace cointegr test statist by larsson and lyha- 
gen (2007) 149 

I panel dsur and panel var estim 151 

i.1 panel dsur estim by mark et al. (2005) . . . . . . . . . . 151 

i.2 panel var estim by breitung (2005) . . . . . . . . . . . . 152 



iv 



acknowledg 

As with so mani thing in life, also thi thesi be not a product of linearity. 
As a teenag I start to work against thi goal by choos ventur of 
puberti over book smarts. thi forc me to choos commerci school over 
high school, a path which be unlik to lead to univers degre in finland. 
fortunately, dure the exuber econom cours taught by jussi hieva- 
nen at the commerci school of hyvinkää, I becom greatli interest about 
economics. despit the enthusiasm, it still take me sever year of, liter- 
ally, hard labor until the motiv be set for a no-nonsens effort to pa 
the univers entranc examination. the motiv be mostli gather in 
work a a packag machin attend at the saint-gobain isov ltd. 
in hyvinkää. 

My first academ stop be the depart of econom at the univer- 
siti of oulu. winter spent in oulu taught me the mean of the phrase 
"freak cold", but also under the encourag care of professor mikko 
puhakka the idea of write a doctor dissert grew. with the help 
of prof. puhakka the project be also put in motion as, after graduat in 
late fall 2005, hi contact grant me a mid-term passag to fdpe’ first 
year phd econometr course.1 person reason take me back down south 
for the rest of my phd studi and I end up in the (late) depart of 
econom at the univers of helsinki. there professor tapio palokanga 
and markku lann becom my tutors. 

like with most phd students, thi be not the last stop for me, a there 
be an almost mandatori visit to a foreign univers expect at some point 
of studies. dure a road trip through eastern coastal state of the US in 
the spring of 2008, I becom convinc that US would be the place of my 

1fdpe=finnish doctor programm in econom 

v 



visit. As our road trip reach new york city, I also knew the exact locat 
of the visit. thi be fortunate, a my six month stay at the new york 
univers becom the best time of my academ studies, both profession 
and personally. the rous academ environ at the nyu also renew 
my interest for economics, which at that point be almost complet lost. 
after return to finland, thi thesi be final within nine months. 

dure my academ journey, I have come across mani peopl and in- 
stitut that I owe gratitude. first, my humbl word of thank go to my 
colleagu and co-stud in the univers of oulu, hecer and the nyu. 
thi thesi would not have be make final without the overal support that 
I have receiv from you. i’m also grate to jussi hievanen for set thi 
thesi on it way all those mani year ago. 

there be mani professor I would like to thank. markku lann for hi 
guidanc and for hi tireless support on econometr and spell issues. 
tapio palokanga for accept me a a phd student in the univers of 
helsinki and for hi guidanc especi in the begin of my phd stud- 
ies. mikko puhakka for give me the "push" to strive for the dissertation. 
markku rahiala for hi indispens help with my master’ thesis, which 
late becom the first articl of thi thesis. raquel fernandez for give me 
the opportun to come to visit the nyu and for her guidanc dure my 
visit there. and, I be indebt to my preliminari examin jörg breitung 
and jesper roin for their insight comment and suggestions. 

I would like to thank my financi benefactor the yrjö jahnsson foun- 
dation, osuuspankki foundation, säästöpankki foundat and the com- 
memor fund of the univers of helsinki for their research grants. i’m 
especi grate to the academi of finland for provid the major of 
the fund for my 6 month visit to the nyu, and to the fdpe for the 
graduat school fellowship. 

I would also like to express my gratitud to certain peopl who have 
make an indispens contribut on the complet of thi thesis. with- 
out henri nyberg and leena kalliovirta thi thesi would have never reach 
the standard in econometr a it now hope does. jenni pääkkönen be 
an invalu asset on show me the way of the academia and provid 
outspoken comment on the articl includ in thi thesis. jenni rytkönen 

vi 



make the red tape at the fdpe seem almost humane. marjori lesser con- 
tribut heavili on make my visit to the nyu possible. leena and pekka 
heikkilä support me in way that be too numer to name throughout 
my academ studies. and, a humbl thank go to my friend for their 
support especi in time of dire straits. 

finally, I be most grate to my mother, anna-liisa, my aunts, arja, 
pirjo and tuula, my uncles, erkki and veli-matti, and to the rest of my ex- 
tend famili for their uncondit love and support dure thi quest. 

helsinki, decemb 2011 

tuoma malinen 

vii 



viii 



chapter 1 

introduct 

1.1 background 

incom inequ have becom one of the close follow societ subject in 
global medium within the last few years. for example, the new york time 
launch a notic campaign on incom inequ last year.1 the finan- 
cial time a well a the economist have also report on develop in 
incom inequ numer in recent times.2 

whi be incom inequ caus medium interest then? one factor con- 
tribut to thi interest be that incom inequ seem to be increas in 
develop economi after contract for a nearli of a centuri (see figur 1 
in section 1.2.2). from history, we know that the concentr of wealth on 
the hand of those who be alreadi rich can caus social unrest or even coup 
d’état (acemoglu and robinson 2001). incom inequ also infring the 
ideal of the foundat of (most) western economies, i.e. that all men (and 
women) be born equal. In addition, incom inequ may low the level 
of human capit by diminish educ opportun for low incom 
households, inflict addit cost to produc by increas illeg rent- 
seeking, and caus financi instabl by increas the leverag among the 
not-so-fortun citizen (fishman and simhon 2002; kumhof and ranciér 
2010; shaw and mckay 1969). thus, besid the rather obviou societ ram- 

1see the new york time topic and incom inequality. 
2for the economist, see the issu of 20th of april and 24th of march 2011. for ft, 

see issu of 5th and 12th of may 2011. 

1 



ifications, incom inequ may have a subtler neg effect on the growth 
prospect of a country. 

within the last two decad or so, the relationship between incom in- 
equal and econom growth have be wide debat and it have emerg 
one of the major field in economics.3 At the same time, the literatur on 
thi relationship have becom concentr on assess the effect empir 
typic by use data that consist on time seri observ from sever 
countries. thi have be due to the fact that the theoret literatur have 
produc result support both side of the "aisle", i.e. both the neg 
and the posit effect of inequ on growth (galor and moav 2004; stiglitz 
1969).4 unfortunately, the result of empir studi have also be contro- 
versial (barro 2000; banerje and duflo 2003; castelló-cli 2010; forb 
2000; persson and tabellini 1994). 

mani modern studi have use panel data consist onli on a hand of 
time seri observ on sever countries, i.e. ’short panels’, to studi the 
relationship between inequ and growth (barro 2000; forb 2000; Li and 
zou 1998; persson and tabellini 1994). thi thesi make an effort to resolv 
the abov mention discrep by analyz data from both short panel 
a well a from panel with long time seri from sever countries. By use 
panel with a long time seri dimension, thi thesi also look for a possibl 
long-run relationship between inequ and growth, which be a topic that 
have not be studi almost at all previously. thesi also contribut on one 
of the classic question in economics, i.e. do the propens to save increas 
with income? thi be anoth field within the growth literatur that tend to 
lack consensu even on the direct of the effect of inequ (cook 1995; 
leigh and posso 2009; Li and zou 2004; schmidt-hebbel and servén 2000). 

the rest of thi introductori chapter present the theori and method 
appli in thi thesis. summari of the three studi present in chap- 
ter 2-4 be also given. section 1.2 open with a histor introduct to 
the distribut aspect advanc by econom theory. It also present the 

3A simpl search for "incom inequ econom growth" on googl scholar produc 
over 746.000 result on the 16th of may 2011. 

4natur there be also a third effect or a non-effect mean that inequ could also 
have no effect on growth. but, such result would lack theoret interest which return 
the question on the (possible) effect of inequ on growth a an empir one. 

2 



measur of incom inequ use in thi studi and give an overview to 
the recent global trend in the inequ of income. the model of incom 
variat and the distribut of incom be discuss in section 1.3. section 
1.4 present the gener econom theori develop to explain the effect of 
incom inequ on econom growth. issu relat to the analysi of panel 
data be discuss in section 1.5. section 1.6 summar the find of thi 
thesis. 

1.2 incom inequality: the wisdom of econom 
thought and global trend 

money be like muck, not good except that it be spread. 
- franci bacon (1625) 

1.2.1 what determin the divis of product among 
the factor of land, labor, and capital? 

the classic queri pose in the titl of thi section have basic govern the 
econom scienc throughout it entir existence. thi be becaus econom 
was, in principle, found to answer two questions: how can we achiev devel- 
opment and what determin the distribut of product among the factor of 
land, labor and capital? they be the two main theme discuss in adam 
smith’ (1776) semin book on the wealth of nation and both of them be 
contribut by sever classic authors, includ malthu (1815), ricardo 
(1817), and mill (1845). As it turn out, neither of these question have 
be easi to answer. the distribut of product amongst the factor of pro- 
duction have divid the econom scienc for the last two centuri while the 
literatur on econom growth has, dure the same period of time, produc 
onli few fact about the factor behind econom development. 

As the histori of the last 200 year have show us, econom progress 
bring in it train an indispens array of benefits. We know that econom 
develop promot health, increas the life expectancy, and increas the 
overal qualiti of life of individu (doepk 2004; galor and weil 2000). most 
of these gain have be produc by follow the idea of market capitalism, 

3 



name an econom system where the mean of product be priv 
own and use to make profit. however, a put forth by schumpet (1942), 
capit be a way of creation through destruction. what thi mean be that 
a market economi be engag in a process of competit which constantli 
creat new through the destruct of the old and inefficient. thi endoge- 
nou creativ process of innov and econom develop enabl the 
growth in product and drive the technolog progress, which rais our 
qualiti of life. what thi process also creates, however, be a continu cycl 
of creation-destruction-creation, where some individu and busi be 
thrown out of profit and suffici incom for a short or possibl extend 
period of time. thi process of capitalist market economi further complic 
the issu of distribution, a the individu who be thrown out of incom be 
no longer factor of production, at least in the strict sens of production, for 
the time they remain outsid the product workforce. market economi 
also tend to go through differ phase of develop that may increas or 
decreas the level of inequ accordingly. 

kuznet (1955) construct a theori to explain the chang in the dis- 
tribut of incom dure the process of develop in capitalist market 
economies. accord to the so call kuznet’ relation, the inequ of 
incom will first increas and then decreas in the cours of econom devel- 
opment. inequ will increas in the begin of industri due to 
a grow wage dispar between agricultur and factori pay. lower mor- 
taliti rates, great fertil rates, and invest in new technolog will 
also increas the inequ of incom dure the first phase of industrial- 
ization. growth of inequ be necessari becaus an egalitarian agrarian 
economi cannot accumul enough save so that capit creation would 
be suffici for product growth. later on, a the economi industrializes, 
the distribut of incom will even out a a larg portion of peopl move 
to a high industri pay. 

kuznet (1955) make a respect effort to describ the (natural) divi- 
sion of product among the factor of product in differ stage of eco- 
nomic development. unfortunately, empir research follow hi semin 
paper on the curvilinear relat between the distribut of incom and the 
level of develop have produc some mix result (frazer 2006; gagliani 

4 



1987; nielsen 1994). moreover, current trend in incom inequ in devel- 
ope economi stand in stark contrast against the kuznet’ relat (see 
figur 1 below). so, even if the kuznet’ relat would describ the evolu- 
tion of the distribut of incom dure industrialization, it do not seem 
to fit veri well on the post-industri economies. In econom theory, the 
"great divide" have also alreadi occur befor kuznet’ publish hi the- 
ory. grow incom inequ in major newli industri economi in 
the late 18th and earli 19th centuri have creat a divid within the eco- 
nomic scienc on how societi should determin the distribut of product 
among it citizens. these two end of the spectrum where (are) the socialist 
econom theori put forth by marx and engel (1848) and marx (1887), and 
the austrian school creat by menger (1871). 

marx (1887), a the father of the socialist econom system, saw the cap- 
italist economi a an exploit of the work class in benefit of the rich. 
He argu that strip down the right that give the capitalist the power 
to oppress the work class, i.e. the right to own capit and land, equal 
both in incom and promin among individu would follow suit.5 how- 
ever, the fall of the soviet bloc in the late 20th centuri show that appli 
marx’ theori to practic be extrem difficult, if not impossible.6 marx’ 
idea of collect govern over the product factor lead to ineffici in 
product due to central govern divis of product among the factor 
of product (walder 1991; weitzman 1991). thus, in a socialist econom 
system, the redistribut of incom be do by govern officials, not by 
market signals. this, naturally, lead to a seriou incent problem amongst 
the worker a return to their product factor, the labor, be not deter- 
mine by their effort.7 wage and privat consumpt be also held back 
which caus the live standard to remain veri low (åslund 2007). In ad- 

5thi refer to the whole product of marx, not just the capit and manifesto of 
the communist parti . 

6it should be noted, however, that marx never mention revolut (ekelund and 
hébert 1990). It be thu possibl that marx thought that social would be the end-point 
of capitalism, mean that after certain stage of develop capit would lead to 
socialism. 

7in socialist system labor forc usual includ also the land-owners, or the kolkhoz 
and sovkhoz, becaus own of land be prohibited. govern jurisdict be the 
owner of the capit (walder 1991). 

5 



dition, central plan economi be plagu by shortag of good and 
services. regardless of the obviou problem face by communist economies, 
the actual econom reason for the collaps of socialist econom system 
be still somewhat debat (see åslund (2007); easterli and fischer (1995); 
harrison (2002); zubok (2008)). 

At the other end of the spectrum, the austrian school of econom saw 
the price mechan and, thus, the free ownership of the factor of pro- 
duction a the best (the most efficient) way to alloc incom among in- 
dividu (hayek 1945; mise 1969). the econom doctrin of the austrian 
school oppos govern intervent to the "self-efficient" market mech- 
anism. therefore, the austrian school advanc the idea of a free market, or 
laissez-faire, econom doctrine. despit the fact that the idea of free-market 
econom have be fairli popular within the econom sciences, no countri 
have actual adopt the econom doctrin of the austrian school liter 
(stringman and hummel 2010). 

within the last 50 year or so, a model that can be see a a hybrid of 
these two end have also emerged.8 In accord with the stockholm eco- 
nomic school, the so call nordic econom model, which incorpor free 
market ideolog in a societi with a highli develop structur of social insur- 
ance, be developed. thi "hybrid" have be abl to combin rel high 
growth rate to reason flat distribut of income. especi within the 
last 20 years, the nordic model have also show it resili to mani shock 
commonli associ with capitalist systems, includ financi crisi and 
recess (aaberg et al. 2002; may 2009). 

1.2.2 measur incom inequ 

how have the incom inequ evolv in countri with differ econom 
systems? In thi thesi two differ measur of incom inequ be used, 
which can be use to shed some light on thi matter. these measur be the 

8befor the nordic model be developed, mani european countri have also creat 
system that incorpor aspect from both social and free-markets. nordic model is, 
however, probabl the prime exampl of a econom doctrin that incorpor the best 
features, i.e. free market think and extens social security, of both of these econom 
models. 

6 



ehii inequ measure, which be base on the gini index by deining and 
squir (1996), and the incom share of the top 1% of incom earners. 

probabl the most common measur of incom inequ have be the 
gini index or the gini coefficient. formally, the gini coeffici be defin as: 

gini = 1 
2n2µ 

σni=1σ 
n 
j=1∣yi − yj ∣, (1.1) 

where n be the number of households, µ be the mean household income, and 
yi and yj be incom of ani two of the n household (culyer 1980). thus, 
the gini index give the rel posit of differ household within the 
incom distribution. one of the problem of the gini index be that it re- 
quir quit a lot of information. To calcul it accur one need the 
mean household (or person) incom within a country, which in mani case 
be veri hard to come by. thi have also caus problem with the compara- 
biliti of the data, a incom data be usual gather differ in differ 
countries. some countries, for example, gather incom data from household 
while other gather it from individuals. this, naturally, can lead to seriou 
compar problem across countries. 

To overcom these problem there have be a grow interest toward 
use taxat statist to estim the level of incom inequ within 
the last decad or so. thi have open up a possibl to construct lengthi 
time seri on the evolut of the top incom share of popul from 
sever differ countries. top incom share data us the same raw data 
from all countri and it be construct use the same methodolog for everi 
countri (piketti 2007). thi should make the seri comparable. the long 
time seri also make it easi to ass possibl structur changes. however, 
some disadvantag remain. first and foremost, fulli homogenu cross- 
countri data just do not exist, although the tax statist may be the 
closest we can get to a data that be homogen across countries. It be also 
possibl that the top incom share follow differ process in time than 
the overal inequ does. furthermore, the possibl of tax avoid may 
have bia the results. nevertheless, top incom share have be found to 
track broader measur of incom inequality, like the gini index, veri well 
(leigh 2007). 

figur 1 present the evolut of the top 1% incom share within 11 

7 



develop economi dure the 20th century. In spite of somewhat differ 

0 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

1875 1900 1925 1950 1975 2000 

australia canada 
finland franc 
japan netherland 
new zealand norway 
sweden UK 
unit state 

figur 1. the share of incom of the top 1% of popul in 11 develop countri 

1880-2009. source: alvaredo et al. (2011) 

social polici among these 11 develop nations, incom inequ have fol- 
low a strikingli similar pattern dure the last centuri or so. In accord 
with the kuznet’ relation, incom inequ have follow a fall trend al- 
most all countri through the 20th century, but in the end of the 20th centuri 
the trend seem to have reversed. roin and waldenström (2011) have exam- 
ine the question that do the seri of top incom of develop countri 
includ structur breaks, i.e. break in the mean and/or trend of the series. 
they found that there be evid of a common trend-break in the seri of 

8 



top 1% incom share in the year 1945 and 1980.9 the break in 1945 show 
a shift from faster declin of incom inequ to a more slow decline. the 
break in 1980, however, constitut a shift after which the declin trend 
either chang to increas trend or to a stabl non-increasing/-decreas 
trend. that is, in thi sub-sampl of develop countries, the share of incom 
of the top 1% have be grow or remain stabl sinc the 1980s. 

To get a big pictur of what have happen within the last 20 years, 
figur 2 present the mean valu of the ehii2008 inequ measur for 96 
countries.10 thi measur be creat use the gini index by deining and 
squir (1996), the annual data on wage on the manufactur sector and 
the manufactur share of popul publish by the unit nation in- 
dustrial develop organ (galbraith and kum 2006).11 the figur 

36 

38 

40 

42 

44 

46 

1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 

mean of ehii2008 

figur 2. the mean of the ehii2008 inequ measur for 96 countri 1963-2002. source: 

galbraith and kum (2006) 

9the number of countri includ in the stydi by roin and waldenström (2011) be 
9. 

10ehii stand for estim household incom inequality. 
11for more detail descript of the ehii2008 inequ measur see section 2.3.1. 

9 



endors the find by roin and waldenström (2011). the mean of incom 
inequ have clearli increas sinc the 1980. 

what countri then have contribut the most for the increas of the 
mean after the 1980s? figur 3 present the mean valu of the ehii2008 
inequ measur for group of former communist and nordic countries, the 
mean valu for the group of 9 out of the 11 develop countri present 
in figur 1, and the mean valu for the remain 69 countri present in 
figur 2.12 accord to figur 3, the big increas in incom inequ 

25.0 

27.5 

30.0 

32.5 

35.0 

37.5 

40.0 

42.5 

45.0 

1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 

mean communist mean develop 

mean nordic mean 69 

figur 3. the mean valu of the ehii2008 inequ measur for communist, nordic, 

and develop countri 1963-2002. source: galbraith and kum (2006) 

have occur in the former communist countries, where the inequ also 
12former communist countri include: bulgaria, china, croatia, cuba, czech re- 

public, hungary, kyrgyz republic, macedonia, poland, romania, slovenia, soviet 
union/russia, and yugoslavia. valu of croatia and slovenia overlap with the valu 
of yugoslavia for three year from 1986 to 1989. nordic countri include: denmark, fin- 
land, iceland, norway, and sweden. 

10 



seem to have be at the low level dure the communist era.13 In nordic 
countries, the trend seem quit stabl although there be an upward kink in 
the graph in 2001. incom inequ in the remain 69 out of 96 countri 
seem quit stabl although it also have risen from the 1980s. thus, the revers 
of the downward trend in inequ in develop economi and the rais in 
incom inequ in transit economi seem to have contribut the most 
on the global trend of increas inequ dure the last two decades. 

1.3 the process of incom variat and the 
distribut of incom 

the forc determin the distribut of incom in ani com- 
muniti be so vari and complex, and interact and fluctuat so 
continuously, that ani theoret model must either be unrealis- 
tical simplifi or hopelessli complicated. 
-d. G. chambernown (1953) 

the veri first formal model on the distribut of incom by chambernown 
(1953) and mandelbrot (1961) be base on the assumpt that the process 
of incom variat be stochastic. intuit thi seem like a veri reason 
assumpt as, at least, some part of the individu incom be usual deem 
to fluctuat randomli from year to year. 

later on, for example, deaton (1991) have use random walk to approx- 
imat the develop in labor incom through time in hi studi on how 
liquid constraint affect nation savings. deaton assum that the labor 
incom of an individu follow an ar(1) process of the form: 

log(yt+1) = δ + log(yt) + log(zt+1), (1.2) 
13it should be note that due to data qualiti and polit issu concern incom 

distribution, the incom distribut data obtain under the communist rule be like 
to be quit unreli (åslund 2007). however, it be also true that in mani transit 
economi poverti rise after transit due to fall output and wages. At the same 
time, the middle-class emerged. these two contract develop have be like to 
contribut to the rapid rise of incom inequ in the former communist countries. still, 
the actual magnitud of the dispers of incom be more or less unclear. 

11 



where yt be labor income, zt+1 be stochast random variable, and δ > 0 be a con- 
stant. when zt+1 be assum to be ident and independ distributed, 
the labor incom process, log(yt), be i(1) non-stationari and, specifically, 
it follow a random walk with drift (see section a.1 for a more detail 
definit of the random walk and i(1) nonstationari processes). An i(1) 
nonstationari process have a infinit memory, i.e. they be highli persis- 
tent. assum some degre of persist in the evolut of the incom 
seri (yt) of an individu be quit intuitive, a shock (e.g., wage raise) to 
the incom process of an individu may have perman effect on the futur 
incom of the individual. therefore, the random walk model (1.2) appear to 
be a good descript of labor income. 

however, it be also like that some determinist factor like educ 
affect on the labor income. In a recent studi on the evolut of consumpt 
and incom inequality, blundel et al. (2008) model the incom of household 
to be vari accord to: 

logyit = zitδt + pit + vit, (1.3) 

where zit be a set of incom characterist that be observ and know 
by consum at time t,14 vit follow a move averag process of order q (a 
ma(q) process), and pi,t = pi,t−1+ϵit with ϵit serial uncorrelated, indic 
that the process {p} be i(1) nonstationary. sever studi in the micro 
literatur tend to find that also empir the perman compon pit 
be a random walk, and henc it can be model a an i(1) nonstationari 
process (meghir and pistaferri 2004; hall and mishkin 1982; blundel et al. 
2008). 

when individu incom seri be affect by a random walk component, 
their aggreg time seri be like to be character by a random walk 
(rossanan and seater 1995). however, the distribut of incom be often 
measur use some bound measure, like the gini index or the share 
of income. thi issu a question on the random walk hypothesis, a ani 
measur that vari within some boundari like the incom share, cannot, by 
definition, be an i(1) nonstationari process. thi be becaus the varianc of 

14these includ demographic, education, employ status, ethnic, etc. factor (blun- 
dell et al. 2008) 

12 



such a seri cannot grow infinitely, which be one properti of the random walk 
process. however, it be possibl that the distribut can have stochast trend 
in it other moments, like the mean, skewness, and kurtosis, than varianc 
(white and granger 2010). thi way the measur of incom inequality, be 
a function of some incom distribut have a stochast trend in one or 
sever of it high moments, may exhibit such high level of persist 
that it be good approxim by an i(1) process than a stationari process. 

1.4 theoret effect of incom inequ on 
econom growth 

you cannot have the benefit of capitalist market growth without 
the support of, virtually, all the people. 
-alan greenspan (c-span, septemb 2007) 

1.4.1 the origin 

the question, how do the distribut of product affect the product was, 
for some time, a more infrequ studi subject in economics, although 
the relat between the distribut of incom and incom growth be com- 
ment alreadi by smith (1776). smith argu that becaus nation save 
govern the accumul of capital, and becaus onli the rich peopl saved, 
the accumul of capit requir that there be enough rich peopl in 
the society. however, smith also argu that product growth would not be 
possibl without suffici demand. He state that everi man should be abl 
to provid for himself and hi family. thi would constitut the threshold of 
sustain inequality, and it would also assur a suffici level of demand 
in the economy. 

despit the fact that the classic doctrin gener argu that invest- 
ment be a result of savings, not much emphasi be put on how the distri- 
bution of incom would affect save after smith (1776). thi be becaus 
classic econom thought reli quit often to the say’ law. what say’ 
law state be that suppli creat it own demand, impli that save be the 
potenti demand (a "promise" of consumption) that be just work through 

13 



investments. there was, however, one loud critic of the say’ law among the 
classics. malthu (1836) argu that save ex ant need not to alway equal 
invest ex ante. that is, consumpt can exceed product result 
to an over-demand, which will lead to diminish wealth of a nation due 
to excess use of product capital. but, malthu (1836) never develop 
hi critiqu to explain how market forc maintain the optimum rate of sav- 
ings, and the monetari caus of overproduct (ekelund and hébert 1990). 
thus, say’ law remain the cornerston in classic econom thinking. 

It take a centuri befor keyn (1936) final the critiqu of the say’ 
law put forth by malthu (1836).15 keyn present hi theori of aggre- 
gate demand and consumpt in hi princip work, the gener theori 
of employment, interest, and money, which also state that inequ of 
incom will lead to slow econom growth. keyn argu that margin 
consumpt decreas a the incom of an individu increases, and thu 
aggreg consumpt depend on chang in aggreg income. accord 
to keynes, demand be the basi of investments, and becaus inequ low- 
er aggreg consumption, the inequ of incom will diminish econom 
growth by diminish investments. 

stiglitz (1969) summar the find of the classic econom theori 
a follows. In classic econom theory, inequ of incom be assum 
to influenc econom growth rate through save and consumption. when 
the save function be linear, e.g. si =myi + b, where yi be output per capita, 
m be the margin propens to save, and b be the per caput save at 
zero income, aggreg save behavior in an economi be not affect by the 
distribut of income. however, if the save function be nonlinear, aggreg 
save becom depend on the distribut of income. 

when the save function be linear or concave, distribut of incom 
and wealth converg toward equal (stiglitz 1969). If the save function 
be convex, i.e. the margin propens to save increas with income, more 
unequ distribut of incom result in high capit intens through 
great aggreg savings. thus, in a steady-st equilibrium, where incom 
be distribut unevenly, the wealth of a nation be great than in the steady- 

15note: the second edit of principl of polit economi gener cite from 
malthus, be publish posthumously. 

14 



state equilibrium, where incom be distribut evenly. however, these steady- 
state equilibrium exist onli when all individu have posit wealth. thus, 
result may not apply, for example, to develop countries. 

1.4.2 modern theori 

there be basic three main strain of modern theori on the effect of 
incom inequ on econom growth. these includ the polit economi 
model by perotti (1993), a model of divis of labor and special by 
fishman and simhon (2002), and the two-regim model by galor and moav 
(2004), which combin the classic approach with human capit theori by 
becker (1965) and mincer (1974). all these strand of theoret literatur 
reli on the human capit theori and on the assumpt of credit restrictions. 
human capit theori explain the role of human capit in the product 
process a special (schooling) and on-the-job invest (training) 
(acemoglu 2009). credit-market imperfect refer to the situat in which 
people’ access to credit be restricted. these restrict can origin from 
the regul of legisl institutions, credit ration impos by central 
banks, or from underdevelop bank sector. further, credit-market im- 
perfect be present when acquir credit in return for expect futur 
profit be grave limited. 

polit economi model assum that prefer of individu be ag- 
gregat through polit process. therefore, redistribut of incom and 
econom growth be driven by the polit process. polit process can be 
driven by a median voter or by organ social groups. In the model by per- 
otti (1993), the equilibrium reach by the economi depend on the initi 
distribut of income. If the aggreg capit be veri small, redistribut 
of incom through tax and subsidi will result in a poverti trap where 
no one be abl to acquir education. In thi case, a more unequ distribu- 
tion of incom will support the economi becaus at least some individu 
be abl to acquir educ and increas the level of human capital. As 
economi becom more developed, veri unequ incom distribut may 
diminish growth becaus the accumul of human capit would requir 
that middle-incom and poor individu acquir education, a the rich have 
alreadi educ themselves. In a rich economy, onli the poor may increas 

15 



the level of human capital, and therefor high steady-st growth path 
requir that incom be distribut evenly. 

If an economy’ aggreg capit be small, unevenli distribut incom 
urg capit owner to invest in special (fishman and simhon 2002). 
In thi case, inequ result to a high level of human capital, a high 
divis of labor, and thu to faster econom growth. when an economy’ 
aggreg capit be large, the more equal distribut of incom encour- 
age household to invest in special and entrepreneurship. In thi case, 
equal of incom will creat a more risk-fre environ and wide-bas 
demand for goods. thi will lead to high employment, great divis of 
labor, and to faster econom growth. 

In the model by galor and moav (2004), the engin of econom growth 
chang from physic capit to physic and human capit in the process of 
econom development. the process of econom develop be divid into 
two regimes, which have their own steady-st growth paths. economi in 
the first regim be underdeveloped, aggreg physic capit be small, and 
the rate of return to human capit be low than the rate of return to physic 
capital. In thi regim inequ increas aggreg save by increas 
the incom of the rich and great aggreg save fuel physic capit 
accumulation. 

In the second regime, economi be rich and the rate of return to hu- 
man capit be so high that it induc human capit accumul (galor 
and moav 2004). therefore, both human and physic capit be engin 
for econom development. sinc individuals’ invest in human capit be 
subject to diminish margin returns, the return to human capit in- 
vestment be maxim when invest in human capit be wide spread 
among the population. becaus access to credit be constrained, human capit 
invest be maxim when incom in the economi be distribut evenly. 

1.5 analyz panel data 

I be oblig at the outset to draw attent to the fact that 
analysi of varianc can be, and is, use to provid solut to 
problem of two fundament differ types. these two distinct 

16 



class of problem are: class I: detect and estim of fix 
(constant) relat among the mean of sub-set of the univers 
of object concerned; class ii: detect and estim of compo- 
nent of (random) variat associ with a composit popula- 
tion. 
- churchil eisenhart (1947) 

A panel or a longitudin data set consist of sever time series, index 
t = 1, ..., T , for sever cross-sect units, index i = 1, ..., n, where i can 
be country, a municipality, a firm, and so on. therefore, the observ can 
be collect to a singl vector, for example: 

Yi = (yi,1 ... yi,t i)′ i = 1, ..., n 
Y = (Y ′1 ... Y ′n)′, 

where the vector (Y ′1 ...i ′n) includ the time seri observ of the n 
statist unit or individuals. 

the use of panel data poss sever major advantag over cross-sect 
or time-seri data. panel data usual give a larg number of data points, 
which increas the degre of freedom and reduc collinear among ex- 
planatori variables, thu improv the effici of estimates. dynam of 
chang or the dynam coeffici cannot usual be estim use cross- 
section or singl time seri data (hsiao 2003). cross-sect estim 
also usual fail on make infer about the dynam of chang a their 
estim tend to reflect inter-individu differ inher in comparison 
of differ people, firms, or countries. that is, cross-sect data be un- 
abl to distinguish between individu or countri in differ regions, for 
example, a it cannot use the inform on subject that chang between 
regions. with panel data, thi can be done, a it includ inform on the 
subject from a long(er) period of time. 

In time seri analysis, analyz some dynam model requir that the 
lag coeffici need to be assumed, a priori, to be a function of onli a 
veri small number of paramet (hsiao 2003). otherwise, multicollinear 
can be a problem.16 If panel data would be available, the interindividu 

16consid a distribut lag model of the form: 

yt = σhk=0βkxt−k + ϵt, t = 1, ..., T, 

17 



diffenc in the (exogenous) explanatori variabl could be use to reduc 
the problem of collinearity. panel data also allow one to control for one of 
the crucial problem aris in cross-sect of time seri data, name 
the omit variabl bias. If individual- or some group-specif factor affect 
on the depend variables, explanatori variabl can captur the effect 
of these factors, and paramet estim will not repres the true effect 
of the explanatori variabl per se. with panel data, one can util the 
intertempor dynam and the individu of the subject be studied. 
consider, for example, a simpl time seri regression: 

yt = α + β′xt + γzt + ϵt (1.4) 

where xt and zt be exogen variables, α be a constant and the error term ϵt 
be independ and ident distribut over t with mean zero and vari- 
anc σ2. If zt be observable, there be no problem and the coeffici of β and 
γ can be consist estim use ols. however, if zt be unobserv 
and the covari between xt and zt be nonzero, the ol estim of coeffi- 
cient on xt be inconsistent. If we would be abl to use repeat observ 
from the same individual, model (1.5) would be give as: 

yt = α + β′xit + γzit + ϵit, (1.5) 

where ϵit be now identically, independ distribut over i and t with mean 
zero and varianc σ2ϵ . now, if zit = zt for all i mean that the valu of z 
stay constant across individuals, one be abl to take deviat from the mean 
across individu at a give time yielding: 

yit − ȳt = β′(xit − x̄t) + (ϵit − ϵ̄t). (1.6) 

thus, the (unobserved) effect zt be elimin and ol can be use to obtain 
consist and unbias estim of β from (1.6). 

the limit of the panel data analysi includ the possibl hetero- 
geneiti bia and cross-sect dependence. even though the panel data can 
cope with heterogen of the data good than the cross-sect or time 

where xt be an exogen variabl and ϵt be random disturb term. now, obviously, xt 
be near xt−1, and still nearer 2xt−1 − xt−2 = xt−1 + (xt−1 − xt−2) (hsiao 2003). thus, a fairli 
strict multicollinearieti appear among h + 1 explanatori variables. 

18 



seri data, ignor the individu or time-specif effect that exist among 
cross-sect or time seri unit can still lead to paramet heterogen in 
the panel model specif (hsiao 2003). if, for example, the slope of the 
estim paramet in the model (1.5) would differ, i.e. βi ≠ βj, straight- 
forward pool of all observ from differ individu could lead to 
nonsens pooling, a it would just give a averag of coeffici that dif- 
fer across individuals. furthermore, time-vari intercept and coeffici 
would also be like to caus bias. 

larg macro panel includ long time seri from sever countries, 
which all possibl belong to some group, like the oecd countries, may be 
affect by cross-sect dependence. the cross-sect depend aris 
when, for example, the gdp seri of sever countri be correl with 
each other. thi may lead to bia infer if not account for. especially, 
in cointegr panel cross-sect depend can bia the result of the 
test and estim consider (baltagi 2008; mark and sul 2003). 

1.5.1 basic estim of panel data 

In panel data models, the condit expect of y give x can be exam- 
ine by use the linear regression: 

yit = αi + βX ′it + ϵit, ϵit ∼ n(0, σ2), ϵit ⊥⊥xit. (1.7) 

where β be a k×1 vector of paramet coeffici (exclud intercept). now, 
if ui ⊥⊥xit, but αi ≠ α ∀i, a random effect estim can be use to estim 
model (1.7). It be base on a model: 

yit = α + βX ′it + ui + ϵit, ui ∼ n(0, σ2u), ϵit ∼ n(0, σ2ϵ ), (1.8) 

where follow assumpt must hold: 

eui = eϵit ≡ 0, (1.9) 

euiuj = 
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩ 

σ2u if i = j 
0 if i ≠ j, 

(1.10) 

eϵitϵjt = 
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩ 

σ2ϵ if i = j, t = s 
0 otherwise, 

(1.11) 

19 



and 

ui ⊥⊥xit, (1.12) 
ϵit ⊥⊥xit, (1.13) 
ϵit ⊥⊥ ui. (1.14) 

In the case of random effects, the ol estim be no longer the blue, i.e. 
the best linear unbias estimator. thus, in the case of random effects, the 
estim must be conduct with gener least squar estimator, or 
gls. 

however, if ui á xit, the gl random effect estim will be incon- 
sistent. In thi case, the fix effect estim can be used. fix effect 
estim be base on the model: 

yit = αi + β′xit + ϵit, ϵit ∼ n(0, σ2), ϵit ⊥⊥xit 
i = 1, ..., n, t = 1, ..., T, 

where αi be a scalar of constant repres the effect of those variabl 
specif to the ith individual. the ol estim of fix effect be also call 
the least-squar dummi variables, or the lsdv estimator. the lsdv esti- 
mator remov the individu effect effects, usual by assum σni=1αi = 0 
(hsiao 2003). thi way the individu effect αi repres the deviat of 
the ith individu from the common mean, and they be elimin from 
estimation. 

one can also use instrument estim method to control for the pos- 
sibl endogen problem. endogen aris when some or all of the ex- 
planatori variabl be correl with some part of the error term. with 
panel data thi often refer to the situat present abov where ui áxit. 
although lsdv estim can be use to control for thi problem, it be bia 
and inconsist estimator, if explanatori variabl includ lag valu of 
the depend variable.17 dynam panel data model be of the form: 

yit = α + γyi,t−1 + ui + ϵit, ui ∼ iid(0, σ2u), ϵit ∼ iid(0, σ2ϵ ) (1.15) 

In thi case, clearly, ui á yi,t−1. now, the gener method of moment (gmm) 
estim can be use to consist estim model (1.15). for the instru- 
mental variables, denot a zit, it be requir that ui ⊥⊥ zit. In the case of 

17however, with T ð→∞ the lsdv estim becom consistent. 

20 



(1.15), lag of differ of explanatori variabl can be use a instrument 
variabl for yit a first differenc elimin the individu time-invari 
variabl ui. so, for example, (yi,t−1 − yi,t−2) and (yi,t−2 − yi,t−3) can be use 
a instrument for yi,t−1, (yi,t−2 − yi,t−3) and (yi,t−3 − yi,t−4 ) can be use a 
instrument for yi,t−2, etc. 

1.5.2 estim in cointegr panel data 

estim present abov be consist and/or asymptot unbias 
onli when the underli data be not cointegr (baltagi 2008; kao and 
chiang 2000). cointegr refer to a stationari linear combin of in- 
tegrat variables. cointegr thu impli that there be a long-run equilib- 
rium relat between the integr variables. integration, or i(1) nonsta- 
tionar of a variabl mean that a stochast trend affect the evolut of 
the seri through time. such seri be describ in a.1. integr variabl 
have a infinit memori and they be highli persist mean that they be 
describ by strong autocorrel between success observ of the 
time series. 

assume, for example, that we have a two-dimension time seri of the 
form: 

⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩ 

y1t = βx∗t + ϵ1t 
y2t = x∗t + ϵ2t, 

(1.16) 

with x∗t ∼ i(1) and ϵ1t, ϵ2t ∼ i(0), then 

(1 − β) 
⎛ 
⎝ 
y1t 

y2t 

⎞ 
⎠ 
= β(x∗t − x∗t ) + (ϵ1t − βϵ2t) ∼ i(0), (1.17) 

thus, the seri Yt = (y1t y2t)′ be say to be cointegr and the cointegra- 
tion vector be [1 − β]. the result present in (1.17) can also be use to 
test for cointegr between i(1) nonstationari variables, i.e. we can test 
be some of the linear combin of the variabl stationary. 

mark and sul (2003) consid a dynam ol (dols) estim with 
fix effects, heterogen trends, and common time effect for cointegr 
panel data. the last model account for cross-sect depend by intro- 

21 



duce a common time effect. mark and sul’ model assum that observa- 
tion on each individu i obey the follow triangular representation: 

yit = αi + λit + θt + γ′xit + uit, (1.18) 

where (1,−γ′) be a cointegr vector between yit and xit, which be ident 
across individuals, αi be a individual-specif effect, λit be a individual-specif 
linear trend, θt be a common time-specif factor, and uit be a idionsyncrat 
error term that be independ across i, but possibl depend across t. 
model (1.18) allow for a limit form of cross-sect correlation, where 
the equilibrium error for each individu be driven in part by θt. 

panel dol elimin the possibl endogen between explanatori 
variabl and the depend variabl by assum that uit be correl at 
most with pi lead and lag of △xit (mark and sul 2003). the possibl en- 
dogen can be control by project uit onto these lead and lags: 

uit = σpis=−piδ′i,s△ xi,t− + uit∗ = δ′izit + u∗it. (1.19) 

the project error u∗it be orthogon to all the lead and lag of △xit and 
the estim equat becomes: 

yit = αi + λit + θt + γ′xit + δizit + u∗it, (1.20) 

where δ′izit be a vector of project dimensions. the consist estim of 
(1.20) be base on sequenti limits, mean that the converg occur in 
sequenti fashion, where first T → ∞ after which n → ∞. equat (1.20) 
can be feasibl estim in panel with small to moder n. 

An altern to the panel dol estim be the panel var estima- 
tor by breitung (2005). He propos a panel var(p) model which can be 
present a a panel vector error-correct model (vecm) a 

△yit = ψidt + αiβ′y,t−1 +Σ 
p−1 
j=1γij △ yi,t−j + ϵit, (1.21) 

where dt be a vector of determinist variabl and ψi a k × k matrix of un- 
know coefficients, γij be unrestrict matrix, and ϵit be a white nois error 
vector with e(ϵit) = 0 and posit definit covari matrix Σi = e(ϵitϵ′it). 
the model be estim in two stages. first, the model be estim sepa- 
rate across n cross-sect units. then cointegr vector be normal 

22 



so that they do not depend on individu specif parameters. second, the 
system be transform to a pool regress of the form: 

ẑit = β′yi,t−1 + v̂it, (1.22) 

where ẑit = (α̂′iς̂−1i α̂i)−1α̂′iς̂−1i △ yit and v̂it be defin in similar fashion. the 
cointegr matrix, β, can now be estim from (1.22) use the ol es- 
timator. It be assum that the statist unit includ in the panel have the 
same cointegr rank. consist estim be base on sequenti limits. 
cross-sect correl be account by use an estim asymptot 
covari matrix. 

1.6 contribut of the thesi 

thi thesi concentr on the panel econometr analysi of the relationship 
between inequ and growth. the relationship be studi from three dif- 
ferent angles. first, the short-term effect of inequ on growth be studied. 
next, the long-run (equilibrium) relationship between inequ and eco- 
nomic develop be analyzed. the third chapter concentr on the effect 
that inequ may have on the factor of econom development, name on 
it possibl effect on savings. 

1.6.1 the effect of incom inequ on econom growth 
in the short run 

In chapter 2, the effect of inequ on growth be studi by use macroe- 
conom data on a panel of 70 countries. chapter contribut on two set 
of problem that panel econometr studi have recent encountered. these 
be the compar problem associ with the commonli use gini index 
by deining and squir (1996), and the problem relat to the estim 
of group-rel elast in panel data. 

mani recent studi assess the effect of inequ on growth have 
use the gini index by deining and squir (1996) a a measur of incom 
inequality. however, the "high quality" dataset of deining and squir have 

23 



receiv seriou critic concern the accuracy, consistency, and compara- 
biliti of the data (atkinson and brandolini 2001; galbraith and kum 2006). 
galbraith and kum (2006) have creat a new improv measur of in- 
come inequ call the ehii2008. they have obtain their inequ 
measur by regress deining and squire’ gini coeffici on the val- 
ue of explanatori variables, which includ the differ incom measur 
of deining and squire’ data set, the set of measur of the dispers of 
pay in the manufactur sector, and the manufactur share of the popula- 
tion. thi should make the valu of ehii2008 consist and compar a 
the data on wage on the manufactur sector should be compar across 
countries. the ehii2008 inequ measur also have a larg data coverag on 
differ countries, which diminish the small sampl bia and the possibl 
of systemat error in estimation. 

mani of the theori present in section 1.4 assum that the effect of 
incom inequ on econom growth would differ between countri accord- 
ing to their level of econom development. estim of such incom group 
elast in panel data with parametr method would requir that some 
group-specif constant be add to the estim model. thi creat a 
statist dubiou estim configuration, and the infer of such esti- 
mation be like to be condit on the sampl (hsiao 2003; baltagi 2008). 
the gener way to avoid the vagu relat to the use of group- or 
individual-rel constant have be to use non-parametr method (lin et 
al. 2006; banerje and duflo 2003). the problem with non-parametr meth- 
od be that they be know to lack statist power compar with parametr 
method in small sampl gener use in growth literature. 

It be show in thi chapter that there be a simpl way to ’bypass’ the 
vagu relat to the use of parametr method to estim group-rel 
parameters. the idea be to estim the group-rel elast implicitli 
use a set of group-rel instrument variables. thi can be do by 
group the individu in the sample, creat group-rel explanatori 
variabl by link each explanatori variabl to each group, and attach- 
ing some group-rel instrument variabl to each of the group-rel 
explanatori variables. although the method be rather simple, the infer 
drawn from these estim should be uncondit or margin with re- 

24 



spect to the population. 
the result obtain use the estim method describ abov indi- 

cate that the relationship between incom inequ and growth be like to 
be non-linear. thi result be rather well in line with the result obtain with 
non- or semi-parametr method (banerje and duflo 2003; lin et al. 2006). 

1.6.2 the long-run relationship between incom inequal- 
iti and econom develop 

find in chapter 2 give onli the short- or medium-term effect of inequal- 
iti on growth. potenti more interest question is, how do inequ 
affect econom growth or develop in the long-run? chapter 3 extend 
the analysi by studi the possibl long-run depend between inequ 
and development. 

chapter 3 incorpor the ehii2.1 inequ measur and a panel data 
on macroeconom variabl with annual time seri observ from 38 
countri to test the exist of long-run equilibrium relat between in- 
equal and the level of gdp. accord to the panel unit root tests, both 
the logarithm ehii2.1 inequ measur and the logarithm gdp per 
caput seri seem to follow an i(1) nonstationari process.18 they be also 
found to be cointegr of order one use panel cointegr test by pe- 
droni (2004) and banerje and carrion-i-silvestr (2006), which impli that 
there be a long-run equilibrium relat between them. 

the effect of inequ on the level of gdp be estim with panel dy- 
namic ol and panel dynam sur estim use a simplifi product 
function includ just two factors, name physic capit and incom in- 
equality. In accord with the theori present by fishman and simhon 
(2002), the estim model assum that the coeffici of inequ re- 
flect the effect of human capit on product growth (see section 1.4.2). 
estim be base on the follow model: 

log(gdpit) = αi + γ′1log(investmentsit) + γ′2log(inequalityit) 
+λit + θt + uit, 

18in unit root testing, the data on the total of 53 countri be used. 

25 



where αi be individu constants, λit be individu trends, θt be the common 
time effect, (1,−γ′1,−γ′2) be a cointegr vector between gdp, invest 
and inequality, and uit be an idiosyncrat error. 

As mention above, mani of the theoret model present in section 
1.4 impli that the growth elast of inequ might differ between de- 
velop and develop economies. To take thi into account in estimation, 
countri in the dataset be divid into three incom groups. To make the 
estim of incom group asymptot feasible, i.e. to make the group 
larg enough, countri be divid into three equal size groups. accord 
to the result of incom group estimations, the long-run growth elast of 
inequ be neg in the middle-incom and rich economies. result for 
develop economi be inconclusive. 

these find impli that the distribut of incom and econom devel- 
opment have a steady-st equilibrium relation, or relations, a commonli 
predict by theoret models. find also impli that thi relationship 
between incom inequ and econom growth be neg in develop 
economies. 

1.6.3 the relationship between inequ and save 

As present in section 1.4, the effect of save on capit accumul 
and growth have alway be one of the fundament research topic in eco- 
nomics. In addit to the theori present in section 1.4, there be sever 
theoret model explain the effect of inequ on savings. 

the perman incom hypothesi by friedman (1957) state that in- 
dividu with low incom have a high propens to consume, and small 
chang in income, or it distribution, do not affect the consumpt decis 
of households. the life-cycl hypothesi argu that, if bequest be luxury, 
the save rate should be high among wealthier individu (kotlikoff and 
summer 1981). deaton (1991) find that when incom follow a random 
walk process and borrow constraint be binding, it be undesir for 
household to undertak ani smooth of consumpt impli that con- 
sumption equal income. In political-economi models, more unequ incom 
distribut may creat demand for more redistribut through taxat 
and incom transfers. If the save function of individu in the economi be 

26 



convex, i.e. the rich save more, thi will diminish aggreg save through 
the diminish incom of the rich (alesina and perotti 1994). 

although theoret research span sever decades, the effect of incom 
inequ on save remain an open empir question. thi be due to the 
fact that empir cross-countri studi have produc controversi result 
on the effect of incom inequ on save (cook 1995; leigh and posso 
2009; Li and zou 2004; smith 2001). gener all the empir studi have 
assum that incom inequality, measur either by the gini index or by the 
share of incom earn by differ incom classes, be a stationari variable. 
however, accord to the result present in chapter 2, incom inequ 
may be driven by a stochast trend indic that inequ would be 
an i(1) nonstationari variable. If thi result held in general, it would offer 
an explan to the ambigu result of the previou empir studies, 
becaus regress a stationari variabl on an i(1) variable(s) can lead to 
a spuriou regress (stewart 2011). In empir studies, save be usual 
measur a a percentag of the gdp. If both the logarithm save and the 
logarithm gdp be i(1) variabl and cointegrated, their differ results, 
by construction, in a stationari variable, name save a a percentag of 
the gdp. thus, if inequ be an i(1) variabl and save a a ratio of 
the gdp a stationari i(0) variable, regress save on inequ would 
give spuriou results. 

In chapter 4, macroeconom data on nine develop economi span- 
ning across four decad start from the year 1960 be use to studi the 
effect of the chang in the top incom share to nation and privat savings. 
the incom share of the top 1 % of popul be use a a proxi for the 
distribut of income. accord to panel unit root tests, the logarithm 
incom share of the top 1%, logarithm gross nation save and logarith- 
mic privat consumpt be all i(1) variables. the incom share of the top 
1% be also found to be cointegr with privat consumption, which impli 
that there be a long-run depend relat between them. the effect of 
inequ on privat consumpt be found to be neg in the nordic and 
central-european countries, but for the anglo-saxon countri the direct 
of the effect (posit vs. negative) remain ambiguous. the result of the 
panel cointegr test be inconclus on the possibl cointegr rela- 

27 



tionship between gross save and the top 1% incom share. the real gdp 
per caput and gross save a well a the real gdp per caput and privat 
consumpt be also found to be cointegrated. thi impli that the ratio 
of save and privat consumpt to gdp would be stationari variabl 
and henc previou research be like to have produc bia result on the 
effect of inequ on savings. 

28 



bibliographi 

aaberg R, wennemo T, bjorklund A, jantti M, pedersen pj, smith N. 
(2002). unemploy shock and incom distribution: how do the nordic 
countri fare dure their crises? scandinavian journal of economics, 
102(1): 77–99. 

acemoglu D. (2009) introduct to modern econom growth. princeton: 
princeton univers press. 

acemoglu D, robinson ja. (2001). A theori of polit transition. american 
econom review, 91(4): 938–963. 

aitken B, harrison A. (1999). Do domest firm benefit from foreign direct 
investments? american econom review, 89, 605–618. 

alesina, A, perotti R. (1996). incom distribution, polit instabl and 
investment. european econom review, 40(6): 1203-1228. 

alvaredo F, atkinson ab, piketti T, saez E. (2011). the world top 
incom database. http://g-mond.parisschoolofeconomics.eu/topincomes. 
access may 14th 2011. 

atkinson A, brandolini A. (2001) promis and pitfal in the use of secondari 
data-sets: incom inequ in oecd countri a a case study. journal 
of econom literatur 39(3):771-799 

bacon F. (1625). Of sedit and troubles. In essays. 

barro R. (2000). inequ and growth in a panel of countries. journal of 
econom growth 5(1):5-32 

29 



becker gs. (1965). A theori of alloc of time. econom journal, 75(299): 
493–517. 

bengoa M, sanchez-robl B. (2003). foreign direct investment, econom 
freedom and growth: new evid from latin america. european journal 
of polit economy, 19(3): 529–545. 

blundel R. pistaferri L. preston, I. (2008) consumpt inequ and par- 
tial insurance. american econom review, 98(5): 1887-1921. 

castelló-cli A. (2010). inequ and growth in advanc economies: 
an empir investigation. journal of econom inequality, 8(3): 293–321. 

chambernown dg. (1953) A model of incom distribution. the econom 
journal, 250(63): 318-351. 

chu cy. (1990). An exist theorem on the stationari state of incom 
distribut and popul growth. intern econom review, 31(1): 
171–185. 

cook C. (1995). save rate and incom distribution: further evid from 
ldcs. appli economics, 27(1): 71-82. 

culyer aj. (1980). the polit economi of social policy. oxford: robert- 
son. 

deining K, squir L. (1996). A new data set measur incom inequality. 
world bank econom review, 10(3):565-591 

doepk M. (2004). account for fertil declin dure the transit to 
growth. journal of econom growth, 9(3): 347–383. 

durham jb. (2004). absorpt capac and the effect of foreign direct 
invest and equiti foreign portfolio invest on econom growth. 
european econom review, 48(2): 285–306. 

easterli W, fischer S. (1995). the soviet econom decline. the world bank 
econom review, 9(3): 341–371. 

30 



eisenhart C. (1947). the assumpt underli the analysi of variance. 
biometrics, 3(1): 1–21. 

ekelund rb, hébert rf. (1990). A histori of econom theori and method, 
3rd edition. mcgraw-hill: new york. 

fishman A, simhon A. (2002). the divis of labor, inequ and growth. 
journal of econom growth, 7(2): 117–136. 

frazer G. (2006) inequ and develop across and within countries. 
world development, 34(9): 1459–1481 

forb K. (2000). A reassess of the relationship between inequ and 
growth. american econom review, 90(4):869-887 

friedman M. (1957). A theori of consumpt function. princeton univer- 
siti press. 

galbraith J. k., kum H. (2006). estim the inequ of household 
incomes: A statist approach to the creation of a dens and consist 
global data set. utip work paper no. 22. http://utip.gov.utexas.edu. 
access 22. januari 2011. 

gagliani G. (1987). incom inequ and econom development. annual 
review of sociology, 13: 313–334. 

galor O, moav O (2004) from physic to human capit accumulation: 
inequ and the process of development. rev econ studi 71(4):1001- 
1026 

goethe, jw. (1892). the maxim and reflections. macmillan: new york. 

galor O, weil dn. (2000). population, technology, and growth: from malthu- 
sian stagnat to the demograph transit and beyond. american eco- 
nomic review, 90(4): 806–828. 

hall re, mishkin fs. (1982) the sensit of consumpt to transitori 
income: estim from panel data. econometrica, 50(2): 461-481. 

31 



harrison M. (2002). coercion, compliance, and the collaps of the soviet 
command economy. econom histori review, 3: 397–433. 

hayek fa. (1945). the use of knowledg in society. the american econom 
review, 4: 519–530. 

hsiao C. (2003). analysi of panel data. new york: cambridg univers 
press. 

hsieh ct, klenow P. (2007). rel price and prosperity. american eco- 
nomic review, 97(3): 562–585. 

jäntti, M. stephen, P. J. (2010). the impact of macroeconom condit 
on incom inequality. journal of econom inequality, 8(2): 221–240. 

kao C, chiang MH (2000) On the estim and infer of a cointegr 
regress panel data. In baltagi B (ed) advanc in econometr 15, 
emerald, bingley, pp. 179-222. 

keyn M. (1936). the gener theori of employment, interest, and money. 
harcourt, new york 

kotlikoff L, summer L. (1981). the role of intergener transfer in 
aggreg capit accumulation. the journal of polit economy, 89(4): 
706–732. 

kottaridi C, stengo T. (2010) foreign direct investment, human capital, 
and non-linear in econom growth. journal of macroeconomics, 32(3): 
858–871. 

kumhof M, ranciér R. (2010). inequality, leverag and crises. imf work 
paper, 10/268. 

kuznet S. (1955). econom growth and incom inequality. american eco- 
nomic review, 45(1): 1–29. 

leigh A. (2007). how close do top incom share track other measur of 
inequality? econom journal, 117(524): 619-633. 

32 



leigh A, posso A. (2009). top incom and nation savings. the review of 
incom and wealth, 1: 57-74 

Li H, zou h-f. (2004). save and incom distribution. annal of econom 
and finance, 5: 245-270. 

Li H, heng-fu Z. (1998). incom inequ be not harm for growth: theori 
and evidence. review of develop economics, 2(3): 318–34. 

louri gc. (1981). intergener transfer and the distribut of earn- 
ings. econometrica, 49(4): 843–867. 

maddison A. (2010). statist on world population, gdp and per caput 
gdp, 1-2008 ad. http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/oriindex.htm. ac- 
cess 13. april 2011. 

malthu tr. (1836). principl of polit economy. 
http://oll.libertyfund.org. access april 15. 2011. 

malthu tr. (1815). An inquiri into the natur and progress of rent. 
http://openlibrary.org. access 14. april 2011. 

mandelbrot B. (1961). stabl paretian random function and the multiplica- 
tive variat of income. econometrica, 29(4): 517-543. 

mark N, sul D. (2003) cointegr vector estim by panel dol and 
long-run money demand. oxford bull econ stat 65(5):655-80 

marx K. (1887) capital: a critiqu of polit econ- 
omy; volum I: the process of product of capital. 
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/. access 2. 
march 2011. 

marx K, engel F. (1848). manifesto of the communist party. 
http://www.anu.edu.au/polsci/marx/classics/manifesto.html. access 
13. april 2011. 

may dg. (2009). did recent experi of a financi crisi help in cop- 
ing with the current financi turmoil? the case of the nordic countries. 
journal of common market studies, 47(5):997–1015. 

33 



meghir C, pistaferri L. (2004) incom varianc dynam and heterogeneity. 
econometrica, 72(1): 1-32. 

menger C. (1871). principl of economics. 
http://mises.org/etexts/menger/principles.asp. access 13. april 
2011. 

mincer J. (1974). schooling, experience, and earnings. new york: nation 
bureau of econom research. 

mill js. (1845). the claim of labour. http://oll.libertyfund.org. access 
april 14. 2011. 

mise L. (1969). the histori set of the austrian school of economics. 
the ludvig von mise institute. http://mises.org/hsofase.asp. acccess 
9 march 2011. 

mocan hn. (1999). structur unemployment, cyclic unemployment, and 
incom inequality. the review of econom and statistics, 81(1):122–134. 

muth, jf. (1960) optim properti of exponenti weight forecasts. 
journal of the american statist association, 55: 299-306. 

nielsen F. (1994). incom inequ and industri development: dualism 
revisited. american sociolog review, 59(5): 654–677. 

persson T, tabellini G. (1994). Is inequ harm for growth. american 
econom review, 84(3): 600–621. 

piketti T. (2007). top incom over the twentieth century: a summari 
of main findings. In atkinson A B, piketti T (eds) top incom over 
the twentieth century: a contrast between european and english-speak 
countries. oxford: univers press. 

pritchett L (2006) doe learn add up add up? the return to school in 
aggreg data. In hanushek E, welch F (eds) handbook of the econom 
of education, volum 1. amsterdam: north-holland. 

34 



ricardo D. (1817). the work and correspond of david ricardo, vol. 1 
principl of polit economi and taxation. http://oll.libertyfund.org. 
access april 14. 2011. 

roin J, waldenström D. (2011). common trend and shock to top incomes: 
a structur break approach. the review of econom and statistics, 
forthcoming. 

rossana rj, seater jj. (1995) tempor aggreg and econom time se- 
ries. journal of busi and econom statistics, 13(4): 441-451. 

schumpet ja. (1942) from capitalism, social and democracy. new 
york: harper. 

schmidt-hebbel K, servén L. (2000). doe incom inequ rais aggreg 
saving? journal of develop economics, 61, 417-446. 

shaw C, mckay H. (1969). juvenil delinqu and urban areas. chicago: 
the univers of chicago press. 

smith A. (1776). An inquiri into the natur and caus of wealth of na- 
tions. http://www.econlib.org/library/smith/smwncover.html. access 
12 march 2011. 

stringham ep, hummel jr. (2010). If a pure market economi be so good, whi 
doesn’t it exist? the import of chang prefer versu incent 
in social change. quarterli journal of austrian economics, 13(2): 31–52. 

walder A G (1992). properti right and stratif in socialist redis- 
tribut economies. american sociolog review, 57(4): 524–539. 

weitzman ML (1991). price distort and shortag deformation, or what 
happen to the soap? american econom review, 81(3): 401–414. 

white, H. granger, C. W. J. (2010). consider of trend in time series. 
journal of time seri econometrics, 3(1): 1–38. 

zubok V. (2008). the soviet union and the détent of the 1970s. cold war 
history, 8(4): 427–447. 

35 



åslund A (2007). how capit wa built: the transform of cen- 
tral and eastern europe, russia, and central asia. new york: cambridg 
univers press. 

36 



appendix A 

random walk and i(1) 
nonstationari process 

when random variabl ϵ1, ..., ϵn be ident and independ distribut 
with e[ϵt] = 0, the sum 

yt = ϵ1 + ... + ϵt, t = 1,2, ... (a.1) 

be call random walk -processes. the name come from the fact that the 
time seri of random walk process (a.1) tend to wonder through time 
with increas variance. the process of (a.1) can also be defin use a 
ar(1) model of the form 

yt = yt−1 + ϵt, ϵt ∼ i.i.d, (a.2) 

which be now also call an i(1) nonstationari process. when a constant 
term (δ ≠ 0) be add to equat (a.2) 

yt = yt−1 + δ + ϵt, ϵt ∼ i.i.d. (a.3) 

the process be call a random walk with drift. 

37 



38 



chapter 2 

inequ and growth: anoth 
look at the subject with a new 
measur and method 

abstract1 

recent empir research on the relationship between incom inequ 
and econom growth have provid controversi results. some studi pre- 
dict a negative, and some a posit effect of inequ on growth. answer 
to the controversi have usual be sought from problem in the estim 
technique, the measur of inequality, or from some form of non-linear in 
the relationship between inequ and growth. thi studi account these 
problem by use an improv measur of incom distribut and paramet- 
ric group-rel panel estimation. In conclusion, we find that the effect of 
inequ be like to be non-linear. 

1A paper base on thi chapter be forthcom in the journal of intern devel- 
opment. 

39 



2.1 introduct 

the effect of incom inequ on econom growth have be under intens 
studi for sever decades, but no clear empir regular have emerged. 
empir research on the subject commenc in 1955 when simon kuznet 
releas hi study. kuznet argu that incom inequ will first increas at 
the begin of industrialization, but will even out a the economi becom 
more developed. although kuznets’ data do provid some evid of the 
exist of such a relation, the subject be onli infrequ investig 
dure the next four decades. the main reason for thi be the lack of data on 
incom distribution. In 1996, deining and squir releas their gini index, 
which quickli becom the most use estim for the incom distribut in 
growth studies. 

after the releas of the gini index, panel data analysi have becom some- 
what of a standard in studi tri to ass the effect of inequ on 
growth, mostli becaus a simpl cross-countri estim can suffer from 
an omitted-vari bias. If region-, country-, or some group-specif factor 
affect econom growth rates, explanatori variabl can captur the effect 
of these factors, and paramet estim will not repres the true effect 
of the explanatori variabl per se.2 thi problem can be diminish us- 
ing panel data. unfortunately, the result of panel data studi have be 
controversial. 

In one of the first panel data studi on the topic, persson and tabellini 
(1994) found that incom inequ have a neg effect on econom growth 
rates. Li and zou (1998) found that incom inequ be posit associ 
with econom growth, a view support by forb (2000). deining squir 
(1998) found that initi inequ in the asset distribut have a strong 
neg effect on growth, a find which have be support by lundberg 
and squir (2003). recently, banerje and duflo (2003), barro (2000), chen 
(2003), and lin et al. (2006) have found evid that the relationship be- 
tween incom inequ and growth might be non-linear. 

2there are, for example, clear indic of thi in the studi by deining squir 
(1998, p. 270), where countri dummi affect the inequ elast of growth. more 
detail analysi of problem relat to the omitted-vari bia in growth regress 
with inequ a an explanatori variabl can be found in forb (2000). 

40 



recent panel econometr studi have gener encount two set of 
problems. first, the gini index of deining and squir (1996) have attract 
seriou critic concern it consist and accuraci (atkinson and bran- 
dolini 2001; galbraith and kum 2006). If the valu of deining and squire’ 
gini index be flawed, then the major of the econometr studi on the 
topic be subject to errors.3 second, estim of incom group elast 
in panel data with parametr method requir that some group-specif 
constant be add to estimation, which may caus the infer to be con- 
dition on the countri in the sample. non-parametr method have be 
use to avoid thi problem (lin et al. 2006, banerje and duflo 2003). the 
problem with non-parametr method be that they be know to lack sta- 
tistic power compar with parametr methods. therefore, cross-countri 
estim and group-specif fix effect estim have usual be use 
to estim the incom group elast with parametr method (see, e.g., 
chen (2003) and forb (2000)). thi has, unfortunately, lead to question- 
abl result becaus mani of the estim model have includ a lag 
depend variabl which render the fix effect estim inconsist with 
small time dimens of data. 

thi studi us a new inequ measur compil by galbraith and 
kum (2006) to correct for the possibl bia creat by the deining and 
squir (1996) gini index. thi studi also present a simpl parametr way 
to robustli estim group-specif elast use full data coverag in a 
panel setting. the result base on non-linear gmm estim impli that 
incom inequ have have a neg effect on growth, but that the relat 
may also includ non-linearities. 

thi paper be organ a follows. section 2 present the basic theo- 
rie that have be suggest to provid the causal relationship of incom 
inequ on econom growth. section 3 give more detail descript of 
the problem encount in previou studies, and present some solut for 
these problems. section 4 introduc the data, and section 5 give estim 
detail and results. section 6 conclud the find of thi study. 

3for example, barro (2000), banerje and duflo (2003), forb (2000), and chen 
(2003) have use the dataset by deining and squir (1996). 

41 



2.2 the theoret effect of inequ on growth 

sever theori have be propos on how incom inequ might affect 
econom growth rates. some theori describ the long-run and other a 
short- or medium-term causal relationship of inequ on growth. becaus 
thi studi ass the short- and/or medium-term effect of inequ on 
growth, the long-run effect be not discuss here. the theori regard 
the short- and medium-term effect of inequ on growth can be classifi 
into four broad categories: credit market imperfections, polit economy, 
social unrest, and save rates, which we discu next. 

2.2.1 credit market imperfect 

given credit market imperfections, the inequ of incom be usual as- 
sum to restrict households’ opportun for education.4 If an economy’ 
aggreg capit be small, unevenli distribut incom urg capit owner 
to invest in special (fishman and simhon 2002). In thi case, inequal- 
iti result in a high level of human capital, a great divis of labor and 
faster econom growth. when an economy’ aggreg capit be large, more 
equal distribut of incom encourag household to invest in specializa- 
tion and entrepreneurship. In thi case, equal of incom creat a more 
risk-fre environ and a broadly-bas demand for goods, which will lead 
to high employment, great divis of labor, and faster econom growth. 

2.2.2 polit economi 

In a societi where the mean incom exce the median income, the idea 
of even out the distribut of incom through the polit process may 
aris (bénabou 1996). In such cases, taxat and transfer payment be 
commonli use to redistribut incomes. higher tax can lead to diminish 
invest and/or consumption. 

4to be more precise, when access to credit be limited, households’ invest opportu- 
niti depend on their asset and incomes. thus, give credit-market imperfections, poor 
household usual forgo invest in human capit (barro 2000). 

42 



when incom be distribut unevenly, the wealthier portion of the pop- 
ulat may tri to influenc politician not to increas tax and incom 
transfers, which can lead to a corrupt government. corrupt administr 
caus ineffici in the distribut of licenses, social benefits, etc. be- 
caus the demand for licens be usual high and inflexible, a rise in licens 
price lower the profit of produc and investors, which be like to reduc 
invest (murphi et al. 1993). 

2.2.3 unrest relat to social polici 

incom inequ may motiv individu to commit crime, illeg rent- 
seek activ or other act that disturb the stabil of societi (bénabou 
1996; merton 1938). inequ can also increas social disorgan when 
social network be disrupt in residenti area (shaw and mckay 1969). 
social disorgan may low social capit and increas crime and delin- 
quenci rates. crime and illeg rent-seek activ may inflict addit 
cost on produc and investors, which lower the incent to invest (hall 
and jone 1999; murphi et al. 1993). low social capit can also increas the 
bargain and enforc cost of contract a the parti have less trust 
in each other (ostrom 1990). low social capit also usual mean a more 
risk-avers society. 

2.2.4 save rate 

high save rate be thought to be especi import for develop 
economies, becaus rais an economi to a high growth path requir sub- 
stantial invest (sach et al. 2004; stiglitz 1969). fund for invest 
come from aggreg save and/or loan from abroad. domest invest 
can also be replac by direct foreign investment. these option be not equal 
in risk. large-scal lend can lead to a balanc of payment deficit and to 
a debt circl if the high growth path remain unattained. direct foreign 
invest creat job and rais incom in the region, but also supersed 
domest supply. A major portion of the profit of foreign firm be also usual 
repatri to a foreign country, which affect the balanc of payment and 
hinder the exercis of an independ monetari policy. foreign invest be 

43 



also usual highli sensit to econom fluctuat and speculation, which 
may caus uncontrol shift in the balanc of capital. 

thus, increas aggreg save may be the safest way for a develop 
countri to financ it structur investment. mani theori argu that sav- 
ing rate would increas with income. these includ the perman incom 
hypothesi of friedman (1957), life-cycl hypothesi of ando and modigliani 
(1963), which be augment with intergener transfer by kotlikoff 
and summer (1981), and save under liquid constraint of deaton (1991) 
and seater (1997). inequ may therefor enhanc growth indirectli through 
increas aggreg save and investment. 

2.3 summari of the main problem encoun- 
tere in the field of studi 

In thi section, we present the problem associ with the deining and 
squir (1996) gini index that have be intens use in incom inequ 
studi within the last 15 years. We also offer a simpl parametr way to 
estim group-rel elast in panel data. 

2.3.1 problem with the deining and squir (1996) 
gini index 

mani modern studi on the relationship between inequ and growth 
have use the deining and squir (1996) gini index a a measur of in- 
come distribution. most of these studi reli on the “high quality” part of 
the data. however, the “high quality” dataset of deining and squir have 
attract seriou critic concern it accuracy, consistency, and compara- 
bility.5 accord to atkinson and brandolini (2001), deining and squire’ 
gini index includ so mani differ dataset that in mani case the “high 
quality” time seri cannot be view a a continu series. the differ 
dataset may not be compar between countri either. these be seriou 

5all thi critic also natur appli to the “low” qualiti part of deining and 
squire’ data. 

44 



problem for estimation, becaus statist infer requir that obser- 
vation be from the same parent population. If the observ be not 
compar even within a country, there be no one parent population, and 
the paramet estim may be spurious. galbraith and kum (2006) have 
also show that the incom distribut estim give by deining and 
squire’ gini index be bia in mani cases. 

the problem concern the accuraci and consist of deining and 
squire’ (1996) “high quality” estim can best be demonstr with the 
help of an example.6 the time seri of deining and squire’ “high quality” 
gini index for france, norway, and india be present in figur 1. the 
first thing that attract attent be the abrupt chang in the valu of 
the gini in norway. the valu of the gini drop by 6 point between 1976 
and 1979 and rise almost 3 point between 1984 and 1986. whi would a 
nordic welfar state have experienc such violent chang in it incom 
distribut when there be no major econom or societ develop or 
crisi dure these periods? there is, however, a far stranger result present 

figur 1. valu of deining and squire’ "high quality" gini index for france, norway, 

and india. source: deining and squir (1996) 

in figur 1. accord to the deining and squir (1996) gini index, india 
have a more equal incom distribut than norway in 1973 and a more equal 
incom distribut than franc in the 1960 and 1970s. thi result be highli 

6all the valu here be from the updat version of deining and squire’ dataset. As 
recommend by deining and squir (1996), 6.6 gini point be add to all the gini 
valu that be from the “expenditure” series. 

45 



questionable, becaus the poverti rate in india be one of the high in 
the develop economi in the 1990s, and the level of poverti have clearli 
declin from the 1970 (justino 2007). both norway and franc also have 
progress taxat and extens publicli financ social servic by the 
1970s. 

for comparison, the time seri of the ehii2008 gini index for france, 
norway, and india be present in figur 2. the chang in seri be grad- 

figur 2. valu of ehii2008 gini index for france, norway, and india. source: 

galbraith and kum (2006) 

ual, a should be the case with a slowly-chang societ variabl like in- 
come distribut in the absenc of econom or other crises. the valu of 
the gini index for india be also clearli abov those of franc and norway, 
which be reason consid the differ in the level of econom de- 
velop and poverti (justino 2007). the effect of the econom downturn 
on incom distribut in the nordic countri at the begin of the 1990 
be also present in the seri for norway. 7 As point out by atkinson and 
brandolini (2001), the most sever problem in the "high quality" dataset of 
deining and squir (1996) be it inconsistency. like norway, there be sev- 
eral other countri which, accord to deining and squire’ gini index, 

7aaberg et al. (2002) argu that veri gener unemploy benefits, a differ type 
of unemploy compar to mani previou econom downturns, and the method use 
to calcul the gini index have probabl contribut to the small chang in the incom 
distribut in norway dure the econom downturn at the begin of the 1990s. In 
other nordic countries, e.g. finland and sweden, the econom downturn and the growth 
of unemploy be more severe. 

46 



exhibit some rather aggress chang in their incom distribut within 
rel short time period without a clear econom rationale. 

these problem in the widely-us deining and squir (1996) gini index 
have some profound implications. In the bad case, all previou studi on 
the topic use thi gini index have produc nonsens estim for the 
effect of incom inequ on growth. even if the paramet estim of 
incom inequ have not be spurious, they still could not be trust 
becaus the valu of deining and squire’ index may have be erroneous. 
It be thu like that we have onli a few studi on the subject whose result 
we can trust, i.e., those studi that have not use their index a a measur 
of incom distribution.8 these includ castelló-cli (2010), who find 
that inequ have a neg effect on growth in low and middle-incom 
economies, frazer (2006), who do not find gener support for the kuznet 
hypothesi of an invert relat between inequ and growth use non- 
parametr methods, and lin et al. (2006), who find support for the kuznet 
hypothesi use semi-parametr methods. 

the ehii2008 inequ measur use in thi studi have be built "on 
top" of the deining and squir (1996) gini index, a method suggest by 
atkinson and brandolini (2001) (galbraith and kum 2006). galbraith and 
kum have estim their inequ measur use the variou incom mea- 
sure of deining and squire’ data set, the set of measur of the dispers 
of pay in the manufactur sector, and the manufactur proport of the 
popul a explanatori variables.9 accord to galbraith and kum, the 
ehii2008 inequ measur have three clear advantag over deining and 
squire’ gini index. It have more than 3000 estimates, while deining and 
squir have onli about 700 “high quality” estimates. the ehii2008 get it 

8it be of cours possibl that measur of incom distribut use in these studi have 
also be flawed, but, for example, frazer (2006) us the unu-wid (world institut 
for develop econom research of the unit nation university) dataset, which be 
consid to be clearli more reliabl than the dataset of deining and squir (1996). 

9first, galbraith and kum (2006) regress the deining and squir (1996) gini index 
on the explanatori variabl to see which be the most import explanatori variabl 
and then use them to estim the ehii2008 inequ measure. the larg unexplain 
(residual) variation, which be the problem in the index of deining and squire, be thu 
elimin from the ehii2008 measure. 

47 



accuraci from the industri data publish annual by the unit nation 
industri develop organ (unido). chang over time and dif- 
ferenc across countri in pay dispers be thu reflect in incom in- 
equality. all estim be also adjust to household gross income, which 
make them more congruent. valu of the ehii2008 also correspond to the 
estim for incom distribut of other research institutes, such a the 
oecd and the unu-wider,10 good than those of the deining and squir 
gini index (föster & pearson 2002, galbraith & kum 2004). 

2.3.2 estim of group-rel elast 

variou modern studi have use non-parametr method to ass the pos- 
sibl non-linear in the relat between inequ and growth (e.g., baner- 
jee and duflo (2003); lin et al. (2006)). the problem with non-parametr 
method be that they be know to lack statist power compar with 
parametr methods, especi in the mid-siz sampl typic use in 
growth studies. that be whi mani studi have tri to avoid the use of non- 
parametr method by impos some restrict on the data. for example, 
forb (2000) have conduct a sensit analysi use fix effect to esti- 
mate the elast of growth with respect to inequ separ in differ 
incom groups. her result show that the inequ elast of growth be 
posit and do not vari between differ incom group of countries. but 
forb us fix effect in a model that includ a lag depend variable, 
which lead to bia paramet estim when the time dimens of the 
data be fixed.11 thi creat a problem face the studi of non-linear relat 
in the dynam panel set use the parametr approach. specifically, the 
group-specif constant be like to lead to infer that be condit 
on the particular countri includ in the data, and there be usual not 
enough observ among differ group for feasibl group- or country- 
specif instrument estimation.12 

10world institut for develop econom research of the unit nation univer- 
sity. 

11for consistency, it be requir that the time dimens of the data tend to infinity. 
12for example, the small group of forb (2000, p. 883) have onli 48 and 54 obser- 

vations, which be clearli too few to obtain asymptot effici in instrument variabl 

48 



some econometrician argu that the statist inference, when use in- 
dividu constant in panel data, be condit on the individu includ in 
the sampl (baltagi 2008, p. 14). thi be becaus the model use individu 
constant be thought to includ onli the inform confin to the indi- 
vidual effect present in that particular sampl (hsiao 2003, p. 43). In other 
words, if we use dummi variabl to “earmark” each individu countri or 
group in our dataset, our infer would be restrict to just those indi- 
viduals, not the population. thi problem be close link to fix effects, 
or the least squar dummi variabl estimator, a the individu effect be 
treat a paramet to be estimated. 

If we want to studi the possibl non-linear in the relationship be- 
tween inequ and growth with respect to the level of econom develop- 
ment, for example, we would need to classifi the countri in our dataset in 
some way (e.g., a poor, middle-income, and rich) by use a set of dummi 
variables. As mention above, thi may restrict our infer to just the 
sampl employed. however, thi problem can be ‘bypassed’ quit easili by 
use a non-linear (instrument variables) estim like the gmm. the 
idea be to estim group-rel elast implicitli use a set of group- 
relat instrument variables. thi can be do by group the individu 
in the sample, creat a group-rel explanatori variabl by link each 
explanatori variabl to each group, and attach some group-rel instru- 
mental variabl to each of the group-rel explanatori variables. the new 
group-rel variabl be use to estim some set of unknown paramet 
drawn from the paramet space. estim be carri out implicitli with 
the non-linear instrument variabl estim use a set of group-rel 
instrument variables, make the infer uncondit or margin with 
respect to the population. 

In practice, however, there be a problem with thi method. the number 
of estim parameters, p, be of the order of the product of the number of 
groups, ng, and the number of explanatori variables, K, name p =kng +1. 
So if the number of individu in the data be larg than the time dimens 
of the data, we end up with a veri small number of degre of freedom rather 

estimations. thus, forb be forc to use a fix effect estimator, which be not like to 
be consist (see previou footnote). 

49 



quickly. thus, in order for the method to work we need to have a suffici 
small number of group with respect to the time dimension. 

2.4 data 

the data use in thi studi consist of the follow variables: real gdp 
per caput with the base year of 1996, chang in real gdp per capita, gross 
invest a a portion of real gdp per capita, averag year of schooling, 
the gini index of deining and squir (1996), and the ehii2008 inequ 
measur of galbraith and kum (2006). the data cover the year 1965 - 2000, 
and be mostli compil from the penn-world tabl (heston et al. 2006). 
except be the ehii2008 inequ measure, which be acquir from 
the univers of texa inequ project, the estim for averag year of 
school which be acquir from the dataset of barro and lee (2000), and 
the gini index, which be acquir from the world bank’ measur incom 
inequ database. the list of countri be present in the appendix. 

tabl 2.1: descript statist 
variabl mean std. deviat min. max. 
gdp 6001.12 6787.93 115.19 34364.50 
gdp growth (%) 2.076 5.408 -53.119 27.254 
d& gini index 37.414 8.574 20.917 57.900 
ehii2008 ineq. measur 40.828 6.651 24.156 57.213 
invest (%) 17.321 8.869 2.237 69.523 
averag school 5.293 2.795 0.380 12.250 

2.5 estim 

sever model specif have be suggest in econometr growth stud- 
y use the gini index a an explanatori variable.13 here, a basic barro-typ 
extend version of the neo-class growth model be use to make the result 

13see, for example, forb (2000), barro (2000) and persson and tabellini (1994). 

50 



comparable. estim be base on the follow model: 

log(growthit) = α + β1log(gdpi,t−1) + β2log(investmenti,t−1) 
+β3log(educationi,t−1) + β4log(inequalityi,t−1) + κit 

(2.1) 

where κit be the residual, which includ both the possibl country-specif ef- 
fect, µi, and the error term, ϵit (µi ∼ i.i.d.(0, σ2u), ϵit ∼ i.i.d.(0, σ2ϵ )). growth be 
measur a five-year averag to control for short-run econom fluctuat 
a in islam (1995). the averag growth rate dure each five-year period be 
regress on the valu of the explanatori variabl in the year immedi 
preced each period.14 the use of five-year interv mean that there are, 
at most, eight observ avail for each country. sinc the instrumenta- 
tion of endogen variabl will drop the maximum number of observ 
in the estim to five for each country, the estim cover the year 
from 1975 to 2000 in practice. 

As show by forb (2000), the estim of equat (2.1) be compli- 
cat by the endogen of the gdp, which can be demonstr by write 
the gdp growth a the differ in level of incom and add incomei,t−1 
to both sides: 

log(incomeit) = α + γlog(incomei,t−1) + β2log(investmenti,t−1) 
+β3log(educationi,t−1) + β4log(inequalityi,t−1) + κit, 

(2.2) 

where γ = β1+1. clearli e(κitincomei,t−1) /= 0. In panel data, all explanatori 
variabl can correl with the (possible) country-specif effect, and thi have 
to be take into account in the estimation. becaus of this, and becaus model 
(2.1) be dynam by nature, estim be do with the gener method 
of moment estim (gmm) (arellano and bond 1991). the benefit of the 
gmm includ heteroskedast not affect it and it be easili equip 
to withstand autocorrelation. 

In thi paper, the first and second lag of the first differ of all ex- 
planatori variabl be use a instrument for the explanatori variabl in 
level (arellano and bower 1995).15 thus, (xi,t−2−xi,t−3) and (xi,t−3−xi,t−4) 
be use a instrument for xi,t−1, and (xi,t−3 −xi,t−4) and (xi,t−4 −xi,t−5 ) 

14the averag growth rate in 1986 to 1990, for example, be regress against the valu 
of the explanatori variabl in 1985. 

15the correl between differ and level commonli diminish rapidli after the 

51 



be use a instrument for xi,t−2, etc. It be therefor assum that all the 
explanatori variabl be predetermin such that e(ϵitx′is) = 0 ∀ t > s, 
where X be the matrix of explanatori variables. 

the reason for estim equat (2.1) in level be the fact that trans- 
form the data with first differenc or orthogon deviat to elimi- 
nate the unobserv individu effect also elimin the individu country- 
relat inform in those effects.16 By elimin individu effects, we 
may actual creat a spurious good fit for our data, becaus we also 
remov some of the individu variat present in the data. 

tabl 2 present the mean and standard deviat of the five-year av- 
erag growth rate and simpl correl coeffici between the five-year 
growth rate and the ehii2008 inequ measur in level and in first differ- 
ences. accord to the mean and standard deviat show in tabl 2.2, 

tabl 2.2: summari statist for 5 year averag growth rate and the 
ehii2008 inequ measur 
variabl mean s.d. 
5 year averag growth rate in level 5.951 3.478 
5 year averag growth rate in first-diff. -0.514 3.998 
variabl corr. p-valu 
5 year aver. gr. and ehii2008 in level -0.1694*** 0.0005 
5 year aver. gr. and ehii2008 in in first diff. 0.1006 0.0656 
5 year aver. gr. in level and ehii2008 in first diff. -0.217*** <.0001 
5 year aver. gr. in first-diff. and ehii2008 in level 0.079 0.1322 

s.d. stand for the standard deviat of the variable. corr. give the valu of the simpl 

correl coeffici between the growth rate and the ehii2008 inequ measur in 

level and in first differences. p-valu give the p-valu of the simpl correl coefficient. 

not much variat would be lose in differenc the five-year averag growth 
rate. however, the simpl correl coeffici tell a differ story. when 
the averag growth rate be give in levels, the correl coeffici with the 

second lag. thus, onli the first two lag of differ be usual relev for the identifi- 
cation. use too mani moment condit could also result in bia in the gmm estim 
(ziliak 1997). 

16these unobserv countri effect reflect, among other things, the differ in the 
initi level of effici (bond et al. 2001). 

52 



ehii2008 inequ measur be neg regardless of the form in which the 
ehii2008 be give (i.e., in first differ or levels). the correl coeffi- 
cient be posit if the averag growth rate be present in first differences. 
thi indic that, although the extern variat do not seem to chang 
much in first-differencing, some inform be clearli lost, which be veri like 
to affect the infer drawn from the data. that is, the result of our estima- 
tion could be total differ if we use first-differenc data. the result in 
tabl 2.2 thu indic that remov individu effect by first-differenc 
run the risk of caus erron inference. 

the estim result of equat (2.1) be present in tabl 3. the 
newey-west estim with lag one be use a the gmm estimator’ weight 
matrix to account for autocorrel in the variabl appear in the or- 
thogon conditions. hansen’ J test be use to evalu the valid of 
extra instruments. accord to the test, the orthogon condit seem 
quit realist for the chosen set of instruments. accord to the result 
of gmm estim present in tabl 2.3, onli lag gdp per caput be 
statist signific at the 5% level. however, the result may have be 
affect by the small sampl bias, becaus the gmm estim may exhibit 
substanti bia in dynam panel data model estim with small sampl 
(hayakawa 2007). 

To diminish the possibl bias, we estim the equat (2.1) use onli 
the ehii2008 a a measur of incom distribution. thi increas the number 
of countri includ in estim to 70 and the number of observ to 
263.17 accord to result present in tabl 2.4, the elast of growth with 
respect to inequ be about -0.014. the elast of growth with respect to 
lag gdp be approxim -0.007. the elast of growth with respect to 
invest be about 0.028. the elast of growth with respect to averag 
year of school be approxim 0.008. 

the gmm estim result in tabl 2.4 be in line with gener econom 
theory, contrari to those in tabl 2.3, where, for example, the coeffici 
of invest be not statist significant. although there be sever 

17countri that have observ in 4 consecut estim period be includ 
in the estimation. thi be the minimum number of observ becaus 3 time seri 
observ be lose due to instrumentation. 

53 



tabl 2.3: estim result for growth rate I 
estimator: fe-ol fe-ol gmm gmm 
constant 0.0173 0.0303** 0.0588* 0.0719*** 

(0.0077) (0.0106) (0.0281) (0.0188) 
gdpi,t−1 -0.0031**** -0.0032**** -0.0044*** -0.0054 

(0.0004) (0.0003) (0.0012) (0.0031) 
investmentsi,t−1 0.0025 -0.0086 0.0091 0.0041 

(0.0076) (0.0073) (0.0140) (0.0124) 
year of schoolingi,t−1 0.0030* 0.0016 0.0035 0.0048 

(0.0014) (0.0012) (0.0024) (0.0059) 
d& gini indexi,t−1 -0.0027 - -0.0628 - 

(0.0021) (0.0572) 
ehii2008i,t−1 - 0.0034 - -0.0079 

(0.0027) (0.0055) 
countri 34 34 34 34 
observ 183 203 103 136 
hansen test - - 0.27 (8) 0.92 (8) 

* = p<.05, ** = p<.01, *** = p<.001, **** = p<.0001. standard error be present 

in parentheses. hansen stand for hansen’ test for overidentifi restrict and the 

number of instrument be present in parentheses. all ol estim be do use 

white heteroskedasticity-consist standard error and covariances. first and second lag 

of first differ be use a instrument for explanatori variabl in gmm estimation. 

A newey-west estim with lag one be use a the gmm estimator’ weight matrix to 

account for autocorrel in the variabl appear in the orthogon conditions. 

54 



tabl 2.4: estim result for growth rate II 
estimator: fe-ol gmm 
constant 0.0336**** 0.0979*** 

(0.0087) (0.0274) 
gdpi,t−1 -0.0026**** -0.0070** 

(0.0003) (0.0023) 
investmentsi,t−1 -0.0055 0.0277* 

(0.0042) (0.0137) 
averag schoolingi,t−1 -0.0014 0.0082* 

(0.0009) (0.0037) 
ehii2008i,t−1 -0.0010 -0.0142* 

(0.0023) (0.0065) 
countri 70 70 
observ 413 263 
hansen test - 4.61 (8) 

* = p<.05, ** = p<.01, *** = p<.001, **** = p<.0001. standard error be present 

in parentheses. hansen stand for hansen’ test for overidentifi restrict and the 

number of instrument be present in parentheses. all ol estim be do use 

white heteroskedasticity-consist standard error and covariances. first and second 

lag of first differ be use a instrument for explanatori variabl in gmm 

estimation. A newey-west estim with lag one be use a the gmm estimator’ 

weight matrix to account for autocorrel in the variabl appear in the 

orthogon conditions. 

55 



possibl reason for thi strang result, includ sampl selection, one like 
explan be that the result in tabl 2.3 may have suffer from small 
sampl bias. 

the result in tabl 2.4 thu impli that the inequ elast of growth 
be negative. there is, however, reason to doubt the congruenc of thi rela- 
tionship. hinelin (2007) have found that estim coeffici of explana- 
tori variabl gener use in growth regress differ substanti between 
oecd and non-oecd countries. barro (2000) have also found that the coeffi- 
cient of inequ in growth regress may differ between the incom group 
of countries. sensit analysi be thu need to test the robust of the 
results. the sensit analysi be conduct use the method suggest in 
section 3.2. 

As explain in section 3.2, in order to studi the elast of econom 
growth with respect to explanatori variabl separ in differ group 
of countries, the estim equat must includ group-rel dummi 
and group-rel variables, and everi group-rel variabl must have it 
own group-rel instrument.18 To estim the elast of growth with 
respect to inequ in oecd and non-oecd countries, the equat (2.1) 
be transform into: 

log(growthit) = β1oecdi + β2noecdi 
+ (β3oecdi + β4noecdi)log(gdpi,t−1) 
+ (β5oecdi + β6noecdi)log(investmenti,t−1) (2.3) 
+ (β7oecdi + β8noecdi)log(educationi,t−1) 
+ (β9oecdi + β10noecdi)log(inequalityi,t−1) + κit 

where oecd be a dummi variabl for oecd economies, noecd be a dummi 
variabl for non-oecd economies, and κit be the residual, which includ 
both the possibl country-specif effect, µi, and the error term, ϵit (µi ∼ 
i.i.d.(0, σ2u), ϵit ∼ i.i.d.(0, σ2)). 

To estim the elast of growth with respect to the gini index in 

18thi mean that, for example, if we have a group of oecd countri mark by dum- 
mies, thi group need to have it own set of explanatori variabl and their instrument 
in the dataset. 

56 



differ incom group of countries, equat (2.1) be transform into: 

log(growthit) = β1dri + β2dmi + β3dpi 
+ (β4dri + β5dmi + β6dpi)log(gdpi,t−1) 
+ (β7dri + β8dmi + β9dpi)log(investmenti,t−1) (2.4) 
+ (β10dri + β11dmi + β12dpi)log(educationi,t−1) 
+ (β13dri + β14dmi + β15dpi)log(inequalityi,t−1) + κit 

where dri be a dummi variabl for rich economies, dmi be a dummi variabl for 
middle-incom economies, dpi be a dummi variabl for poor economies, and 
κit be the residual, which includ both the possibl country-specif effect, 
µi, and the error term, ϵit (µi ∼ i.i.d.(0, σ2u), ϵit ∼ i.i.d.(0, σ2ϵ )). 

tabl 2.5 show the result of the non-linear newey-west gmm estima- 
tion of equat (2.3) and (2.4) for inequality. As before, the newey-west 
estim be base on one lag. group-rel first and second lag of first 
differ be use a instrument for group-rel explanatori variables. 
accord to the hansen’ J test, orthogon condit cannot be reject 
for the chosen set of instrument in all estim (result not shown). 

the magnitud of the effect of inequ be quit differ between the 
two measur in both oecd and non-oecd countries, although none of 
the paramet estim of the oecd and the non-oecd countri be 
statist signific at the 5% level in either group of countries. the 
inequ elast of growth vari even more between the two measur 
in incom group estimation. the paramet estim of the deining and 
squir (1996) gini index be posit in the group of countri whose gdp 
per caput be under $1000 and over $2500 in 1965 and neg in the re- 
main incom groups. however, the paramet estim of the gini index 
be not statist signific at the 5% level in ani of the incom groups. 

the effect of inequ seem more robust across incom group when the 
ehii2008 be use a a measur of inequality.19 the effect be neg in all 
incom group except in the group of countri whose gdp per caput be 

19the differ between the measur may be due to sampl select a there be great 
differ in the number of countri includ in estim between the two measures. 
thi differ could also result from small-sampl bia in the gmm estim or from 
inconsist in the deining and squir (1996) dataset. 

57 



tabl 2.5: sensit analysis: gmm estim on growth elast of in- 
equal measur in select group of countri 

coeffici of standard 
ineq. measur error countri observ 

whole sampl d& -0.0368 0.0416 34 103 
whole sampl ehii2008 -0.0142* 0.0065 70 263 

oecd d& -0.0004 0.0033 15 103 
non-oecd d& -0.0065 0.0102 34 103 

oecd ehii2008 -0.0043 0.0073 19 263 
non-oecd ehii2008 -0.0156 0.0097 49 263 

incom groups: 
d&s: 
<$500 -0.0137 0.0118 8 103 
>$500 - <$2000 -0.0014 0.0042 13 103 
>$2000 -0.0078 0.0101 13 103 

d&s: 
<$1000 0.0015 0.0052 11 103 
>$1000 -<$2500 -0.0049 0.0044 14 103 
>$2500 0.00001 0.0065 9 103 

ehii2008: 
<$500 -0.0230* 0.0098 18 263 
>$500 - <$2000 -0.0109 0.0099 37 263 
>$2000 -0.0031 0.0065 15 263 

ehii2008: 
<$1000 -0.0016 0.0120 33 263 
>$1000 -<$2500 -0.0142* 0.0065 14 263 
>$2500 0.0108 0.0073 9 263 

* = p<.05. countri denot the number of countri mark with dummi variabl in the dataset. ob- 

servat give the total number of observatio includ in the estimation. d& denot the gini index 

by deining and squir (1996) and the ehii2008 inequ measur by galbraith and kum (2006). es- 

timat of group-elast be do use group-rel dummi and instrument in the whole dataset. 

first and second lag of first differ be use a instrument for explanatori variabl in gmm estima- 

tion. A newey-west estim with lag one be use a the gmm estimator’ weight matrix to account for 

autocorrel in the variabl appear in the orthogon conditions. 

58 



over $2500 in 1965. the paramet estim be also statist signific in 
the group with gdp per caput under $500 and between $1000 and $2500 
in 1965, but not in the group with gdp per caput under $1000 in 1965. 
result obtain use the ehii2008 inequ measur do thu indic 
that the relationship between incom inequ and growth may be non- 
linear, a find which be quit well in line with those obtain with non- or 
semi-parametr method (banerje and duflo 2003; lin et al. 2006). 

2.6 conclus 

our result show that the effect of incom inequ on econom growth 
be statist signific and neg when use a new measur of incom 
distribution, the ehii2008 measur of inequality. however, group-rel es- 
timat reveal that although the neg effect of inequ on growth 
dominates, there be some non-linear in the relationship. 

mani previou studi have bypass the problem in the commonli use 
measur of incom distribution, i.e. the deining and squir (1996) gini 
index, mostli becaus there have be no other measur of incom distri- 
bution available. however, it be like that deining and squire’ dataset 
contain inconsist such that all the result obtain use it be in 
doubt. the ehii2008 inequ measur use in thi studi can be assum 
to be more consistent. the data coverag be also clearli extend compar 
to deining and squire’ data. previou studi have usual onli be abl 
to use data on 40-50 countri at most while we use inform on 70 coun- 
tries. becaus of this, dynam panel data estim may have suffer from 
small-sampl bia in previou studies. We also includ data on sub-saharan 
african economies, on which there be basic no data in deining and 
squire’ dataset. 

result may have be influenc by sampl select bia and measure- 
ment error. since, at it best, the data includ onli about one-third of 
all the countri in the world, systemat error may have influenc the 
findings. the ehii2008 inequ measur be not an unflaw estim of 
incom distribut either, becaus it be onli a represent of statist 
summaries, like the gini index. thus, the level of inequ give by the 

59 



ehii2008 inequ measur may not repres the true level of inequ 
in the countri in question. It should also be note that the result describ 
onli the short- or medium-term relationship between inequ and growth, 
and the long-run relationship remain an open question. 

In spite of these inevit reservations, the present find can be con- 
sider more reliabl than those of mani previou studies. thi be mostli 
due to inaccuraci and inconsist in the gini index by deining and 
squir (1996). use of the ehii2008 inequ measur also greatli increas 
the data coverag thu diminish the small sampl bia and the possibil- 
iti of systemat error in estimation. In previou studies, the examin 
of group-rel growth elast of inequ by parametr method be 
also complic by statist obscurities. the use of group-rel constant 
in estim be statist dubious, and the asymptot properti of esti- 
mator suffer greatli where sever paramet be estim use onli a 
few dozen observations. however, a be show here, the problem relat 
to the use of countri constant in panel data can be bypass in a statist 
meaning way by use a non-linear estimator. 

60 



bibliographi 

aaberg R, wennemo T, bjorklund A, jantti M, pedersen P J, smith N 
(2002). unemploy shock and incom distribution: how do the nordic 
countri fare dure their crises? scandinavian journal of economics, 
102(1): 77–99. 

ando A, modigliani F. (1963) the "life cycle" hypothesi of savings: aggre- 
gate implic and tests. the american econom review, 53(1): 55–84. 

arellano M, bond S. (1991). some test of specif for panel data: mont 
carlo evid and an applic to employ equations. review of 
econom studies, 58(2): 277 - 97. 

arellano M, bover O. (1995). anoth look at the instrument variabl 
estim of error-compon models. journal of econometrics, 68(1): 
29–51. 

atkinson A, brandolini A. (2001). promis and pitfal in the use of secondari 
data-sets: incom inequ in oecd countri a a case study. journal 
of econom literature, 39(3):771–799 

baltagi B. (2008). econometr analysi of panel data. john wiley & sons, 
west sussex 

banerje A, duflo E. (2003). inequ and growth: what can the data say? 
journal of econom growth, 8(3):267-299. 

barro R. (2000). inequ and growth in a panel of countries. journal of 
econom growth, 5(1):5-32 

61 



barro rj, lee j-w. (2000). intern data on educ attainment: 
updat and implications. cid work paper no. 42. harvard. 

bénabou R. (1996). inequ and growth. In nber macroeconom an- 
nual, ben S. bernank and julio J. rotemberg, (eds.). cambridge, ma: 
mit press. 

bond S, hoeffler A, templ J. (2001). gmm estim of empir growth 
models. cepr discuss paper 3048. london. 

castelló-cli A. (2010). inequ and growth in advanc economies: 
an empir investigation. journal of econom inequality, 8(3): 293–321. 

chen, b-l. (2003). An inverted-u relationship between inequ and long- 
run growth. econom letters, 78(2):205-212. 

deaton, A. (1991). save and liquid constraints. econometrica, 59(5): 
1221–1248. 

deining K, squir L. (1998). new way look at old issues: inequ and 
growth. journal of develop economics, 57(2): 259–287. 

deining K, squir L. (1996). A new data set measur incom inequality. 
world bank econom review, 10(3):565-591 

dynan K, skinner J, zeld S. (2004). Do rich save more? journal of polit 
economy, 112(2): 397-444 

fishman A, simhon A. (2002). the divis of labor, inequ and growth. 
journal of econom growth, 7(2): 117–136. 

forb K. (2000). A reassess of the relationship between inequ and 
growth. the american econom review, 90(4): 869-87. 

frazer G. (2006). inequ and develop across and within countries. 
world development, 34(9):1459-1481. 

friedman, M. (1957). A theori of consumpt function. princeton univer- 
siti press. 

62 



föster M, pearson M. (2003). incom distribut and poverti in the oecd 
area: trend and drive forces. econom studies, 49(4):479–513. 

galbraith J, kum H. (2006). estim the inequ of household incomes: 
a statist approach to the creation of a dens and consist global data 
set. utip work paper no. 22. levy. 

hall re, jone ci. (1999). whi do some countri produc so much more 
output per worker than others? quarterli journal of economics, 114(1): 
83–116. 

hayakawa K. (2007). small sampl bia properti of the system gmm esti- 
mator in dynam panel data models. econom letters, 95(1): 32–38. 

heston A, summer R, aten B. (2006). penn world tabl version 6.2. center 
for intern comparison of production, incom and prices. univer- 
siti of pennsylvania. 

hsiao C. (2003). analysi of panel data. new york: cambridg univers 
press. 

islam N. (1995). growth empirics: a panel data approach. quarterli journal 
of economics, 110(4): 1127–1170. 

jong-sun Y, khagram S. (2005). A compar studi of inequ and cor- 
ruption. american sociolog review, 70(1): 136–157. 

justino P. (2007). social secur in develop countries: myth or necessity? 
evid from india. journal of intern development, 19(3): 367– 
382. 

kotlikoff L, summer L. (1981). the role of intergener transfer in 
aggreg capit accumulation. the journal of polit economy, 89(4): 
706-732. 

kuznet S. (1955). econom growth and incom inequality. american eco- 
nomic review, 45(1): 1-29. 

Li H, heng-fu Z. (1998). incom inequ be not harm for growth: theori 
and evidence. review of develop economics, 2(3): 318–334. 

63 



lin sc, huang hc, weng hw. (2006). A semi-parametr partial linear in- 
vestig of the kuznets’ hypothesis. journal of compar economics, 
34(3): 634–647. 

lundberg M, squir L. (2003). the simultan evolut of growth and 
inequality. the econom journal, 113(487): 325–344. 

merton rk. (1938). social structur and anomie. american sociolog re- 
view, 3(5): 672–695. 

murphi km, shleifer A, robert bw. (1993). whi be rent-seek so costli 
to growth. american econom review, 83(2): 409-14. 

ostrom E. (1990). govern the commons. cambridge: cambridg univer- 
siti press. 

persson T, tabellini G. (1994). Is inequ harm for growth. american 
econom review, 84(3): 600–621. 

sach J, mcarthur J, scmidt-traub G, kruk M, bahadur C, fay M, mccord 
G. (2004). end african poverti trap. brook paper of econom 
activity, 1: 117–240. 

seater, john J. (1997). An optim control solut to the liquid constraint 
problem. econom letters, 54, pp. 127-134. 

shaw C, mckay H. (1969). juvenil delinqu and urban areas. chicago: 
the univers of chicago press. 

stiglitz J. (2002). global and it discontents. new york: w.w. norton 
& compani inc. 

sukiassyen G. (2007). inequ and growth: what do the transit econ- 
omi data say? journal of compar economics, 35(1): 35-56. 

ziliak jp. (1997). effici estim with panel data when instrument be 
predetermined: An empir comparison of moment-condit estimators. 
journal of busi & econom statiscs, 15(4): 419-431. 

64 



appendix B 

countri list 

65 



tabl b.1: countri list 
algeria itali 
australia jamaica 
austria japan 
bangladesh jordan 
barbado kenya 
belgium malawi 
bolivia malaysia 
cameroon malta 
canada mauritiu 
central african republ mexico 
chile netherland 
colombia nicaragua 
costa rica norway 
cypru pakistan 
denmark panama 
dominican republ papua new guinea 
ecuador philippin 
egypt poland 
El salvador portug 
fiji seneg 
finland singapor 
franc south africa 
germani spain 
ghana sri lanka 
greec sweden 
haiti syria 
hondura taiwan 
hong kong togo 
hungari tunisia 
iceland turkey 
india unit kingdom 
indonesia unit state 
iran uruguay 
ireland venezuela 
israel zimbabw 

66 



chapter 3 

estim the long-run 
relationship between incom 
inequ and econom 
develop 

abstract1 

there be sever theori describ the effect of incom inequ on eco- 
nomic growth. these theori usual predict that there exist some optimal, 
steady-st growth path between inequ and development. thi studi 
us a new measur of incom distribut and panel data cointegr 
method to test for the exist of such a steady-st equilibrium rela- 
tion. It be show that there be a long-run equilibrium relationship between 
the variables, and that thi relationship be neg in develop economies. 

1A paper base on thi chapter be forthcom in the empir economics. 

67 



3.1 introduct 

the decad long empir research on the relationship between incom in- 
equal and econom develop have produc controversi results, with 
the direct and the statist signific of the effect of incom inequal- 
iti on econom growth chang between studi (e.g., banerje and duflo 
2003, barro 2000, chen 2003, forb 2000, Li and zou 1998, lin et al. 2006). 
theori have also gener be divid on the effect of incom inequ 
on growth. the classic approach argu that save rate be an increas 
function of wealth. In thi case, inequ will increas incom of the rich 
whose margin propens to save be the highest. thus, incom inequ will 
lead to faster capit accumul (kaldor 1957; kuznet 1955; smith 1776). 
the polit economi approach emphas the destabil effect that in- 
equal may have on the societi (benhabib and rustichini 1996). accord 
to thi view, equal will increas stabil in the societi and simul in- 
vestment and econom growth. the credit market imperfect approach 
suggest that equal of incom diminish the effect of credit-constraint 
on human capit accumul in develop economi (galor and moav 
2004). becaus credit-constraint becom less bind in a develop econ- 
omi where incom be distribut evenly, equal of incom will fasten the 
accumul of human capit and thu acceler econom growth. 

despit of sever theori describ the relationship between inequal- 
iti and growth, the depend between the variabl over time remain an 
open empir question. although we have observ on gdp from sev- 
eral consecut years, valu of commonli use gini index (e.g., the gini 
index by deining and squir (1996)) have not be consist measur 
over time, which have make it virtual imposs to ass the possibl time 
depend between the two variables. some studi have tri to bypass 
thi problem by regress the valu of averag growth rate of 20 years, 
or more, on the valu of the gini index and other explanatori variabl 
in the first year includ in the averag (chen 2003; forb 2000). the 
problem with thi method be that these multi-decad averag lose a lot of 
inform and there be a risk of spuriou paramet estimates. the observ 
controversi in the relat between inequ and growth have also lead some 
to estim the relat use non-parametr or semi-parametr method 

68 



(banerje and duflo 2003; frazer 2006; lin et al. 2006). the advantag of 
non-parametr method be the fact that they can be use to estim the 
relat between variabl in both short- and long-run and robustness. the 
drawback of these method be low statist power compar to parametr 
methods, especi in finit samples. recently, galbraith and kum (2006) 
have gather a inequ measur dataset that have continu observ 
from sever countries, which enabl the use of panel data time seri meth- 
ods. 

from time seri analysi we know that, if variabl be integr pro- 
cesses, we can learn about their long-run depend by test whether the 
variabl be cointegrated. If variabl be found to be cointegrated, there ex- 
ist a stationari distribut between them, and we can estim thi steady- 
state relationship use standard estim methods. unfortunately, these 
rule do not appli to panel data per se. the infer and estim in panel 
cointegr data differ from that in regular time series, becaus the asymp- 
totic properti of the estim in panel cointegr regress model be 
differ from those of time seri cointegr regress model (baltagi 
2008; phillip and moon 1999). the time seri regress may, for exam- 
ple, be spurious, while the panel regress utilis all cross-sect be not 
(phillip and moon 1999). ol estim be also not asymptot unbias 
in cointegr panel data (kao and chiang 2000). 

thi studi us panel cointegr method and improv data on in- 
come inequ to ass the possibl steady-st relationship between in- 
come inequ and econom development. accord to panel unit root 
tests, both the logarithm ehii2.1 inequ measur and the logarithm 
gdp seri seem to follow an i(1) process in countri in question.2 they 
be also found to be cointegr of order one use panel cointegr test 
develop by pedroni (2004) and banerje and carrion-i-silvestr (2006), 
which impli that there be a long-run equilibrium relat between them. 
the cointegr coeffici of the ehii2.1 inequ measur be estim 
with panel dynam ol and panel dynam sur estim and it be found 
to be negative. accord to the incom group estimations, thi neg 

2ehii=estim household incom inequ data set by univers of texa in- 
equal project. 

69 



relationship be robust in middle-incom and rich economies. result for de- 
velop countri be inconclusive. 

thi paper be organ a follows. section 2 present the gener theori 
describ the causal relationship from incom inequ to econom growth. 
section 3 present the data and report the result of panel unit root and 
cointegr tests. estim detail and result be give in section 4 and 
section 5 concludes. 

3.2 the main theoret relationship between 
inequ and growth 

3.2.1 the incom approach 

In classic econom theory, inequ of incom be assum to influenc 
econom growth rate through save and consumption. accord to smith 
(1776), an increas divis of labor rais productivity, but save govern 
capit accumulation, which enabl product growth. when the save 
function be linear, e.g., si = myi + b, where yi be output per capita, m be the 
margin propens to save, and b be the per caput save at zero income, 
aggreg save behavior in an economi be not affect by the distribut of 
incom (stiglitz 1969). however, if the save function be nonlinear, aggreg 
save becom depend on the distribut of income. 

when the save function be linear or concave, distribut of incom 
and wealth converg toward equal (stiglitz 1969). If the save function 
be convex, i.e., the margin propens to save increas with income,3 un- 
eqalitarian stationari distributions, or steady-st equilibriums, be pareto 
superior to egalitarian stationari distributions. thi be because, in the case 
of a convex save function, more unequ distribut of incom result 
in high capit intens through great aggreg savings. In these une- 
galitarian steady-st equilibria, incom and consumpt for all individu- 
al be great than in egalitarian steady-st equilibria. In addition, in a 
steady-st equilibrium, where incom be distribut unevenly, the wealth 

3the hypothesi of convex save function be support by empir findings, see e.g., 
dynan et al. (2004). 

70 



of a nation be great than in the steady-st equilibrium, where incom be 
distribut evenly. however, these steady-st equilibrium exist onli when all 
individu have posit wealth. thus, result may not apply, for example, to 
develop countries.4 

3.2.2 the credit-market imperfect and combin ap- 
proach 

the incom approach emphas the effect of incom inequ on save 
and on physic capit accumulation. credit market imperfect approach 
consid the effect of incom inequ on the accumul of human cap- 
ital (galor and zeira 1993). In a model by galor and moav (2004), the 
engin of econom growth chang from physic capit to physic and hu- 
man capit in the process of econom development. the process of econom 
develop be divid into two regimes, which have their own steady-st 
growth paths. 

economi in the first regim be underdeveloped, aggreg physic cap- 
ital be small, and the rate of return to human capit be low than the rate 
of return to physic capit (galor and moav 2004). there be two type of 
individu in the economy: those who own the physic capit (the rich) and 
those who do not (the poor). the poor consum their entir incom (wages) 
and be not engag in save and on capit accumulation. thus, there be 
a temporari steady-st equilibrium where the poor be in poverti trap 
and the rich get richer. inequ increas aggreg save by increas 
the incom of the rich and great aggreg save fuel physic capit 
accumulation.5 

In the second regime, physic capit accumul by the rich have in- 

4accord to keyn (1936), demand be the basi for invest and, becaus in- 
equal lower aggreg consumption, inequ of incom will lead to slow econom 
growth. thi argument that inequ decreas consumpt be valid, if the save func- 
tion be convex. In thi case, aggreg demand diminish when incom becom more 
unequ distributed. 

5in modern less develop economies, it be possibl that also human capit drive 
growth, if the capit and skill-bias technolog be imported. In thi case, the effect of 
inequ on growth would be mix or neg (galor and moav 2004). 

71 



creas the rate of return to human capit so high that it induc human 
capit accumul (galor and moav 2004). In thi regime, both human and 
physic capit be engin for econom development. sinc individuals’ in- 
vestment in human capit be subject to diminish margin returns, the 
return to human capit invest be maxim when invest in hu- 
man capit be wide spread among the population. becaus access to credit 
be constrained, human capit invest be maxim when incom in the 
economi be distribut evenly. however, in a certain phase of econom de- 
velop incom of everi individu becom so high that credit constraint 
becom less binding. In thi local stabl steady-st equilibrium, the effect 
of inequ on growth becom less significant. 

3.2.3 the polit economi approach 

polit economi model assum that prefer of individu be aggre- 
gate through polit process. therefore, redistribut of incom and eco- 
nomic growth be driven by the polit process. polit process can be 
driven by a median voter or by organ social groups. In the model by per- 
otti (1993), the equilibrium reach by the economi depend on the initi 
distribut of income. If the aggreg capit in the economi be veri small, 
redistribut of incom through tax and subsidi will result in a poverti 
trap where no one be abl to acquir education. In thi case, more unequ dis- 
tribut of incom will help the economi becaus in that case at least some 
individu can acquir educ and increas the level of human capit 
in the economy. As economi becom more developed, veri unequ incom 
distribut may diminish growth becaus the accumul of more human 
capit would requir that middle-incom and poor individu acquir ed- 
ucation, a the rich have alreadi educ themselves. In an rich economy, 
onli the poor may increas the level of human capit in the economi and 
high steady-st growth path requir that incom be distribut evenly. 

72 



3.3 time seri analysi of panel data 

the theoret model present abov predict steady-st equilibrium re- 
lations, or stationari distributions, that may exist between incom inequ 
and the evolut of output. the estim of these theoret stationari 
distribut requir that we know the time seri featur of the variabl 
in the model. mani model also assum that incom distribut and eco- 
nomic develop be determin endogenously, which have to be take into 
account in the estimation.6 

3.3.1 data 

data for thi studi consist at 3 variables: real gdp per capita, estim 
household incom inequ (ehii) 2.1 measure, and portion of invest 
on gdp. gross domest product be state in real term with the base year 
of 1996. invest be gross invest a a portion of gdp. the data 
on gdp and invest be from penn world tabl (heston et al. 2006). 
the ehii2.1 measur of inequ be from the univers of texa inequ 
project (galbraith and kum 2006). 

mani of the previou studi make on the relationship between incom 
inequ and econom growth have use the gini index construct by 
deining and squir (1996) a a measur on incom distribution.7 the main 
reason whi so mani research have reli on the deining and squire’ 
gini index have be it alleg "high quality". however, a point out by 
atkinson and brandolini (2001, p. 780), deining and squire’ dataset in- 
clude so mani differ dataset that in mani case it would be "highli 
mislead to regard deining and squire’ "high quality" estim a a 
continu series". the differ country-rel dataset in deining and 
squire’ "high quality" dataset may also not be compar with each other. 
these be seriou problem for estimation, becaus the statist infer 
requir that observ be from the same parent population. If the obser- 

6bénabou (2005) have actual suggest that endogen of incom inequ in growth 
regress be the primari reason for the observ controversi in empir growth studies. 

7these includ barro (2000), banerje and duflo (2003), forb (2000), and chen 
(2003). 

73 



vation be not comparable, there be no one coher parent popul and 
the paramet estim may be spurious. 

mani scholar studi incom inequ have alreadi switch to gini 
index provid by unu-wider.8 although unu-wid gini be like to be 
more consist and accur than deining and squire’ gini index, they 
share one deficiency. both gini index be unevenli distribut through 
time, which restrict their use in time seri analysis. however, galbraith 
and kum (2006) have gather a ehii2.1 inequ measure, which have a 
consistent, long time seri for sever countries. 

galbraith and kum (2006) have build their measur of inequ "on 
top" of the gini index by deining and squir (1996), a method that have 
be suggest by atkinson and brandolini (2001). galbraith and kum have 
obtain their inequ measur by regress deining and squire’ gini 
coeffici on the valu of explanatori variables, which includ the differ 
incom measur of deining and squire’ data set, the set of measur of 
the dispers of pay in the manufactur sector, and the manufactur 
share of the population. accord to galbraith and kum, the ehii2.1 in- 
equal measur have three clear advantag over the deining and squire’ 
gini index. It have more than 3000 estimates, while deining and squir 
have onli about 700 "high quality" estimates. the ehii2.1 get it accuraci 
from the industri data publish annual by the unit nation indus- 
trial develop organ (unido). thi way chang over time and 
differ across countri in pay dispers be reflect in incom inequal- 
ity. all estim be also adjust to household gross income, which make 
them more congruent. valu of the ehii2.1 also correspond to the estim 
of incom distribut of other research institutes, such a the oecd and 
the unu-wider, good than those of the deining and squire’ gini index 
(föster and pearson 2003; galbraith and kum 2006). 

3.3.2 unit root test 

there be 60 countri in the ehii2.1 dataset where the time seri of in- 
equal measur be consist and at least 20 year long. after individu 

8world institut for develop econom research of the unit nation univer- 
sity. 

74 



tabl 3.1: descript statist 
variabl mean std. deviat min. max. 

gdp 6624.25 6750.15 145.24 32766.51 
gdp growth (%) 6.498 5.692 -27.032 72.860 
ehii2.1 inequ 39.713 6.520 23.074 58.975 
invest (%) 18.112 8.664 0.191 52.531 

unit root tests, 7 countri be discard from the set becaus their seri 
of the ehii2.1 inequ measur or gdp do not seem to follow a i(1) 
process accord to the adf-test.9 descript statist of the remain 
53 countri be present in tabl 1 and a list of the 53 countri be present 
in the appendix. 

most of the time seri analysi method for panel data assum that there 
be no cross-unit correl present in the panel. when deal with econom 
variables, thi restrict be quit uncomfortable, becaus for exampl busi- 
ness cycl do transfer to neighbor countri quit easili in modern open 
economies. To account for the obviou cross-sect correl present in 
the data, the result of panel unit root test allow for cross-sect de- 
pendenc be also report (pesaran 2007). pesaran’ test account for cross- 
section correl by introduc common factors. thi method captur a 
linear cross-sect dependence, where there can be sever common factor 
between the test seri of the panel. 

the panel unit root test use in thi studi assum two differ type 
of unit root processes. test by levin et al. (2002) (llc) assum a common 
unit root process, i.e., that all the countri in the dataset have the same 
unit root. test by Im et al. (2003) (ips), fisher type adf and PP tests, 
present by maddala and Wu (1999), and test by pesaran (2007) allow for 
individu unit root processes. that is, they allow the coeffici of unit root 

9thi be a precautionari method. karlsson and löfgren (2000) have studi how few 
stationari seri in the panel can alter the result of panel unit root tests. they found 
that when the time dimens of a dataset be long, small fraction of stationari seri in 
the dataset result to high power and vice versa. therefore, there be a risk that panel 
with larg T would erron be model a stationari and panel with small T a 
non-stationary. 

75 



to differ across countries. A more detail discuss about the use panel 
unit root test be provid in the appendix. 

summari of the result of the five panel unit root test be present 
in tabl 3.2.10 individu trend and constant be includ in the test for 
gdp and inequality. for gdp it be natur to allow for both individu time 
trend and constants, becaus the time seri of gdp usual follow a clear 
upward trend. the time seri of inequ also seem to be trend in mani 
countries,11 and so it be also allow to have individu time trends. gdp 
growth and invest seem not to exhibit a trend, and so onli individu 
constant be includ in their tests.12 all other test use the unbalanc 
panel data of 53 countries,13 except pesaran’ test where a balanc panel of 
38 countri with 25 yearli observ be used.14 summari tabl (year and 
countri included) of the differ dataset can be found in the appendix. 

accord to all five tests, the logarithm gdp and inequ seem to 
follow a i(1) process, and the seri of gdp growth and invest seem 
to be stationary.15 however, a mention above, it be like that at least 
some of the test seri be cross-sect correlated. thi would violat 
the assumpt of uncorrel residu among cross-sections. banerje et 
al. (2005) have studi the effect of the violat of the assumpt of no 
cross-unit cointegr on reject frequenc of the null hypothesis. their 
result show that in the presenc of cross-unit cointegration, the adf, pp, 
and ip test grossli overreject the null hypothesi of unit root with small 
time (T ) and rel larg cross-sect (n) dimens of data. accord- 
ing to all these tests, the null hypothesi of unit root cannot be reject in 
seri of inequ and gdp. As pesaran’ test also do not reject the null 

10all test be perform with eview 6, except pesaran’ test which be do with 
stata. lag length have be determin use schwart inform criterion, spectral 
estim have be conduct with bartlett kernel and bandwidth have be select use 
newey-west method. 

11the time seri be inspect visually. 
12if individu trend be included, the result chang onli margin and both seri 

be still stationari accord to all five tests. 
13panel unit root test be also conduct use the whole dataset of 60 countries. 

result be similar to those present in tabl 3.2. 
14pesaran’ test requir that the panel be balanced. 
15result be the same when origin data of 60 countri be used. 

76 



tabl 3.2: panel unit root test 
variabl llc ip adf PP pesaran* 

log(gdp) 9.068 15.092 15.855 16.072 0.709 
(1.0000) (1.0000) (1.0000) (1.0000) (0.761) 

gdp growth -45.913 -25.415 572.04 599.36 -12.089 
(<.0001) (<0.0001) (<.0001) (<.0001) (<.0001) 

log(inequality) 0.549 2.702 77.387 70.521 -0.790 
(0.7085) (0.9966) (0.9834) (0.9968) (0.215) 

log(investments) -6.071 -7.558 244.13 212.80 -4.529 
(<.0001) (<.0001) (<.0001) (<.0001) (<.0001) 

the p-valu of the test statist be present in parentheses. all test includ individu 

effect and trend except the test for gdp growth and invest which includ onli 

individu effects. lag length be determin use schwart inform criterion. all 

other test use unbalanc panel of 53 countri except pesaran’ test, where the panel be 

balanc includ 38 countri and 25 yearli observations. 

hypothesi for inequ and gdp, they seem veri like to be unit root 
processes.16 becaus pesaran’ test also find gdp per caput growth and 
invest to be stationary, it seem that cross-sect correl have 
not bia the result of tradit unit root tests. thus, these seri be 
assum to be stationary. 

3.3.3 cointegr test 

the possibl cointegr between inequ and gdp be test with panel 
cointegr test develop by pedroni (2004), which consist of 11 differ 
test statistics.17 To allow for possibl cross-sect depend present in 
the panel, cointegr be also test with a test develop by banerje and 

16first differenc seri be stationari accord to all panel unit root tests. gdp and 
inequ thu seem to be i(1). 

17there be 7 differ test statistics, but eview 6 give also the result of weight 
test statist on the first four tests. test statist includ the panel version of PP and 
adf tests, a form of the averag of the phillip and ouliari (1990) test statist (ρ), 
and panel varianc ratio statist (v). 

77 



carrion-i-silvestr (2006). A more detail discuss about these test be 
provid in the appendix. 

pedroni’ panel cointegr test 

the model for test for cointegr between inequ and gdp is: 

log(gdpit) = αi + δit+ γilog(inequalityit)+ βilog(investmentsit)+ ϵit, (3.1) 

where the chang in gdp be explain by the chang in inequ and on 
the level of investments, and (1,−γi) be the individu cointegr vector 
between inequ and gdp. result of pedroni’ panel cointegr test 
on equat (3.1) be present in tabl 3.3.18 

accord to all of the 11 test statist present in tabl 3.3, the seri 
of inequ and gdp be cointegr at the 5% level. the test be also 
conduct use onli the inequ a an explanatori variabl for gdp. 
In thi case, 9 of the 11 test statist find the gdp and inequ to be 
cointegrated.19 

If the test be conduct use onli invest a an explanatori variable, 
all of the 11 test statist find the invest and gdp to be cointegrated. 
thi indic that there might be cross-sect cointegr relat in 
the panel of investments, which may have affect on the result of panel 
unit root tests. cross-unit cointegr can bia the result of panel unit 
root test toward type I error, i.e., that hypothesi of unit root be reject 
far too often (banerje et al. 2005; breitung and pesaran 2008). If seri be 
cross-sect cointegrated, the common trend present in the data may be 
identifi a common factor in unit root test that model the cross-sect 
correl through common factors, like the pesaran’ test, and remov 
from the analysi (breitung and pesaran 2008). In thi case, if the remain 
idiosyncrat compon be stationary, the panel unit root test have a ten- 
denci to present the time seri a stationari when panel unit be actual 
nonstationary. so, although all panel unit root test found the invest 

18the test be conduct with eview 6. 
19if the origin data of 60 countri be used, 8 of the 11 test find the gdp and inequ 

to be cointegrated. 

78 



tabl 3.3: pedroni’ panel cointegr test statist for log(gdp) and 
log(inequality) 

within-dimens 
statist prob. weight. statist prob. 

panel v-statist 49.309 <.0001 44.793 <.0001 
panel ρ-statist 7.152 <.0001 7.329 <.0001 
panel pp-statist 2.888 0.0062 3.494 0.0009 
panel adf-statist 2.489 0.0180 3.039 0.0039 

between-dimens 
statist prob. 

group ρ-statist 9.417 <.0001 
group pp-statist 4.555 <.0001 
group adf-statist 2.313 0.0275 

countri 53 
observ 1961 

the null hypothesi be that there be no cointegr between variables. within-dimens 

test presuppos common AR coeffici among cross sections. between-dimens test 

presuppos individu AR coefficients. lag length be determin with schwarz infor- 

mation criterion. spectral estim be do with bartlett method and bandwidth be 

select with newey-west method. 

79 



to be i(0), the possibl that invest be actual i(1) process that be 
cointegr with gdp have to be take into account in estimation.20 

banerje & carrion-i-silvestre’ cointegr test 

As with panel unit root tests, the presenc of cross-sect depend may 
have affect the result of cointegr tests. there may also be structur 
break in the relat between inequ and gdp. To account for possi- 
ble cross-sect depend and structur break in the relat between 
inequ and gdp, cointegr be also test with the panel cointegra- 
tion test develop by banerje and carrion-i-silvestr (2006). banerje and 
carrion-i-silvestre’ test allow for cross-sect depend by introduc 
common factor in the estim model. 

tabl 3.4 report the result of banerje and carrion-i-silvestre’ panel 
cointegr test between inequ and gdp use the dataset of 38 coun- 
tri with 25 yearli observations. the test allow for level and cointegr 
vector shifs.21 

accord to the basic model allow just time trend in the test series, 
inequ and gdp would be cointegrated. If level and slope trend shift be 
allowed, onli ρ test find the variabl to be cointegr at the 5% level. If 
both time trend and cointegr vector shift be allowed, ρ test find the 
variabl to be cointegr at 0.01% level and the t test find the variabl 
to be cointegr at the 10%level. 

thus, inequ and gdp seem to be cointegr even when possibl 
structur break in the relat and the possibl cross-sect correl 
present in the panel be take into account. when cointegr relation- 
ship includ structur breaks, cointegr test tend to be bia toward 
accept the null hypothesi of no cointegration, wherea cross-sect 
correl tend to bia the result toward reject the null (banerje and 

20the cointegr between log(gdp) and log(inequality), and log(gdp) and 
log(investments) be also test with johansen’ combin fisher panel cointegr 
test develop by maddala and Wu (1999). accord to it, both gdp and inequ and 
gdp and invest be cointegr of order one. detail result be avail upon 
request. 

21estim do with gauss. We be grate to carrion-i-silvestr for provid the 
program code. 

80 



tabl 3.4: banerje & carrion-i-silvestre’ cointegr test for log(gdp) 
and log(inequality) 

pedroni model with a time trend 
statist p-valu 

zt̂nt (λ̂) -6.434 <.0001 
zρ̂nt (λ̂) -7.122 <.0001 

model with level shift 
statist p-valu 

zt̂nt (λ̂) -1.256 0.1046 
zρ̂nt (λ̂) -3.913 <.0001 

model with coint. vector shift 
statist p-valu 

zt̂nt (λ̂) -1.619 0.0527 
zρ̂nt (λ̂) -5.992 <.0001 

countri 38 
observ 950 

model with level shift includ time trend and a level and slope trend shift. model with a 

cointegr vector shift includ time trend and cointegr vector shifts. 

81 



carrion-i-silvestr 2006; banerje et al. 2004). result present in tabl g.2 
impli that cross-sect correl and/or structur break in the relat 
between inequ and gdp have not bia the result of pedroni’ panel 
cointegr test present in tabl 3.3. 

3.4 estim of the cointegr coeffici 
of inequ 

3.4.1 estim and infer in cointegr panel 

convent limit theorem assum one index (n or T ) to pa to infinity. 
the limit theori for panel with larg cross-sect (n) and time (T ) dimen- 
sion need to allow both index to pa to infinity. thi have some profound 
effect for estimators. for example, the ol estim be not asymptot 
unbiased, and the standard gmm estim be inconsist for panel cointe- 
grate data (kao and chiang 2000). 

sever estim for cointegr panel data have be proposed. prob- 
abli the most commonli use estim have be the fully-modifi ol 
(fm-ols) propos by phillip and moon (1999) and pedroni (2000), and 
the dynam ol (dols) propos by kao and chiang (2000). the major 
problem for estim in cointegr panel data have be the model of 
simultan cross-sect and time seri depend (phillip and moon 
1999). thi be a problem in thi study, becaus it be like that, at least, gdp 
seri be correl or even cointegr across the panel. mark and sul 
(2003) have develop a version of dol estim that allow for simul- 
taneou cross-sect and time seri dependence. It us a common time 
effect to control for cross-sect dependency.22 

22wagner and hlouskova (2010) have compar the perform of differ type of 
estim for panel cointegr data. they found that mark and sul’ dol system 
estim (panel dols) perform best in the case of cross-unit correl or cointegr 
compar to sever other estim develop for panel cointegr data. the test 
estim includ fm-ol present by phillip and moon (1999), dol present 
by kao and chiang (2000) and mark and sul (2003), one-step var, and two-step var 
present by breitung (2005). 

82 



It is, of course, possibl that the common time-effect cannot captur all 
the cross-sect correl present in the data. In thi case, a panel dy- 
namic seemingli unrel regress estim develop by mark et al. 
(2005) can be use to fulli account for the cross-sect dependence. panel 
dsur estim can be use when the cross-sect be small rel to time 
series. A more detail discuss about panel dol and dsur estim 
can be found in the appendix. 

3.4.2 estim result 

the estim model includ a measur of physic capit accumul 
(investments) and a measur of incom inequ (ehii2.1). panel dol 
estim be use to estim the follow equation: 

log(gdpit) = αi + γ′1log(investmentsit) + γ′2log(inequalityit)+ 
+λit + θt + uit, 

(3.2) 

where αi be individu constant, λit be individu trends, θt be the common 
time effect, (1,−γ′1,−γ′2) be a cointegr vector between gdp, invest 
and inequality, and uit be a idiosyncrat error. tabl 3.5 present the result 
of fix effect dol estim of equat (3.2).23 

the cointegr coeffici of invest be posit and statist 
signific at the 5% level in all estimations. the cointegr coeffici 
of inequ be neg and statist signific at the 5% level in all 
estim use the dataset with 37 yearli observations. In estim 
use the dataset with 25 yearli observations, the cointegr coeffici 
of inequ be not statist signific at the 5% level when two and 
three lead and lag of the first differ be use a instrument for the 
explanatori variables. 

thus, the result of panel dol estim use the 15 countri dataset 
with longer time dimens impli that the long-run growth elast with 
respect to incom inequ would be negative. however, the result of panel 
dol estim use the 38 countri dataset with shorter time dimens 
be inconclusive. 

23estim be conduct with gauss. author be grate to donggyu sul for provid 
the program code on hi homepage. 

83 



tabl 3.5: dol estim of the cointegr coeffici of inequ 
depend variable: log(gdp) 

panel dol (lead & lags=1) 
log(investments) 0.2199*** 0.0954* 

(0.0402) (0.0455) 
log(inequality) -0.1836*** -0.0678** 

(0.0252) (0.0217) 
panel dol (lead & lags=2) 
log(investments) 0.1851*** 0.1852*** 

(0.0447) (0.0433) 
log(inequality) -0.2427*** -0.0632 

(0.0287) (0.0290) 
panel dol (lead & lags=3) 
log(investments) 0.1281*** 0.3847*** 

(0.0488) (0.0384) 
log(inequality) -0.3069*** -0.0375 

(0.0297) (0.0194) 

countri 15 38 
year 1963-99 1972-96 
observ 816 950 

* = p<.05, ** = p<.01, *** = p<.001. standard error of the paramet estim be 

present in parentheses. standard error be estim use andrew and monahan’ 

pre-whiten method. inclus of individu constant mean that all estim be 

make with fix effects. lead & lags=1 mean that first lag and lead of first differ 

of explanatori variabl be use a instruments. lead & lags=2 mean that first and 

second lead and lag of first differ be use a instruments, etc. 

84 



3.4.3 estim of incom group-rel elast of 
growth 

recently, hinelin (2008) have found that the estim coeffici of ex- 
planatori variabl gener use in growth regress differ substanti 
between oecd and non-oecd countries. panel cointegr test by pe- 
droni (2004) and banerje and carrion-i-silvestr (2006) also allow for 
individu cointegr coeffici between countries. It be therefor pos- 
sibl that the cointegr coeffici of inequ may differ in differ 
group of countries. however, none of the theori present in section 2 
impli that there would be differ in the growth elast of incom in- 
equal between oecd and non-oecd countries. what they do impli be 
that the growth elast of inequ might differ between develop and 
develop economies. 

To estim the long-run growth elast of incom inequ and 
physic capit accumul in differ incom groups, countri in the 
dataset be divid into three incom groups. To make the estim of in- 
come group asymptot feasible, i.e., to make the group larg enough, 
countri be divid into three equal size groups. thi be do use all 
the countri in the 53 countri dataset that have observ on gdp in 
1972. there be 48 such countri in the dataset of 53 countri and so we 
have 3 group of 16 countries. the threshold for these group become: gdp 
per caput under $1270 in 1972 for less develop countries, gdp per caput 
between $1271 and $3715 in 1972 for middle-incom countries, and gdp per 
caput abov $3715 in 1972 for rich countries. tabl 10 present the result 
of panel dol estim of equat (3.2) in differ incom group of 
countries.24 

the cointegr coeffici of invest be posit and statist 
signific in all incom groups, when three lead and lag be use a instru- 
ments. the cointegr coeffici of inequ be neg and statist 
signific at the 5% level in middle-incom and rich economi in all estima- 
tions. In less develop economies, the cointegr coeffici of inequ 

24estim be conduct with gauss. author be grate to donggyu sul for provid 
the program code on hi homepage. 

85 



tabl 3.6: dol estim of the cointegr coeffici of inequ in 
differ incom group 
depend variable: log(gdp) 

less develop middle-incom rich 

panel dol (lead & lags=1) 
log(investments) 0.1766*** 0.1000* -0.0018 

(0.0366) (0.0496) (0.0974) 
log(inequality) -0.0069 -0.1317* -0.1443* 

(0.0190) (0.0559) (0.0627) 
panel dol (lead & lags=2) 
log(investments) 0.2678*** 0.0803 0.0919 

(0.0583) (0.0543) (0.0742) 
log(inequality) 0.0549* -0.1520*** -0.2417*** 

(0.0238) (0.0299) (0.0490) 
panel dol (lead & lags=3) 
log(investments) 0.4492*** 0.2667*** 0.1962** 

(0.0366) (0.0397) (0.0596) 
log(inequality) 0.1014*** -0.2175*** -0.4558*** 

(0.0152) (0.0397) (0.0424) 

countri 11 12 15 
year 1972-96 1972-96 1972-96 
observ 275 300 375 

* = p<.05, ** = p<.01, *** = p<.001. standard error be present in parentheses. 

standard error be estim use andrew and monahan’ pre-whiten method. all 

estim includ individu constants, individu trends, and common time effects. 

86 



be posit and statist signific at the 5% level when two and three 
lead and lag be use a instruments. 

the result of tabl 3.6 have two implications. the elast of growth 
with respect to investments, i.e., physic capit accumulation, diminish 
in accord with the level of econom develop and the elast of 
growth with respect to incom inequ chang in the process of econom 
development. In earli stage of econom development, the effect of incom 
inequ on growth be positive, but turn neg a the economi becom 
more developed. the neg growth elast of inequ also increas 
in accord with the level of econom development. 

however, panel dol may be bia if there remain correl between 
equilibrium error and lead and lag of instrument variabl of differ 
cross-sect (see appendix c). In thi case the panel dol exhibit the 
same form of second order asymptot bia a pool ol (mark and sul 
2003). To account for thi possibl cross-equ correlation, the panel 
dsur estim be appli to incom group estimation. becaus panel dsur 
requir that the time seri dimens be clearli larg than cross-sect 
dimension, a dataset that have 34 yearli observ on 24 countri be used. 
thi dataset span from 1963 to 1996. group of countri be do in the 
same way a present above. there be 44 countri in the dataset of 53 
countri that have observ on real gdp per caput in 1963. thus, 
33% of all countri would give 14.6 countri per group. becaus of this, 
14 countri be includ in the group of less develop and rich countri 
and 16 countri to the group of middle-incom countries. the threshold 
for these group become: gdp per caput under $637 in 1963 for less de- 
velop economies, gdp per caput between $638 and $1903 in 1963 for 
middle-incom economies, and gdp per caput over $1903 in 1963 for rich 
economies. tabl 3.7 give the result of panel dynam sur estim of 
equat (3.2) in differ incom groups.25 

accord to the result present in tabl 3.7, the cointegr coeffi- 
cient of invest be posit and statist signific at the 5% level 
in less develop and middle-incom countries.26 the cointegr coeffi- 

25estim be conduct with gauss. author be grate to donggyu sul for provid 
the program code on hi homepage. 

26estim be also do with three lead and lags, but a there be no major 

87 



tabl 3.7: dsur estim of the cointegr coeffici of inequ in 
differ incom group 
depend variable: log(gdp) 

less develop middle-incom rich 

panel dsur (lead & lags=1) 
log(investments) 0.1532*** 0.1296*** 0.0068 

(0.0309) (0.0345) (0.0114) 
log(inequality) -0.1567*** -0.1700*** -0.1187*** 

(0.0208) (0.0282) (0.0069) 
panel dsur (lead & lags=2) 
log(investments) 0.1841*** 0.0843*** -0.0151 

(0.0132) (0.0168) (0.0092) 
log(inequality) -0.1337*** -0.1622*** -0.1216*** 

(0.0132) (0.0168) (0.0071) 

countri 7 6 11 
year 1963-96 1963-96 1963-96 
observ 238 204 374 

* = p<.05, ** = p<.01, *** = p<.001. standard error be present in parentheses. stan- 

dard error be estim use parametr correction. all estim includ individu 

constants, individu trends, and common time effects. 

88 



cient of invest be not statist signific at the 5% level in ani of 
the estim of rich countries. the elast of growth with respect to 
invest also get small a countri get richer. thi impli that the 
influenc of invest on per caput growth diminish a the level of phys- 
ical capit increases. the cointegr coeffici of inequ be neg 
and statist signific at the 5%level in all incom groups.27 

It be unexpect that the cointegr coeffici of invest be not 
posit and statist signific in rich economies. however, dsur esti- 
mator assum that the cointegr rank be 1. becaus estim equat 
includ two explanatori i(1) variables, there may be two cointegr vec- 
tors. If equat (3.2) be estim with dsur use onli invest a a 
explanatori variabl in rich economies, the cointegr coeffici of invest- 
ment be posit (the valu of the cointegr coeffici be about 0.01) and 
statist signific at the 5% level.28 If equat (3.2) be estim use 
inequ a the onli explanatori variable, the cointegr coeffici of 
inequ chang onli margin compar to the result present in tabl 
3.7. 

As such, result present in tabl 3.7 contradict the result of panel 
dol estimation, where the cointegr coeffici of the inequ be 
posit and statist signific in less develop economi when two 
and three lead and lag be use a instruments. thi could result from 
cross-sect correl not captur by the common time effect, from 
correl between equilibrium error and cross-equations, from effici of 
panel dsur compar to panel dols, or from sampl select bias. To test 
this, both estim be use to estim model (3.2) use the dataset with 
34 yearli observations. result of estim be present in tabl 3.8. 

accord to the results, the cointegr coeffici of inequ be not 
statist signific in less develop economies, when panel dol esti- 
mator be used, and neg and statist significant, when panel dsur 

chang in the results, onli result of estim with one and two lead and lag be 
present here. 

27equat 3.2) be also estim use onli the data on 6 of the most develop 
countries. result be similar to those present in tabl 3.7. 

28the cointegr coeffici of invest remain more or less the same when esti- 
mation in other incom group be do use onli invest a a explanatori variable. 

89 



tabl 3.8: dol and dsur estim of the cointegr coeffici of 
inequ in differ incom group 
depend variable: log(gdp) 

less develop middle-incom rich 

panel dol (lead & lags=1) 
log(investments) 0.263* 0.180*** 0.136*** 

(0.116) (0.047) (0.043) 
log(inequality) -0.101 -0.120*** -0.057 

(0.066) (0.038) (0.030) 
panel dol (lead & lags=2) 
log(investments) 0.420* 0.162*** 0.068 

(0.144) (0.040) (0.061) 
log(inequality) -0.106 -0.112*** -0.108*** 

(0.070) (0.032) (0.035) 
panel dsur (lead & lags=1) 
log(investments) 0.1532*** 0.1296*** 0.0068 

(0.0309) (0.0345) (0.0114) 
log(inequality) -0.1567*** -0.1700*** -0.1187*** 

(0.0208) (0.0282) (0.0069) 
panel dsur (lead & lags=2) 
log(investments) 0.1841*** 0.0843*** -0.0151 

(0.0132) (0.0168) (0.0092) 
log(inequality) -0.1337*** -0.1622*** -0.1216*** 

(0.0132) (0.0168) (0.0071) 

countri 7 6 11 
year 1963-96 1963-96 1963-96 
observ 238 204 374 

* = p<.05, ** = p<.01, *** = p<.001. standard error be present in parentheses. stan- 

dard error be estim use parametr correction. all estim includ individu 

constants, individu trends, and common time effects. 

90 



be used. the differ between the estim result present in tabl 
3.6 and 3.8 impli that the estim result of less develop economi 
might be driven by the sampl selection. however, it be also possibl that 
the differ result from bia in the dol estim caus by correl 
in cross-equations. unfortunately, due to the limit extent of the data thi 
issu cannot be solv here and thi question need to be address further 
in futur research. 

there be no major differ in result of middle-incom and rich economi 
compar to result present in tabl 3.6. thus, the result obtain for 
middle-incom and rich countri seem to be robust across samples. 

3.5 conclus 

the result show that the distribut of incom and econom develop- 
ment seem to have a steady-st equilibrium relation, or relations, a com- 
monli predict by theoret models. accord to estimations, thi long- 
run growth elast of incom inequ be neg in middle-incom and 
rich economics. estim result also indic that the long-run growth 
elast of inequ may differ between less develop economies. 

there be (at least) three reserv that have to be attach to the 
results: the highli simplifi product function, the time dimension, and 
the extent of the data use in estimation. the product function use in 
estim includ onli two inputs, name physic capit and incom in- 
equality. It be assum that the coeffici of inequ reflect the effect of 
human capit on product growth. however, it be like that the observ 
effect of incom inequ reflect the econom effect of sever other vari- 
abl a well. It have be show that incom inequ may, in addit to 
human capital, have an effect on sever variables, e.g., social capital, ag- 
gregat savings, and social stability. control for all these variabl could 
result in bia coeffici of inequality, becaus the coeffici would not 
repres the aggreg effect of incom inequ but onli a partial effect. 
thus, it may be feasibl not to tri to control the differ channel through 
which incom inequ may affect growth. 

panel cointegr method have make it possibl to test for cointegra- 

91 



tion use onli a hand of time seri observations. thi have brought about 
a dilemma. If onli a few dozen time seri observ be need for cointe- 
gration testing, what be the time dimens after which the relationship can be 
describ a a long-run relation? It be assum here that a "lower bound" 
for long-run relationship be one gener (25 to 30 yearli observations). 
some may argu that, economically, thi do not constitut long-run. how- 
ever, theori describ the effect of inequ on growth predict that there 
may be temporari steady-st equilibrium between them at differ stage 
of econom development. As result present here indic that countri 
in question seem to be, at least, in their temporari steady-st equilibrium 
within thi period, it seem that one gener could be consid long-run 
in thi setting. 

the dataset use in estim be fairli small includ onli 38 countri 
at maximum. there be also onli few less develop countri includ in 
group-rel estimations. due to this, the result on poor countri remain 
inconclusive, but the data on develop economi be far more comprehen- 
sive. In rich economies, estim result valid the gener find of the 
theori describ the relationship between incom inequ and growth. 
that is, incom inequ be associ with low long-run econom growth 
in rich economies. 

92 



bibliographi 

atkinson A, brandolini A. (2001). promis and pitfal in the use of secondari 
data-sets: incom inequ in oecd countri a a case study. journal 
of econom literature, 39(3):771-799 

baltagi B. (2008). econometr analysi of panel data. john wiley & sons, 
west sussex 

banerje A, marcellino M, osbat C. (2005). test for ppp: should we use 
panel methods? empir economics, 30(1):77-91 

banerje A, marcellino M, osbat C. (2004). some caution on the use of panel 
method for integr seri of panel data. econometr J 7(2):322-40 

banerje A, carrion-i-silvestr J. (2006). cointegr in 
panel data with break and cross-sect dependence. 
european central bank work paper seri no. 591. 
http://www.ecb.int/pub/scientific/wps/date/html/wpsall.en.html. ac- 
cess 20 august 2010 

banerje A, duflo E. (2003). inequ and growth: what can the data say? 
journal of econom growth, 8(3):267-299 

barro R. (2000) inequ and growth in a panel of countries. journal of 
econom growth, 5(1):5-32 

bènabou R. (2005) inequality, technology, and the social contract. In aghion 
P, durlauf S (eds) handbook of econom growth 1b. elsevier, amsterdam, 
pp. 1595-1638 

93 



benhabib J, rustichini A. (1996) social conflict and growth. journal of eco- 
nomic growth, 1(1):125-142 

breitung J. (2005) A parametr approach to estim of cointegr 
vector in panel data. econometr reviews, 24(2):151-173 

breitung J, pesaran H. (2008). unit root and cointegr in panels. In 
matysa L, sevestr P (eds) the econometr of panel data: fundament 
and recent develop in theori and practice, springer, berlin, pp. 279- 
322 

chen b-l. (2003). An inverted-u relationship between inequ and long- 
run growth. econom letters, 78(2):205-212. 

De La croix D, doepk M. (2003). inequ and growth: whi differenti 
fertil matters. american econom review, 93(4):1091-1113. 

deining K, squir L. (1996). A new data set measur incom inequality. 
world bank econom review, 10(3):565-591 

dynan K, skinner J, zeld S. (2004). Do rich save more? J pol econ 
112(2):397-444 

forb K. (2000). A reassess of the relationship between inequ and 
growth. american econom review, 90(4):869-887 

frazer G. (2006). inequ and develop across and within countries. 
world development, 34 (9), 1459–1481 

föster M, pearson M. (2003). incom distribut and poverti in the oecd 
area: data and explanations. cesifo econom studies, 49(4):479-513 

galbraith J, kum H. (2006). estim the inequ of household incomes: 
a statist approach to the creation of a dens and consist global data 
set. utip work paper no. 22. http://utip.gov.utexas.edu. access 10 
januari 2007 

galor O, moav O. (2004). from physic to human capit accumulation: 
inequ and the process of development. review of econom studies, 
71(4):1001-1026 

94 



galor O, zeira J. (1993). incom distribut and macroeconomics. review 
of econom studies, 60(1):35-52 

heston A, summer R, aten B. (2006). penn world tabl version 6.2. center 
for intern comparison of production, incom and prices. univer- 
siti of pennsylvania 

hinelin D. (2008). paramet heterogen in growth regressions. econom 
letters, 101(2):126-129 

Im K, pesaran H, shin Y. (2003) test for unit root in heteregen 
panels. journal of econometrics, 115(1):53-74 

kao C, chiang mh. (2000) On the estim and infer of a cointegr 
regress panel data. In baltagi B (ed) advanc in econometr 15, 
emerald, bingley, pp. 179-222. 

kaldor N (1957). A model of econom growth. econom journal, 
67(268):591-624 

karlsson S löthgren M. (2000). On the power and interpret of panel 
unit root tests. econom letters, 66(3):249-255 

keyn M. (1936) the gener theori of employment, interest, and money. 
harcourt, new york 

kuznet S. (1955). econom growth and incom inequality. american eco- 
nomic review, 45(1):1-29 

levin A, lin cf, chu cs. (2002). unit root test in panel data: asymptot 
and finite-sampl properties. journal of econometrics, 108(1):1-24 

Li H, heng-fu Z. (1998). incom inequ be not harm for growth: theori 
and evidence. review of develop econom 2(3):318-334 

lin sc, huang hc, weng hw. (2006). A semi-parametr partial linear in- 
vestig of the kuznets’ hypothesis. journal of compar econom 
34(3): 634-647. 

95 



maddala G, Wu S. (1999). A compar studi of unit root test with panel 
data and a new simpl test. oxford bulletin of econom statist 61(spe- 
cial issue): 631-652. 

mark N, ogaki M, sul D. (2005). dynam seemingli unrel cointegr 
regressions. review of econom studi 72(3): 797-820. 

mark N, sul D. (2003). cointegr vector estim by panel dol 
and long-run money demand. oxford bulletin of econom and statis- 
tic 65(5):655-80 

pedroni P. (2004) panel cointegration: asymptot and finit sampl prop- 
erti of pool time seri test with an applic to ppp hypothesis. 
econometr theori 20(3):597-625 

pedroni P. (2000). fulli modifi ol for heterogen cointegr panels. 
In baltagi B (ed) advanc in econometr 15, emerald, bingley, pp. 
93-130 

pedroni P. (1999). critic valu for cointegr test in heterogen pan- 
el with multipl regressors. oxford bulletin of econom and statist 
61(special issue): 653-670 

perotti R. (1993). polit equilibrium, incom distribut and growth. re- 
view of econom studi 60(4): 755-776 

persson T, tabellini G. (1994). Is inequ harm for growth. american 
econom review 84(3): 600-621 

pesaran H. (2007). A simpl panel unit root test in the presenc of cross 
section dependence. journal of appli econometr 22(2): 265-315 

phillip P, moon H. (1999). linear regress limit theori for nonstationari 
panel data. econometrica 67(5): 1057-1111 

phillip peter, ouliari S. (1990). asymptot properti of residu base 
test for cointegration. econometrica 58(1): 165-193 

smith A. (1776). An inquiri into the natur and caus of wealth of na- 
tions. http://www.gutenberg.org/etext/3300. access 6 septemb 2010 

96 



stiglitz J. (1969). distribut of incom and wealth among individuals. 
econometrica, 37(3):382-397 

wagner M and hlouskova J. (2007). the perform of panel cointegr 
methods: result from a larg scale simul study. econometr review 
29(2):182-223 

97 



98 



appendix C 

panel unit root test 

the tradit panel unit root test use in thi studi be base on the 
follow regression: 

△yit = ρiyi,t−1 + δi + ηit + θt + ϵit, (c.1) 

where δi be the individu constants, ηit be the individu time trends, and θt 
be the common time effect. all test reli on the assumpt that e[ϵitϵjs] = 0 
∀ t, s and i ≠ j, which be requir for the calcul of common time effects. 
the inclus of individu constant and time trend be also optional. 

the null hypothesi in all test ish0 ∶ ρi = 0 ∀ i, but the test have differ 
assumpt about the heterogen of ρ and on the altern hypothesis. 
Im et al. (2003), fisher type adf and PP tests, and pesaran (2007) test 
introduc below allow for individu processes. their altern hypothesi 
be that some but not all of the individu seri may have unit roots. levin 
et al. (2002) test, on the other hand, assum a common unit root process, 
i.e., ρi = ρ ∀ i. 

the test by pesaran (2007) be base on a regress 

△yit = ρyi,t−1 + ηit + αi + δiθt + ϵit, (c.2) 

where αi be the individu constants, ηit be the individu time trends, θt 
be the common time effect, whose coefficients, δi, be assum to be non- 
stochast and they measur the impact of the common time effect on seri 
i, ϵit ∼ i.i.d.n(0, σ2) over t, and ϵit be independ of ϵj and θs for all i ≠ j and 
s, t. cross-sect depend be allow through the common time effect 

99 



which be proxi by the cross-sect mean of yit (ȳt = n−1σnj=1yjt) and it 
lag values, ȳt−1, ȳt−2, etc. the null hypothesi be that H0 ∶ ρi = 0 ∀ i and 
altern hypothesi allow for some of the test seri to be nonstationary. 

100 



appendix D 

pedroni’ and banerje & 
carrion-i-silvestre’ panel 
cointegr test 

panel cointegr test develop by pedroni (2004) be base on the model: 

yit = αi + δit + βixit + ϵit, (d.1) 

where αi: and δi: allow for member specif fix effect and determinist 
trends, xit be a m-dimension column vector of explanatori variabl for 
each member i, and βi be an m-dimension row vector for each member i. 

the data gener process be describ a a partit vector z′it ≡ 
(yit,xit) where the true process be gener a zit = zi,t−1 + ζit, ζ ′it = (ζ 

y 
itζ 

X 
it ) 

(pedroni 2004). 1√ 
T 
∑[tr]t=1 ζit be assum to converg to a vector brownian 

motion with asymptot covari of Ωi a T ð→∞. the individu process 
be assum to be i.i.d. so that e[ζitζ ′js] = 0 ∀s, t, i ≠ j. 

let êit denot the estim residu of (d.1) and ω̂i the consist 

101 



estim of ωi. the 7 test statist can now be defin a : 

zv̂nt ≡ (σni=1σtt=1l̂−211iê2i,t−1) 
−1 
, 

zρ̂nt−1 ≡ (σni=1σtt=1l̂−211iê2i,t−1) 
1 
σni=1σ 

T 
t=1l̂ 

−2 
11i(êi,t−1∆êit − λ̂i, 

zt̂nt ≡ (σ̃ 
2 
ntς 

N 
i=1σ 

T 
t=1l̂ 

−2 
11iê 

2 
i,t−1) 

−1 
σni=1σ 

T 
t=1l̂ 

−2 
11i(êi,t−1∆êit − λ̂i), 

zt̂nt ≡ (s̃ 
∗2 
ntς 

N 
i=1σ 

T 
t=1l̂ 

−2 
11iê 

∗2 
i,t−1) 

−1 
σni=1σ 

T 
t=1l̂ 

−2 
11i(ê∗i,t−1∆ê∗it − λ̂i), 

z̃ρ̂nt−1 ≡ σni=1 (σtt=1ê2i,t−1) 
−1 
σtt=1(êi,t−1∆êit − λ̂i), 

z̃t̂nt ≡ Σ 
N 
i=1 (σ̂2iσtt=1ê2i,t−1) 

−1/2 
σtt=1(êi,t−1∆êit − λ̂i), 

z̃∗ 
t̂nt 
≡ σni=1 (σtt=1ŝ∗2i ê∗2i,t−1) 

−1/2 
σtt=1(ê∗i,t−1∆ê∗it), 

where l−211i = ω̂11i − ω̂′21iω̂−122iω̂21i, λ̂i = 1/tς 
ki 
s=1 (1 − s/(ki + 1))σtt=s+1µ̂itµ̂i,t−s, 

ŝ2i ≡ 1/tσtt=1µ̂2it, σ̂i = ŝ2i + 2λ̂i, σ̃2nt ≡ 1/nσni=1l̂−211iσ̂2i , ŝ∗2i ≡ 1/tσtt=1µ̂∗2it , s̃∗2nt ≡ 
1/nσni=1ŝ∗2i , l̂211i = 1/tσtt=1ϑ̂2it+2/tς 

ki 
s=1 (1 − s/(k − i + 1))σtt=s+1ϑ̂i, ϑ̂i,t−s. the 

residu µ̂it, µ̂∗it and ϑ̂it be attain from regressions: êit = γ̂êi,t−1 + µ̂it, êit = 
γ̂iêi,t−1+σk−ik=1 γ̂ik∆êi,t−k+ µ̂∗it, ∆yit = σmm=1b̂mi∆xmi,t = ϑ̂it. (pedroni 1999, 2004) 

the first 4 statist be construct by pool the data by it within 
dimens (pedroni 2004). here the numer and denomin term be 
sum separ for the analog convent time seri statistics. the 
last 3 statist pool the between dimens of the panel. these statist 
be construct by comput the ratio of the correspond convent 
time seri statist and then by comput the standard sum of the 
N time seri of the panel. In the weight statist present in tabl 3, 
the numer and denomin of the panel statist be weight by the 
member specif long-run condit variances. pedroni (1999, 2004) show 
that under the null of no cointegr the asymptot distribut of the 
7 statist present abov and the weight statist converg to normal 
distribut with zero mean and varianc of one a N and T sequenti 
converg to infinity. 

panel cointegr test develop by banerje and carrion-i-silvestr (2006) 

102 



be base on a model: 

yi,t = fi(t) + x′i,t + ui,t, 
△xi,t = vi,t, 

fi(t) = µi + βit + θdui,t + γidt ∗i,t, 
uit = F ′tπi + eit 

(d.2) 

where ei,t = ρiei,t + ϵi,t, 

dui,t = 
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩ 

0 t ≤ tbi 
1 t > tbi 

, (d.3) 

DT ∗i,t = 
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩ 

0 t ≤ tbi 
(t − tbi) t > tbi 

, (d.4) 

where tbi = λit, λi ∈ Λ, denot the time of the break for the i-th unit in 
a close subset of (0,1), and F ′t :s be the common factor which be use to 
account for the possibl cross-sect dependence. the cointegr vector 
be specifi a a function of time: 

δi,t = 
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩ 

δi,1 t ≤ tbi 
δi,2 t > tbi 

. (d.5) 

banerje & carrion-i-silvestre’ test comput a Ze 
t̄nt 
(λ) = n−1∑ni=1 tp̂i(λ) 

statist for each break point use the idiosyncrat disturb term (eit). 
the break point be estim a the argument that minim the sequenc 
of standard statistics. thus, the estim break date be give by 

t̂b = argmin 
λ∈λ 

⎛ 
⎝ 
n−1/2ze 

t̄nt 
(λ) −θe2(λ) 

√ 
N 

√ 
ψe2(λ) 

⎞ 
⎠ 
. 

103 



104 



appendix E 

panel dol and panel dsur 
estim 

e.1 panel dol 

mark and sul (2003) consid a dol estim with fix effects, fix ef- 
fect and heterogen trends, and with fix effects, heterogen trends, 
and common time effects. the last model account for cross-sect depen- 
denc by introduc a common time effect. mark and sul’ model assum 
that observ on each individu i obey the follow triangular repre- 
sentation: 

yit = αi + λit + θt + γ′xit + uit, (e.1) 

where (1,−γ′) be a cointegr vector between yit and xit, which be ident 
across individuals, αi be a individual-specif effect, λit be a individual-specif 
linear trend, θt be a common time-specif factor, and uit be a idionsyncrat 
error that be independ across i, but possibl depend across t. model 
(e.1) allow for a limit form of cross-sect correlation, where the equi- 
librium error for each individu be driven in part by θt. 

panel dol elimin the possibl endogen between explanatori 
variabl and the depend variabl by assum that uit be correl at 
most with pi lead and lag of △xit (mark and sul 2003). the possibl en- 
dogen can be control by project uit onto these pi lead and lags: 

uit = σpis=−piδ′i,s△ xi,t− + uit∗ = δ′izit + u∗it. (e.2) 

105 



the project error u∗it be orthogon to all lead and lag of △xit and the 
estim equat becomes: 

yit = αi + λit + θt + γ′xit + δizit + u∗it, (e.3) 

where δ′izit be a vector of project dimensions. the consist estim of 
(i.4) be base on sequenti limits, i.e., a T →∞ then n→∞. equat (i.4) 
can be feasibl estim in panel with small to moder n. 

e.2 panel dsur 

however, if there remain correl between equilibrium error, uit, and lead 
and lag of other cross-sect △xjt, j /= i, the panel dol exhibit the same 
form of second order asymptot bia a pool ol (mark and sul 2003). 
panel dsur estim can be use to account for thi correlation. 

the data gener process in mark et al. (2005) dsur estim be of 
the form 

yit = βix′it + uit, (e.4) 

△xit = eit (e.5) 

where there be n cointegr regress each with T observations, and xit 
and eit be k×1 dimension vectors. endogen be control for by includ- 
ing lead and lag of (i.2) into the regression, a in panel dol estim 
present above. panel dsur estim a long-run covari matrix that be 
use in estim of equat (i.1). thi make panel dsur more effici 
than panel dol when cross-sect be dependent. the effici of panel 
dsur actual improv a the correl between cross-sect increases. 

106 



appendix F 

countri list 

107 



tabl f.1: countri list I 
countri observ countri observ 

australia 35 malaysia 32 
austria 37 malta 27 
bangladesh 21 mauritiu 32 
barbado 28 mexico 30 
belgium 30 netherland 37 
bolivia 30 new zealand 34 
canada 37 nicaragua 21 
chile 37 norway 36 
colombia 37 panama 32 
cypru 37 papua new guinea 20 
denmark 36 philippin 35 
ecuador 37 portug 27 
egypt 36 seneg 24 
El salvador 28 singapor 37 
fiji 23 spain 37 
finland 36 sweden 37 
germani 25 syrian arab republ 36 
greec 37 taiwan 25 
hong kong 27 turkey 36 
hungari 30 UK 32 
india 37 usa 37 
indonesia 29 uruguay 23 
ireland 36 venezuela 29 
israel 34 
itali 32 
japan 37 
korea, republ of 37 
kuwait 38 
macao 20 
madagascar 22 

n=53 

observ give the maximum number of simultan observ in the seri of 

ehii2.1 inequ measur and real gdp per capita. 

108 



tabl f.2: countri list II 
countri (25 years) countri (34 years) countri (37 years) 
1973-1996 1963-1996 1963-1999 

australia australia austria 
austria austria canada 
barbado canada chile 
bolivia chile colombia 
canada colombia ecuador 
chile denmark finland 
colombia ecuador greec 
cypru finland india 
denmark greec japan 
ecuador india korea, republ of 
egypt ireland netherland 
finland israel singapor 
greec japan spain 
hungari korea, republ of sweden 
india netherland unit state 
indonesia new zealand 
ireland norway 
israel philippin 
itali singapor 
japan spain 
korea, republ of sweden 
kuwait syria 
malaysia turkey 
malta unit state 
mauritiu 
mexico 
netherland 
new zealand 
norway 
philippin 
singapor 
spain 
sweden 
syria 
turkey 
unit kingdom 
unit state 
venezuela 

n=38 n=24 n=15 

year give the number of simultan yearli observ in the seri of ehii2.1 inequ measur and 

real gdp per capita. 

109 



110 



chapter 4 

incom inequ and savings: a 
reassess of the relationship 
in cointegr panel 

abstract1 

the effect of incom inequ on save and consumpt have remain an 
open empir issu despit sever decad of research. result obtain in 
thi studi indic that incom inequ and privat consumpt be both 
i(1) nonstationari variabl that be cointegrated, and inequ have have 
a neg effect on privat consumpt in central-european and nordic 
countries. result for anglo-saxon countri be inconclusive. these find 
suggest that previou empir research may have produc bia result 
on the effect of inequ on save by assum that inequ would be 
a stationari variable. 

1an earli version of thi chapter have be publish in helsinki center of econom 
research discuss papers, no. 337 

111 



4.1 introduct 

the effect of save on capit accumul and growth have alway be 
one of the fundament research topic in economics. accord to smith 
(1776), increas divis of labor rais productivity, but save govern 
capit accumulation, which enabl product growth. In the 18th century, 
onli rich peopl saved. therefore, econom growth be possibl onli when 
there be enough rich peopl in the society. however, accord to keyn 
(1936), inequ of incom would slow down econom growth. keyn ar- 
gu that margin consumpt decreas a the incom of an individu 
increases, and thus, aggreg consumpt depend on chang in aggreg 
income. becaus demand be the basi of investments, and becaus inequ 
lower aggreg consumption, inequ of incom would diminish econom 
growth. In neo-class growth models, incom distribut determin the 
level save and thu the level of capit accumul (solow 1956; kaldor 
1957). 

In addit to the approach of classic economics, there exist sever the- 
ori describ the effect of incom inequ on save and consumption. 
these includ the perman incom hypothesi by friedman (1957), life- 
cycl hypothesi by ando and modigliani (1963), which be augment with 
intergener transfer by kotlikoff and summer (1981), save under 
liquid constraint by deaton (1991), and political-economi model (e.g. 
alesina and perotti (1994)). 

although theoret research span sever decades, the effect of incom 
inequ on save remain an open empir question. thi be due to the 
fact that empir cross-countri studi have produc controversi result 
on the effect of incom inequ on savings. In one of the most recent panel 
econometr studies, leigh and posso (2009) estim the effect of the incom 
share of the top 1% on the percentag valu of gross save of the gdp 
and find no statist signific effect of inequ on nation savings. 
similarly, schmidt-hebbel and servén (2000) find no statist signific 
effect of the percentag valu of save of the gdp use sever differ 
measur of incom inequality. however, smith (2001) find that inequality, 
measur with deining and squire’ (1996) gini index, have a statist 
robust posit effect on the percentag valu of save of the gdp. cook 

112 



(1995) find the same effect in less develop economies. Li and zou (2004) 
find that inequ have a neg effect on privat save use deining 
and squire’ (1996) gini index and the ratio of privat save of gdp. 

all the empir studi summar abov have assum that incom 
inequality, measur either by the gini index or by the share of incom earn 
by differ incom classes, be a stationari variable. however, in the earli 
theoret literatur on incom inequality, the incom variat be assum 
to be driven by a stochast process (chambernown 1953; mandelbrot 1961). 
moreover, mandelbrot (1961) argu that time-independent, i.e. stationary, 
incom variat be unlikely, and it be possibl that the distribut of 
incom will never reach a steadi state impli a nonstationari process of 
incom variation. In recent studi with cross-countri panel data, malinen 
(2012) and herzer and vollmer (2012) have obtain result accord to 
which the data gener process of incom inequ would be driven by a 
stochast trend, indic that inequ would be an i(1) nonstationari 
variable. previously, for example, mocan (1999) have obtain similar results.2 

If thi assumpt of the earli theoret model held in general, it would 
offer an explan to the controversi in the previou empir studies. thi 
be becaus regress a stationari variabl on an i(1) variable(s) can lead to 
a spuriou regress (stewart 2011). In empir studies, save be usual 
measur a a percentag of the gdp. If both logarithm save and the 
logarithm gdp be i(1) variabl and cointegrated, their differ results, 
by construction, in a stationari variable, name save a a percentag of 
the gdp. thus, if inequ be an i(1) variabl and save a a ratio of 
the gdp a stationari i(0) variable, regress save on inequ would 
give spuriou results. 

thi studi us panel cointegr method to test the time seri prop- 
erti of the includ variabl and to estim the (possible) long-run rela- 
tion between incom inequ and savings. We use data on nine develop 
economies, and span four decad start from the year 1960. the in- 
come share of the top 1%, use to proxi the distribut of income, have be 
found to track broader measur of incom inequality, like the gini index, 
veri well (leigh 2007). accord to panel unit root tests, the logarithm in- 

2see also jäntti and jenkin (2010). 

113 



come share of the top 1%, logarithm gross nation save and logarithm 
privat consumpt be all i(1) nonstationari variables. incom share of 
the top 1% be also found to be cointegr with privat consumption, which 
impli that there be a long-run depend relat between them. the effect 
of inequ on privat consumpt be found to be neg in the nordic 
and central-european countries, but for the anglo-saxon countri the di- 
rection of the effect (posit vs. negative) remain somewhat ambiguous. 
the result of the panel cointegr test be inconclus on possibl coin- 
tegrat between gross save and the top 1% incom share. the real gdp 
per caput and gross save a well a the real gdp per caput and privat 
consumpt be also found to be cointegrated. thi impli that the ratio 
of save and privat consumpt to gdp would be stationari variabl 
and henc previou research be like to have produc bia result on the 
effect of inequ on save and consumption. 

the rest of the paper be organ a follows. section 2 give the theoret- 
ical and empir background of the study. section 3 describ the data and 
present the result of unit root tests. section 4 report the result of cointe- 
gration test and section 5 give the estim results. section 6 concludes. 

4.2 theoret and empir consider 

sever theori have be construct to explain the effect of inequ on 
savings. In classic econom theory, the form of the individu save func- 
tion determin the effect of incom inequ on savings. when the save 
function be linear or concave, the distribut of incom and wealth converg 
toward equal a the economi grow (stiglitz 1969). If the save function 
be convex, the margin propens to save increas with income. accord- 
ing to the perman incom hypothesis, individu with low incom have 
high propens to consume, and small chang in income, or it distribu- 
tion, do not affect the consumpt decis of household (friedman 1957). 
the life-cycl hypothesi argu that, if bequest be luxury, the save rate 
should be high among wealthier individu (kotlikoff and summer 1981). 
In political-economi models, more unequ incom distribut may creat 
demand for more redistribut through taxat and incom transfers, and 

114 



if the save function of individu in the economi be convex, i.e. the rich 
save more, thi will diminish aggreg save through diminish incom 
of the rich (alesina and perotti 1994). 

what be common to all of the theori introduc abov be that they gen- 
eral assum that the individu incom process be non-stochastic. however, 
a point out by stiglitz (1969), the veri first (formal) model of incom 
inequ by chambernown (1953) and mandelbrot (1961) be base on 
stochast processes. chambernown (1953) develop a model assum that 
the evolut of incom of an individu be determin by his/her incom in 
the previou year and by a stochast (chance) process. In modern terms, thi 
process would be say to be i(1) non-stationary. 

i(1) non-stationari process have a infinit memory, i.e., they be highli 
persistent. assum some degre of persist in the evolut of the in- 
come seri of an individu be quit intuit a shock (e.g., wage raise) to 
the incom process of an individu be like to have perman effect on 
the futur incom of the individual. microeconom literatur on household 
incom and consumpt behavior adopt the idea of perman effect af- 
fect the incom seri of an individual. for instance, hall and mishkin 
(1982) consid a stochast model of consumpt propos by muth 
(1960), where the effect of individu incom on consumpt be divid 
into perman and transitori components. In a recent studi on the evo- 
lution of consumpt and incom inequality, blundel et al. (2008) use the 
same kind of formul where the incom of household vari accord to 
the follow function: 

logyit = zitϑt + pit + vit, (4.1) 

where zit be a set of incom characterist of household i that be observ 
and know by consum at time t,3 vit follow an ma(q) process, and pi,t = 
pi,t−1 + ϵit with ϵit serial uncorrelated, indic that the process {p} be 
i(1) non-stationary. sever studi in the micro literatur tend to find that 
also empir the perman compon pit be a random walk, and henc 
it can be model a an i(1) nonstationari process (meghir and pistaferri 
2004; hall and mishkin 1982; blundel et al. 2008). 

3these includ demographic, education, employ status, ethnic, etc. factor (blun- 
dell et al. 2008) 

115 



deaton (1991) studi how liquid constraint affect nation savings, 
when incom be driven by a random walk with drift.4 He argu that the as- 
sumption of optim intertempor consumpt behavior of consum be 
restrict by borrow constraint would help to creat a model that could 
explain the observ pattern of household wealth and the depend of 
consumpt on incom dure the life cycl of an individual. accord to 
deaton, the problem with stochast life cycl - perman incom models, 
like the model by hall and mishkin (1982), be that they assum substanti 
wealth accumul at some point of the life cycl of an individual, which 
be not support by the data. deaton assum that the labor incom of an 
individu follow an ar(1) process of the form: 

log(yt+1) = log(yt) + log(zt+1) + δ, (4.2) 

where yt be labor income, zt+1 be stochast random variable, and δ > 0 be a con- 
stant. when zt+1 be assum to be ident and independ distributed, 
the labor incom process, log(yt), be i(1) non-stationari and, specifically, 
it follow a random walk with drift. deaton found that, when incom be a 
random walk and borrow constraint be binding, it be undesir for 
household to undertak ani smooth of consumption, i.e., they have no 
incent to save. thi impli that consumpt equal incom on all in- 
come levels. however, he assum that the interest rate be high than the 
consumer’ discount rate. If the interest rate equal the consumer’ discount 
rate, the stochast incom process and borrow constraint lead to the re- 
sult that the propens to consum be low at high incom level (seater 
1997; travaglini 2008). In thi day and age, the debat on the valid of 
the life cycl - perman incom hypothesi be still veri much ongoing. In a 
recent paper, attanasio and weber (2010) review the literatur on intertem- 
poral alloc model and present some modif to the standard life 
cycl hypothesi framework to make the model fit the micro data better. 

when individu incom seri be affect by a random walk component, 
the aggreg time seri be like to be character by a random walk 
(rossanan and seater 1995). thi appli to the aggreg income, but the 

4assum a drift in incom relat be intuit and necessary, becaus incom tend 
to grow over time. thus, just variat around that trend be assum to be stochastic. 

116 



distribut of incom be often measur use some bound measure, like 
the gini index or share of total income. thi chang thing a bit a ani 
measur that vari within some boundari like the incom share, cannot, 
by definition, be an i(1) nonstationari process. thi be becaus the varianc 
of such an seri cannot grow to infin with time, which be what happen 
with random walk series. however, it be possibl that the distribut can 
have a stochast trend in it other moments, like the mean, skewness, and 
kurtosis, than varianc (white and granger 2010). thus, when individu 
incom seri that be affect by a random walk compon be aggreg 
to a bound distribution, it be like that thi distribut have a stochast 
trend in it kurtosi and/or in it skewness. thi way the measur of incom 
inequality, be a function of some incom distribution, may exhibit such 
high level of persist that it be good approxim by an i(1) process 
than a stationari process. 

figur 1 present the detrend and demean time seri of the top 1% 
incom share seri for 5 develop countries. time seri of the share seem 
to "wander" randomli through time in all countries, which be a distinct 
featur of a seri that be driven by a stochast trend. the seri be also 
clearli not mean- or trend-revert in the observ period, which be one 
condit of stationarity. 

thus, the possibl that incom inequ be driven by a stochast trend 
need to be take into account in the analysi of the relationship between 
inequ and savings. especi in empir analysis, thi be quit crucial, 
a the possibl i(1) non-stationar of the includ variabl determin the 
way thi relationship can be consist estim (see the introduction). 
that be whi we next turn to test the time seri properti of relev 
variables. 

4.3 data and unit root test 

4.3.1 data 

In thi studi we use the the top 1% incom share of popul to proxi the 
incom distribut in differ countries. sinc the work of piketti (2003), 

117 



-.06 

-.04 

-.02 

.00 

.02 

.04 

.06 

.08 

1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 

australia canada franc 
japan US 

figur 1. the detrend and demean share of incom of the top 1% of popul in 5 

develop countri 1925-1998 source: leigh (2007) 

there have be a grow interest toward build long time seri of the 
evolut of top incom share of the population. measur the develop 
in top incom share make it possibl to construct substanti longer time 
seri from the evolut of the distribut of incom than would be possibl 
use the gini index or similar aggreg measures. top incom seri be 
built use nation tax data and appli the same method across countri 
to make the seri compar (atkinson and piketti 2007). leigh (2007) have 
also demonstr that the top 1% incom share seri have a high correl 
with other measur of incom inequality, like the gini index. the dataset 
on the top 1% incom share gather by leigh be a primari sourc of data 
in thi study. 

however, after leigh (2007) there have be addit to the pool of coun- 
tri for which a histor dataset of the evolut of top incom be available. 

118 



roin and waldenström (2011) have use data collect from sever differ- 
ent sourc in their analysi of common trend and shock in top incom 
series. their dataset be extensive, but it, like the dataset by leigh (2007), have 
one caveat. due to the length of some seri (start from the begin of 
the 20 century) the observ from all countri be not continuous, and 
thu they be forc to extrapol over some observations. thi be problem- 
atic, becaus extrapol of over just one observ may alter the time 
seri properti of the observ variable. from the dataset of leigh we know 
that the seri of new zealand have observ miss in 1961, 1974, and 
1976. thus, new zealand be not includ in the dataset that consist of those 
periods. for the other countri neither leigh nor roin and waldenström 
explicitli list the observ over which they be extrapolating, and thu 
we have to check the origin data sourc to find out about the locat of 
the miss observations. after observ the individu sourc of data, we 
includ nine countri in our baselin dataset. these countri are: australia, 
canada, finland, france, the netherlands, norway, sweden, switzerland, the 
unit kingdom and the unit states.5 all these countri have continu 
observ from the year 1960 onwards, except switzerland from which we 
have onli bi-annu averag observ (dell et al. 2010). that is, for ex- 
ample, in 1995 and in 1996 the valu correspond to the averag share of the 
top 1% incom dure 1995-1996. thus, we do not includ switzerland on ani 
of the unit root tests, but observ from switzerland be includ in the 
cointegr test and estimations. becaus of the restrict impos by 
some of our test method explain later, the nine countri be divid 
into three group of countri accord to their (assumed) econom models. 
the group are: nordic, central-european, and anglo-saxon countries.6 In 

5the problemat countri in thi dataset be finland and the netherlands. In fin- 
land’ case the origin data, allegedli span from 1920 to 2005, could not be checked, 
but we could check that the data be continu at least from 1966 onwards. for the nether- 
land there be direct observ onli from the year 1977 onward and signific part 
of the previou observ be a result of interpol and pure estimation. however, 
panel unit root test be do also without nordic countri and the netherlands, and 
becaus extrapol would have the big impact on those tests, the bia creat by 
possibl extrapol over some valu of top 1% seri in finland and the netherland 
be diminished. 

6canada, unit kingdom and unit state be includ in the anglo-saxon group. 

119 



addition, japan and new zealand be includ in the test for the time 
seri properti of the top 1% incom share data. 

the endogen variabl use in thi studi be the gross save and 
the privat consumpt expenditures. the data on these be obtain from 
the ameco databas compil and publish by the directorate-gener 
for econom and financi affair of the european comission. ameco be 
used, becaus it have more extens time seri coverag on the variabl 
in question than, for example, the dataset of world bank. ameco do 
not includ data on privat savings, but becaus privat consumpt be the 
mirror imag of privat savings, it should not make ani differ which 
of these two variabl be used. both variabl be measur in aggreg 
term to minim the effect that a third variabl might have on the relat 
between inequ and savings. changes, for example, in fertil may have 
an effect on variabl that be measur in per caput term without affect 
the incom share of the top 1%. thus, express gross save and privat 
consumpt in per caput term could add stochast element to the time 
seri of those variabl unrel to their relat with incom inequality. 

the other variabl includ in the estim be the real gross domest 
product per capita, the depend rate, and the interest rate. the real gdp 
per caput be histor thought to proxi the expect lifetim wealth of the 
resid in a countri (cook 1995). the level of nation incom may also 
have a direct effect on gross save and consumption. the depend rate 
be use to control for possibl chang in the save pattern across the life 
cycl of individuals, and it measur the ratio of the popul under 15 to 
that over 64 year of age. interest rate may affect the individu propens 
to save by affect the profit of saving. the year 1960 be the first year 
includ in the dataset but the last year vari from one countri to another. 
the data on depend be obtain from the world develop indic 
of the world bank and the data on interest rate be from the databas of the 
intern monetari fund. 

the data on interest rate vari a littl across countri in the dataset. 
the baselin rate be the discount or the bank rate, i.e. the rate at which cen- 

france, netherlands, and switzerland be includ in the central-european group, and 
finland, norway, and sweden be includ in the group of nordic countries. 

120 



tral bank lend to deposit banks. however, for some countries, observ 
of thi variabl be not avail for the whole time period. that be whi there 
be some differ in the indic of interest rate between the group of 
countries. for finland, sweden, norway, and switzerland, the central bank 
rate be used. for canada, the unit kingdom, and the usa, the treasuri 
bill rate be used, which give the rate at which short-term secur be issu 
or trade in the market. for franc and the netherlands, the money market 
rate be used, which give the rate on short term lend between financi 
institutions. although use differ indic of interest rate be not opti- 
mal, all these indic should reflect chang in the interest rate at which 
consum borrow from and deposit money to banks. 

4.3.2 unit root test 

To test for possibl unit roots, four differ panel unit root test be used. 
the first two be the so call tradit and the last two the so call 
second gener panel unit root tests. tradit panel unit root test do 
not allow for cross-sect depend while the second gener test 
allow for cross-sect correlation. 

the tradit panel unit root tests, by Im et al. (2003) and the panel 
version of the adf test by maddala and Wu (1999), be base on the fol- 
low regression: 

△yit = ρiyi,t−1 + ηit + αt + θt + ϵit, (4.3) 

where αi be individu constants, ηit be individu time trends, and θt be 
the common time effects. the test reli on the assumpt that e[ϵitϵjs] = 0 
∀ t, s and i ≠ j, which be requir for calcul common time effects. thus, 
if the differ seri be correlated, the last assumpt be violated. 

the second gener test by pesaran (2007) and phillip and sul 
(2003) be base on the regress 

△yit = ρyi,t−1 + ηit + αi + δiθt + ϵit, (4.4) 

where αi be the individu constants, ηit be the individu time trends, 
and θt be the common time effect, whose coefficients, δi, be assum to be 

121 



non-stochastic, measur the impact of the common time effect of seri i, 
and ϵit be assum to be normal distribut with mean zero and covari 
of σ2 and independ of ϵj and θs for all i ≠ j and s, t. cross-sect 
depend be allow through the common time effect, which gener the 
correl between cross-sect units. the matrix δi give the non-random 
factor load coeffici that determin the extent of the cross-sect 
correlation. the null hypothesi in all test be that ρi = 0 ∀ i. the altern 
hypothesi are: 

H1 ∶ ρi < 0, i = 1,2, ...,n1, ρi = 0, i = N1 + 1,n1 + 2, ...,n. (4.5) 

for consist of panel unit root test it be also requir that, under the 
alternative, the fraction of the individu process that be stationari be 
non-zero, formal limn→∞(n1/n) = γ, 0 < γ ≤ 1 (im et al. 2003). 

tabl 4.1 present the result of the four panel unit root test for the top 
1% incom share. the test have be appli to three differ datasets. 
the first includ the data on five countri with the long continu time 
seri in the dataset by leigh (2007).7 the second dataset includ the eight 
countri on which we have data for all the includ variabl exclud 
switzerland. the third dataset includ observ from seven countri 
exclud the nordic countries. thi dataset span from 1983 to 2002.8 the 
third dataset be used, because, accord to roin and waldenström (2011), 
there be a trend break in the seri of the top 1% incom share in 1991 in 
the nordic countries. accord to roin and waldenström (2011), there 
be similar trend break in the top 1% incom share seri in the anglo- 
saxon countries, includ australia, canada, UK and usa (in 1982), in 
central european countries, includ france, switzerland, and netherland 
(in 1976), and in asian countries, includ japan (in 1983). so, to make 
sure that the result of the panel unit root test be not driven by structur 
breaks, the test be run use onli those countri that should not have 
break in their top 1% incom share seri in the test period. accord 
to all test in all datasets, the logarithm top 1% incom share be a i(1) 

7countri includ in the test are: australia, canada, france, japan, and the usa. 
all these countri should have continu observ throughout the period. 

8countri includ in the test are: australia, france, japan, new zealand, the unit 
kingdom, and the usa. 

122 



tabl 4.1: panel unit root test of the top 1% incom share 
variabl period ip adf pesaran PS 
top 1% 1925-1998 3.449 2.270 -0.103 4.200 

(0.998) (0.994) (0.459) (0.838) 
top 1% 1960-1996 5.256 1.282 -0.348 3.212 

(0.999) (0.998) (0.364) (0.976) 
top 1% 1983-2002 -0.302 16.670 -0.198 16.636 

(0.381) (0.273) (0.421) (0.187) 

the test equat is:△yit = ρiyi,t−1+δi+ηit+θt+ϵit. all variabl be test in logarithms. 

p-valu of the test statist appear in parentheses. with the except of the PS test, 

lag length be determin use schwart inform criterion (sic). In PS test the lag 

length be select with top-down method. the dataset of 1925-1998 includ 6 countri 

and 444 observations, the dataset of 1960-1996 includ 9 countri and 333 observations, 

and the dataset of 1983-2002 includ 6 countri and 121 observations. 

nonstationari process. thi hold even in the last test, where the nordic 
countri be exclud from the test to control for the possibl structur 
break present in their top 1% incom share series. 

tabl 4.2 present the result of panel unit root test of the other variables. 
becaus gross save be express in constant euro and privat consumpt 
in purchas power pariti (ppp), two differ seri of real gdp per caput 
seri be includ in the dataset. accord to all tests, gross savings, privat 
consumption, the interest rates, and both version of the real gdp per caput 
be i(1) processes. with the except of the test by pesaran (2007), all test 
clearli reject the null hypothesi of the nonstationar of the depend 
rate, indic that it be a trend-stationari variable. 

4.4 cointegr test 

4.4.1 test with the whole data 

the method for test for cointegr in panel data have develop veri 
rapidli dure the first decad of the 21st century. one of the most com- 

123 



tabl 4.2: panel unit root test of the other includ variables, 1960-1996 
variabl ip adf pesaran PS 
gross save 2.207 2.144 -0.186 4.79 

(0.986) (0.999) (0.426) (1.000) 
privat consumpt 12.532 0.0645 0.221 7.53 

(1.000) (1.000) (0.587) (0.960) 
gdp, ppp 11.006 14.039 0.347 5.331 

(1.000) (1.000) (0.636) (0.994) 
gdp, eur 3.912 19.453 2.420 11.210 

(1.000) (0.364) (0.992) (0.796) 
depend -5.077 82.382 1.005 50.92 

(<.001) (<.001) (0.843) (<.001) 
interest rate 0.717 13.937 -1.144 19.97 

(0.764) (0.731) (0.126) (0.220) 

the test equat is: △yit = ρiyi,t−1 + δi + ηit + θt + ϵit. all variabl be in logarithms. 

probabl of the test statist appear in parentheses. In all other tests, except in the 

PS test, lag length be determin use schwart inform criterion (sic). test 

includ 9 countri and 333 observations. 

monli use cointegr test method have be the residu base panel 
cointegr test by pedroni (2004). the limit of pedroni’ test be that 
it assum independ of cross-sections, an assumption, which be like to 
be violat in econometr cross-countri studies.9 cross-sect correl 
may bia the result toward reject the null of no cointegr (baner- 
jee et al. 2004). To account for thi bias, we use a panel cointegr test 
develop by banerje and carrion-i-silvestr (2006) that control for cross- 
section depend by introduc common factors. the test also control 
for possibl endogen of regressor by includ lead and lag of differ- 
enc explanatori variabl in estim (thi method be explain more 
thoroughli in the appendix I describ the panel dsur estimator). A more 
thorough explan of the test by banerje and carrion-i-silvestr (2006) 

9there are, for example, onli few countri that avoid the downturn of 2008 that 
start from the u.s. 

124 



can also be found in the appendix G. the test be base on two differ test 
statistics, name zρ̂nt (λ̂) and zt̂nt (λ̂) to test for the possibl cointegra- 
tion between two variables. both statist be base on the adf regression, 
from where the former us the estim coeffici of ρ̂ and the latter the 
associ t-ratio to comput the test statistic. 

tabl 4.3 present the result of the panel cointegr test by banerje 
and carrion-i-silvestr (2006). It report the result of the cointegr test 
between gross save and the top 1% incom share and gross save and the 
gdp per capita.10 In addition, we test for cointegr between privat con- 
sumption and the top 1% incom share and privat consumpt and gdp 
per capita. 11 accord to the result of the zt̂nt (λ̂) test present in tabl 
4.3, gross save and the incom share of top 1% a well a privat consump- 
tion and top 1% incom share be cointegr at the 5% level. accord 
to the zρ̂nt (λ̂) test, onli gross save and the top 1% incom share be 
cointegrated. however, banerje and carrion-i-silvestr (2006) note that the 
zt̂nt (λ̂) statist should be prefer over the zρ̂nt (λ̂) statistic, becaus the 
former have consider good size and power properti especi in small 
samples. thus, we reli more on the result of the zt̂nt (λ̂), and conclud that 
both gross save and privat consumpt seem to be cointegr with the 
top 1% incom share. the gdp per caput and gross save a well a gdp 
per caput and privat consumpt seem to be cointegr of order 1. 

tabl 4.3 onli present the result of the test without breaks. however, 
we also conduct test with breaks, but if trend break be allow for, 
the result do not chang dramatically. thi be expect a structur break 
tend to bia the result toward the accept of the null (banerje and 
carrion-i-silvestr 2006). the result of the test includ structur break 
be avail upon request. 

10gdp per caput in euro be use in the for gross save a the gross save seri be 
also present in euros. gdp per caput in ppp be use in the test for privat save for 
the same reason. 

11estim be do with gauss. We be grate to carrion-i-silvestr for provid 
the program code. 

125 



tabl 4.3: banerje & carrion-i-silvestre’ cointegr test for gross sav- 
ings, final consumpt and the incom share of top 1% 

gross save privat consumpt 
top 1% incom share 
zt̂nt (λ̂) -3.952 -2.255 

(<.0001) (0.0121) 
zρ̂nt (λ̂) -3.084 -0.548 

(0.0010) (0.292) 
gdp per caput 
zt̂nt (λ̂) -5.683 -5.494 

(<.0001) (<.0001) 
zρ̂nt (λ̂) -3.090 -6.399 

(0.0010) (<.0001) 

countri 9 9 
year 1960-1996 1960-1996 
observ 333 333 

the test model includ individu determinist constant and trends. 

126 



4.4.2 test for the cointegr rank 

one of the obviou drawback of the residu tests, like the one present 
above, be that they cannot identifi the number of cointegr vector be- 
tween the variables. If we have just two variables, thi be not a problem, 
becaus then there cannot be more than one cointegr vector. however, 
with three variables, there can be two cointegr vectors, with four vari- 
abl three cointegr vectors, etc. the cointegr rank affect estima- 
tors, becaus some estimators, like the panel dsur estimator, be base on 
the singl equat approach mean that a singl cointegr relation- 
ship be assumed. If there be two or more cointegr relationship between 
the variables, the asymptot properti of the estim deriv under the 
assumpt of one cointegr relat be no longer valid. In addition, 
estim allow for multipl cointegr vectors, like the estim by 
breitung (2005) use in thi study, usual assum that the cointegr 
rank be homogen across the countri includ in the panel. 

To allow for multipl cointegr vectors, we use the panel trace coin- 
tegrat test develop by larsson and lyhagen (2007) to test for the coin- 
tegrat rank in model involv sever explanatori variables. their test 
be base on the likelihood ratio test of johansen (1995). the gener model 
on which larsson ja lyhagen’ test be base can be write a 

△yt = µ +πyt−1 +σm−1k=1 γk∆yt−k + ϵt, (4.6) 

where Π = αikβ′kj, Π and Γk be of order np×np and µ = (µ′1, µ′2, ..., µ′n) and 
ϵt = (ϵ′1t, ϵ′2t, ..., ϵ′nt) be of order np× 1, and ϵt = (ϵ′1t, ϵ′2t, ..., ϵ′nt) be assum to 
be multivari normal distribut with mean zero and covari matrix 
Ω. 

It be assum that matrix Π have a reduc rank ofnr, 0 ≤ r ≤ p, and can be 
decompos a Π = αikβ′kj. the matrix αik be assum to be unrestricted, but 
βkj = 0 ∀i ≠ j. the fact that unrestrict αik mean that differ panel unit 
can be dependent, but becaus of the restrict on βkj, these depend 
relat can onli appear in the short run. In other words, cointegr 
relat be onli allow within the unit of the panel. the cointegr 
rank be estim by sequenti test 

h(r) ∶ rank(π) ≤ Nr (4.7) 

127 



against the altern 
h(p) ∶ rank(π) ≤ Np (4.8) 

a in johansen (1995). A more detail explan of the test be provid in 
appendix B. 

A limit in the panel cointegr test by larsson and lyhagen 
(2007) be that the number of estim paramet increas rapidli with 
the number of cross sections. thi mean that there need to be enough time 
seri observ compar to cross-sect unit or the paramet of the 
model cannot be estimated. In our baselin dataset, there be nine countri 
and 37 time seri observ per country, a relat which be far too small 
for the test. that be whi countri be divid into three group a explain 
in the section 3.1. becaus countri in these group tend to have similar eco- 
nomic and social structures, it be more like that they also have homogen 
cointegr relations. 

tabl 4.4 and 4.5 present the result of the test for the cointegr 
rank by larsson and lyhagen (2007) for the three group of countri for 
gross save and privat consumpt a the depend variable.12 all vari- 
abl be detrend and demean befor testing. the var lag length be 
determin use the schwartz inform criterion (sic). 

accord to the result present in tabl 4.4, the top 1% incom share 
and gross save appear to be differ stationari variabl in the central 
european and anglo-saxon countries. that is, both be i(1) variabl that 
be not cointegrated. thi result contradict the result present in tabl 
4.3, where gross save and the top 1% incom share be found to be 
cointegrated. the result of nordic countri indic that there would be, 
at least, two cointegr vector between top 1% incom share and gross 
savings. when the gdp per caput and the interest rate be add test find 
a cointegr rank of two in the nordic countries. 

accord to result of tabl 4.5, privat consumpt and the top 1% 
incom share be cointegr in the central european and anglo-saxon 
countries. when the gdp per caput and the interest rate be added, the 
test find a cointegr rank of two in the anglo-saxon countri and coin- 

12all test be do by gauss. We be grate to johan lyhagen for provid the 
gauss code on hi homepage. 

128 



tabl 4.4: panel trace cointegr test for save and the top 1% incom 
share for the 3 countri group 

nordic central-europe* anglo-saxon** 

top 1% 
r=0 211.12 292.15 72.32 

(197.64) (307.22) (92.86) 
r≤ 1 57.52 - - 

(50.71) 
top 1%, gdp & interest 
r=0 469.50 - - 

(381.22) 
r≤1 301.53 - - 

(283.40) 
r≤2 186.47 - - 

(175.66) 
r≤3 113.70 - - 

(83.32) 

countri 3 3 3 
year 1960-03 1960-96 1960-00 
observ 132 111 123 

all seri be detrend and demean befor testing. * In the group of central european 

countries, onli gdp per caput and top 1% incom share be includ in the test, becaus 

there be too few time seri observ per countri to includ a 4 variable. ** for anglo- 

saxon countries, gdp per caput in constant euro be use instead of gdp per caput 

in purchas power pariti in the test with privat consumption. all variabl be test 

in logarithms. bartlett correct critic valu be present in parentheses. lag length 

be select use schwarz inform criterion. 

129 



tabl 4.5: panel trace cointegr test for consumpt and the top 1% 
incom share for the 3 countri group 

nordic central-europe* anglo-saxon** 

top 1% 
r=0 295.33 294.36 194.75 

(167.08) (270.17) (171.47) 
r≤1 68.33 72.97 38.86 

(51.49) (83.63) (59.64) 
top 1%, gdp & interest 
r=0 410.85 516.43 1137.26 

(381.27) (470.88) (992.44) 
r≤1 281.61 194.42 586.90 

(267.77) (214.56) (523.78) 
r≤2 172.84 - 300.25 

(166.60) (336.24) 
r≤3 58.99 - - 

(89.81) 

countri 3 3 3 
year 1960-03 1960-96 1960-00 
observ 132 111 123 

all seri be detrend and demean befor testing. * In the group of central european 

countries, onli gdp per caput and top 1% incom share be includ in the test, becaus 

there be too few time seri observ per countri to includ a 4 variable. ** for anglo- 

saxon countries, gdp per caput in constant euro be use instead of gdp per caput 

in purchas power pariti in the test with privat consumption. all variabl be test 

in logarithms. bartlett correct critic valu be present in parentheses. lag length 

be select use schwarz inform criterion. 

130 



tegrat rank of three in the nordic countries. In the central european 
countri onli privat consumption, the top 1% incom share and the gdp 
per caput be includ in the testing, becaus there be not enough time 
seri observ for includ four variables. In central-european coun- 
tri the cointegr rank among these three variabl be found to be one. 

the result of nordic countri present abov thu indic that there 
be two stationari cointegr relat between gross save and the top 
1% incom share a well a between privat consumpt and the top 1% 
incom share. In the time seri case thi would impli that, in both of these 
tests, the two variabl be i(0) trend-stationary. however, it do not seem 
like that some of these seri would be trend-stationari in nordic countries, 
a all of the panel unit root test found gross savings, privat consumpt 
and the top 1% incom share to be i(1) non-stationari (see section 3.2). If 
the time seri of a variabl in three out of nine countri would be trend- 
stationary, it would be highli unlik for the test to present the seri a 
i(1) non-stationary. 

with panel data, the implic of the cointegr rank test be not 
so straightforward a they be in the case of time series. In model (4.7), the 
block matrix element of Π be give by πij = σnk=1αikβ′jk, which equal αijβ′j 
when βij = 0 for all i ≠ j. however, if βij ≠ 0 for i ≠ j, then the block matrix 
element of Π be give αijβ′jk and the rank of Π can be larg than the 
number of variables. that is, becaus the dimens of Π be Np × np, the 
number of cross-sect cointegr relat may increas the rank of the 
matrix. one like sourc of cross-sect cointegr would be a station- 
ari linear combin of i(1) non-stationari common factor(s) drive the 
gdp per caput seri in the nordic countries. As nordic countri have veri 
similar social structures, and becaus they be small countri within close 
proxim to each other, it would be quit natur if a common stochast 
trend would affect their gdp series. As gdp per caput and consumpt 
be found to be cointegrated, common stochast trend drive the gdp 
seri would also affect on the seri of save and privat consumption. 
so, the result of the nordic countri present in tabl 4.5 be like to 
be explain by cross-sect cointegr relat affect the gdp per 
caput and consumpt series. 

131 



In conclusion, result of cointegr test indic that incom inequal- 
ity, measur with the top 1% incom share, and privat consumpt be 
cointegrated, but the result of the cointegr test for gross save be 
somewhat inconclusive. It be not quit clear whi thi be or whi the result 
deviat from the result of the unit root tests. It should be noted, however, 
that in the case of the test of banerje and carrion-i-silvestr (2006) we have 
more than doubl the number of observ compar to the test of lars- 
son and lyhagen (2007). so, even with the bartlett correction, it be possibl 
that the power of larsson and lyhagen’ test be not suffici to reject the 
null hypothesi of zero rank of the Π matrix. 

4.5 estim 

accord to the result present in the previou section, the cointegr 
rank among the includ variabl vari between the group of countries. 
becaus of this, two differ estim method be appli to estim the 
long-run effect of the incom share of the top 1% on the gross save and 
privat consumption. panel dynam seemingli unrel regressor (dsur) 
estim of mark et al. (2005) be use when there seem to be onli one cointe- 
grate vector between the variables, while the two-step maximum-likelihood 
panel var estim by breitung (2005) be use when there seem to be two 
or more cointegr relat between the variables. the reason for use 
panel dsur estim be that wagner and hlouskova (2010) have found 
that single-equ estimators, like panel dsur, perform good than the 
var estim of breitung (2005), when cross-sect be cross-sect 
correl and/or cointegrated.13 both estim control for possibl endo- 
geneiti of the regressors. the panel dsur estim control for endogen 
by includ lag and lead of first differ of the explanatori variabl 
in the estim equation. panel var control for endogen by impos 

13result of wagner and hlouskova (2010) impli that panel dol would perform good 
than panel var by breitung (2005) in cross-sect cointegr panels. panel dsur 
be not includ in testing. however, a panel dsur be more effici than panel dol 
when cross-sect be correlated, it be also like to be more effici than panel dol 
when cross-sect be cointegrated. 

132 



block-diagon of the fisher inform matrix with respect to short- and 
long-run parameters. A more detail explan of the estim use can 
be found in the appendix. the possibl long-run cross-unit depend rela- 
tion in incom and consumpt seri between the nordic countri found 
in previou section cannot be control with estim allow for short- 
run depend and/or cross-sect correlation. fortunately, wagner and 
hlouskova (2010) have found that, if there be onli a cross-sect iden- 
tical unit-specif cointegr relationship(s) between the cross-sections, it 
creat onli a small bia in the result of cointegr estim use here. 

the estim model is: 

log(yit) = αi + γ′1log(gdpit) + γ′2log(top1it)+ 
+γ′3(interestit) + λit + uit, 

(4.9) 

where where αi’ be individu constant, λit’ be individu trends, and 
uit be a white nois error vector with e(uit) = 0. tabl 4.6 present the 
result of estim of equat (4.9) use the panel dsur and panel var 
estimators.14 accord to the results, the relat between the top 1% 
incom share and gross save somewhat depend on the includ variables. 
the initi estim of the cointegr coeffici of inequ measur 
with the top 1% incom share be negative,15 but the panel var estim 
from the model includ also the gdp per caput and the interest rate be 
posit in all countri groups. however, the paramet estim of the top 
1% incom share be statist signific onli in nordic countri and on 
the last estim of the anglo-saxon countries. 

theori describ the relat between incom inequ and save 
usual concentr on household save behavior, which make privat sav- 
ing or consumpt a more valid measur to ass the effect of inequ 
on consumpt or save than gross save that includ also the govern- 
ment. tabl 4.7 present the result of panel dsur and panel var esti- 
mation where the depend variabl be privat consumption.16 accord 

14estim be conduct with gauss. author be grate to donggyu sul and joerg 
breitung for provid the program code on their homepages. 

15if first equat be estim with panel var, result be similar to those present in 
tabl 4.6. 

16estim be conduct with gauss. author be grate to donggyu sul and joerg 
breitung for provid the program code on their homepages. 

133 



tabl 4.6: estim of the long-run elast of gross save with respect 
to top 1% incom share in 3 group of countri 

depend variable: log(gross savings) 

nordic central-europ anglo-saxon 
panel dsur (l&l =2) 
log(top 1%) -0.0846** -0.127*** -0.4462 

(0.0288) (0.0405) (0.3706) 
panel var (lags=2;1;1) 
log(top 1%) 0.0799*** 0.3794 0.2499 

(0.0251) (0.2751) (0.1769) 
log(gdp) 0.0118*** 0.0946*** 0.0903*** 

(0.0015) (0.0100) (0.0108) 
panel var (lags=2;1;2) 
log(top 1%) 0.5654* 0.1866 0.5385* 

(0.2512) (0.2583) (0.1990) 
log(gdp) 0.1374*** 0.0894*** 0.0983*** 

(0.0169) (0.0097) (0.0105) 
log(interest) -0.3655** -0.0213 0.0990 

(0.1237) (0.0477) (0.0803) 

countri 3 3 3 
year 1960-03 1960-96 1960-00 
observ 132 111 123 

* = p<.05, ** = p<.01, *** = p<.001. standard error of the paramet estim be 

present in parentheses. standard error be estim use andrew and monahan’ 

pre-whiten method. inclus of individu constant mean that all estim be 

make with fix effects. lag give the lag order of the var model. l&l =2 mean that 

first and second lead and lag of first differ of the explanatori variabl be use a 

instruments. 

134 



tabl 4.7: estim of the long-run elast of privat consumpt with 
respect to top 1% incom share in 3 group of countri 

depend variable: log(priv consumption) 

nordic central-europ anglo-saxon 
panel dsur (l&l=2) 
log(top 1%) -0.1107*** -0.1219*** -0.1260*** 

(0.0097) (0.0342) (0.0325) 
panel var (lags=2;1;2) 
log(top 1%) -0.1409** -0.2101*** 0.1130*** 

(0.0490) (0.0530) (0.0290) 
log(gdp) 0.0905*** 0.1002*** 0.0982*** 

(0.0039) (0.0026) (0.0021) 
panel var (lags=1;1;2) 
log(top 1%) -0.1349* -0.1748*** 0.0826*** 

(0.0512) (0.0451) (0.0262) 
log(gdp) 0.0919*** 0.0996*** 0.1007*** 

(0.0042) (0.0024) (0.0021) 
log(interest) -0.0132 0.0203 -0.0383*** 

(0.0262) (0.0120) (0.0108) 

countri 3 3 3 
year 1960-03 1960-96 1960-00 
observ 132 111 123 

* = p<.05, ** = p<.01, *** = p<.001. standard error of the paramet estim be 

present in parentheses. standard error be estim use andrew and monahan’ 

pre-whiten method. lag give the lag order of the var model. individu constant 

and trend be includ in the regressions. l&l =2 mean that first and second lag and 

lead of first differ of explanatori variabl be use a instruments. 

135 



to the results, the cointegr coeffici of the gdp per caput have the 
expect posit sign in all group of countries, but the interest rate have a 
statist signific neg effect onli in the group of the anglo-saxon 
countries. the "blurry" estim of interest rate in central-european coun- 
tri be not a surpris a these countri have differ indic of interest 
rates. among the anglo-saxon and nordic countries, individu countri 
have the same indic of interest rate within each group, but the indic 
differ between the groups. In the anglo-saxon countries, the treasuri bill 
rate be used, wherea in the nordic countries, the central bank rate be 
used. although it be surpris that the interest rate have no statist sig- 
nific effect on the level of privat consumpt in the nordic countries, 
the result may also be explain by differ consumpt profiles. bacchetta 
and gerlach (1997) found that in the unit state and canada, the chang 
in credit condit have a larg impact on consumpt than in franc or 
the uk. humphrey (2004) also show that credit card be use more of- 
ten a a mean of payment in canada and the US than in europe. thus, 
it be like that chang in the interest rate have a great effect on privat 
consumpt in the anglo-saxon than in the european countries. 

accord to the result of tabl 4.7, the cointegr coeffici of in- 
equal be neg in all three countri group when the top 1% incom share 
be the onli explanatori variable. however, when the gdp per caput be add 
a an explanatori variable, the cointegr coeffici of inequ chang 
to posit in the anglo-saxon countries. In the nordic and central-european 
countri the coeffici remain neg and statist significant, thu 
indic that these result be robust. 

As such, the result impli that the long-run elast of privat consump- 
tion with respect to inequ would be neg in the nordic and central- 
european countries, but posit in the anglo-saxon countries. although thi 
result be somewhat counterintuitive, it is, of course, alway possibl that the 
individu save function be convex in the european countri and concav 
in the anglo-saxon countries. however, thi contradict the result of most 
theori and also some quit recent micro-econometr evid from the US 
state that propens to save rais with incom (dynan et al. 2004). from 
these reason some reserv need to be attach to the estim result 

136 



of the anglo-saxon countries.17 It is, for example, possibl that the cointegra- 
tion rank differ among the anglo-saxon countri in estim includ 
the gdp per capita. In thi case, the asymptot properti of the panel var 
estim deriv under the assumpt of homogenu cointegr rank 
be no longer valid. unfortunately, the time seri dimens of individu 
countri be too small for meaning country-specif test of the cointe- 
gration rank. thus, the ambigu concern the estim result of the 
anglo-saxon countri have to be left to be address in futur studies. 

4.6 conclus 

In thi studi we assess the relationship between incom inequ and 
save use a panel of develop economies. We also test the assumpt 
present in earli theoret literatur on incom variat that the size dis- 
tribut of incom could follow a random walk. accord to the results, 
incom inequality, measur with the logarithm top 1% incom share, log- 
arithm aggreg save and logarithm privat consumpt be driven 
by stochast trends. the non-stationar of the logarithm top 1% incom 
share impli that the current macroeconom literatur may have take an 
erron stand by assum a stationari process of incom variation. 

the result concern cointegr between the top 1% incom share 
and gross save be contradictori a the seri be found to be coin- 
tegrat by both of the use test onli in the nordic countries. all test 
found the top 1% incom share and privat consumpt to be cointegrated, 
which indic that there be a long-run steady-st relat between them. 
the long-run elast of privat consumpt with respect to inequ 
be found to be neg in the central-european and nordic countries, 
but posit in the anglo-saxon countries. thi result impli that, in the 

17to check that thi result do not relat to the expans of credit in the wake of 
grow inequality, we add the domest credit claim on the privat sector a an ex- 
planatori variabl for anglo-saxon countries. the variabl be found to be i(1) accord 
to all panel unit root test mention in section three. the variabl be obtain from 
imf database. ad a measur of credit do not chang the main result for anglo- 
saxon countri and it have the expect statist signific posit effect on privat 
consumption. 

137 



anglo-saxon countries, the margin propens to save would decreas with 
income, while in the rest of the countri it would increase. however, estima- 
tion result for the anglo-saxon countri crucial depend on the inclus 
of the gdp per caput series. when the gdp per caput be not includ 
in the estimation, the paramet estim of the top 1% incom share be 
neg and statist significant. thus, it be possibl that the inclus 
of the gdp per caput seri may introduc some form of bia in the estima- 
tion of anglo-saxon countri which cannot be control with current panel 
estim methods. 

one assumpt that need to be test in the futur be the assumpt 
of homogen cointegr rank among the anglo-saxon countries. If the 
cointegr rank have differ among the anglo-saxon countri in estima- 
tion includ the gdp per capita, the estim will have be biased. 
In thi study, the individu countri cointegr relat could not be 
tested, becaus test would have requir consider more time seri 
observ than be avail in our dataset. for the nordic and central- 
european countri the observ posit effect of inequ on privat sav- 
ing seem robust. estim result be unchang when either onli the 
top 1% incom share or the interest rate and the gdp per caput be also 
includ a explanatori variables. thi impli that even if the cointegra- 
tion rank have differ within the group of nordic and central-european 
countri in estim with addit explanatori variables, thi have not 
chang the basic results. 

so, although the result for the anglo-saxon countri be somewhat in- 
conclusive, the result for the nordic and central-european countri clearli 
indic that incom inequ lead to high level of privat savings. thi 
result be well in-lin with the theoret and micro-econometr evidence. It 
also impli that the controversi surround the result of the previou em- 
piric macroeconom studi have be like to result from miss-specif 
of the estim model by assum stationari incom inequality. 

138 



bibliographi 

alesina A, perotti R. (1994). incom distribution, polit instabl and 
investment. european econom review, 40, 1203-1228. 

ando A, modigliani F. (1963). the "life cycle" hypothesi of savings: aggre- 
gate implic and tests. the american econom review, 53, 55-84. 

atkinson ab, piketti T. (2007). top incom over the twentieth century: A 
contrast between european and english-speak countries. oxford uni- 
versiti press, oxford. 

attanasio op, weber G. (2010). consumpt and savings: model of in- 
tertempor alloc and their implic for public policy. journal of 
econom literature, 48, 693-751. 

bacchetta P, gerlach S. (1997). consumpt and credit constraints: inter- 
nation evidence. journal of monetari economics, 40, 207-238. 

bai J, Ng S. (2004). A panic attack on unit root and cointegration. econo- 
metrica, 72(4): 1127-1177. 

baltagi B. (2008). econometr analysi of panel data. john wiley & sons, 
west sussex 

banerje A, marcellino M, osbat C. (2004) some caution on the use of panel 
method for integr seri of panel data. econometr journal, 7(2), 
322-40 

banerje A, marcellino M, osbat C. (2005). test for ppp: should we use 
panel methods? empir economics, 30, 77-91. 

139 



banerje A, carrion-i-silvestr J. (2006) cointegr in 
panel data with break and cross-sect dependence. 
european central bank work paper seri no. 591. 
http://www.ecb.int/pub/scientific/wps/date/html/wpsall.en.html. ac- 
cess 20 august 2010. 

blundel R, pistaferri L, preston I. (2008) consumpt inequ and par- 
tial insurance. american econom review, 98(5), 1887-1921. 

breitung J. (2005). A parametr approach to estim of cointegr 
vector in panel data. econometr reviews, 24(2), 151-173 

breitung J, pesaran H. (2008). unit root and cointegr in panels. In 
matysa L, sevestr P (eds) the econometr of panel data: fundament 
and recent develop in theori and practice, springer, berlin, 279-322 

brock wa, mirman lj. (1973). optim econom growth and uncertainty: 
the no discount case. intern econom review, 14, pp. 560-573. 

campbel J, deaton A. (1989). whi be consumpt so smooth? review of 
econom studies, 56, 357-374. 

chambernown dg. (1953). A model of incom distribution. the econom 
journal, 250(63), 318-351. 

chu cy. (1990). An exist theorem on the stationari state of incom 
distribut and popul growth. intern econom review, 31(1), 
171–185. 

cook C. (1995). save rate and incom distribution: further evid from 
ldcs. appli economics, 27, 71-82. 

cook S. (2005). the stationar of consumption-incom ratios: evid from 
minimum LM unit root testing. econom letters, 89, 55-60. 

deaton A. (1991). save and liquid constraints. econometrica, 59, 1221- 
1248. 

deining K, squir L. (1996). A new data set measur incom inequality. 
world bank econom review, 10(3), 565-591 

140 



dell F, piketti T, saez E. (2010). incom and wealth concentr in 
switzerland over the twentieth century. In atkinson A, piketti T (eds) top 
incom over the twentieth century: a global perspective. oxford: univer- 
siti press. 

dynan K, skinner J, zeld S. (2004). Do rich save more? journal of polit 
economy, 112(2), 397-444 

fisher I. (1930). the theori of interest a determin by impati to 
spend incom and opportun to invest. onlin librari of liberty. ac- 
cess 26. of novemb 2010. 

friedman M. (1957). A theori of consumpt function. princeton univer- 
siti press. 

gonzalo J, granger C. (1995). estim of common long-memori compo- 
nent in cointegr systems. journal of busi and econom statis- 
tics, 13, 27-35. 

hall re. (1978). stochast implic of the life cycle-perman incom 
hypothesis: theori and evidence. the journal of polit economy, 86, 
971-987. 

hall re, mishkin fs. (1982) the sensit of consumpt to transitori 
income: estim from panel data. econometrica, 50(2), 461-481. 

herzer D, vollmer S. (2012). inequ and growth: evid from panel 
cointegration. journal of econom inequality, (forthcoming). 

hierro M, maza A. (2009) non-stationari transit matrices: an overlook 
issu in intra-distribut dynamics. econom letters, 103, 107-109. 

humphrey (2004). replac of cash by card in u.s. consum payments. 
journal of econom and business, 56, 211-225. 

Im K, pesaran H, shin Y. (2003). test for unit root in heteregen 
panels. journal of econometrics, 115(1), 53-74 

johansen S. (1995). likelihood-bas infer in cointegr vector au- 
toregress models. oxford: oxford univers press. 

141 



jäntti M, stephen pj. (2010). the impact of macroeconom condit on 
incom inequality. journal of econom inequality, 8, 221-240. 

kao C, chiang mh. (2000). On the estim and infer of a cointegr 
regress panel data. In baltagi B (ed) advanc in econometr 15, 
emerald, bingley, pp. 179-222 

kaldor N. (1957). A model of econom growth. econom journal, 67(268), 
591-624 

keyn M. (1936). the gener theori of employment, interest, and money. 
harcourt, new york 

king rg, plosser jh, stock jh, watson mw. (1991). stochast trend and 
econom fluctuation. the american econom review, 81(4), 819-840. 

kotlikoff L, summer L. (1981). the role of intergener transfer in 
aggreg capit accumulation. the journal of polit economy, 89, 706- 
732. 

kuznet S. (1955). econom growth and incom inequality. american eco- 
nomic review, 45(1), 1-29 

larsson R, lyhagen J. (2007). infer in panel cointegratin model with 
long panels. journal of busi & econom statistics, 25, 473-483. 

leigh A. (2007). how close do top incom share track other measur of 
inequality? econom journal, 117, 619-633. 

leigh A, posso A. (2009). top incom and nation savings. the review of 
incom and wealth, 1, 57-74. 

levin A, lin cf, chu cs. (2002). unit root test in panel data: asymptot 
and finite-sampl properties. journal of econometrics, 108 (1), 1-24 

Li H, zou h-f. (2004). save and incom distribution. annal of econom 
and finance, 5, 245-270. 

louri gc. (1981). intergener transfer and the distribut of earn- 
ings. econometrica, 49(4), 843–867. 

142 



luca re. (1978) asset price in an exchang economy. econometrica, 46(6), 
1429-1445. 

maddala G, Wu S. (1999). A compar studi of unit root test with panel 
data and a new simpl test. oxford bulletin of econom and statistics, 
61 (special issue), 631-652 

malinen T. (2012). estim the long-run relationship between incom in- 
equal and econom development. empir economics, forthcoming. 

mandelbrot B. (1961) stabl paretian random function and the multiplica- 
tive variat of income. econometrica, 29(4), 517-543. 

mark N, ogaki M, sul D (2005). dynam seemingli unrel cointegr 
regressions. review of econom studies, 72(3), 797-820 

meghir C, pistaferri L. (2004) incom varianc dynam and heterogeneity. 
econometrica, 72(1), 1-32. 

mocan hn. (1999) structur unemployment, cyclic unemployment, and 
incom inequality. the review of econom and statistics, 81 (1), 122- 
134. 

muth jf. (1960) optim properti of exponenti weight forecasts. 
journal of the american statist association, 55, 299-306. 

pedroni P. (2004). panel cointegration: asymptot and finit sampl prop- 
erti of pool time seri test with an applic to ppp hypothesis. 
econometr theory, 20(3), 597-625 

pedroni P. (1999). critic valu for cointegr test in heterogen pan- 
el with multipl regressors. oxford bulletin of econom and statistics, 
61(special issue), 653-670 

pesaran H. (2007). A simpl panel unit root test in the presenc of cross 
section dependence. journal of appli econometrics, 22(2), 265-315 

phillip P, moon H. (1999). linear regress limit theori for nonstationari 
panel data. econometrica, 67(5), 1057-1111 

143 



phillip pc, sul D. (2003). dynam panel estim and homogen 
test under cross section dependence. econometr journal 6(1), 217– 
259 

piketti T. (2003). incom inequ in france, 1901-1998. journal of polit- 
ical economy, 5, 1004-1042. 

roin J, waldenström D. (2011). common trend and shock to top incomes: 
a structur break approach. the review of econom and statistics, 
forthcoming. 

romero-ávila D. (2009). are oecd consumption-incom ratio stationari 
after all? econom modelling, 26, 107-117. 

rossana rj, seater jj. (1995). tempor aggreg and econom time 
series. journal of busi and econom statistics, 13(4), 441-451. 

saranti N, stewart C. (1999). Is the consumption-incom ratio stationary? 
evid from panel unit root tests. econom letters, 64, 309-314. 

smith A. (1776). An inquiri into the natur and caus of wealth of na- 
tions. http://www.gutenberg.org/etext/3300. access 6 septemb 2010 

smith D. (2001). intern evid on how incom inequ and credit 
market imperfect affect privat save rates. journal of develop 
economics, 64, 102-127. 

schmidt-hebbel K, servén L. (2000). doe incom inequ rais aggreg 
saving? journal of develop economics, 61, 417-446. 

seater jj. (1997). An optim control solut to the liquid constraint 
problem. econom letters, 54, 127-134. 

solow rm. (1957). A contribut to the theori of econom growth. quar- 
terli journal of economics, 70(1), 65-94. 

stewart C. (2011). A note on spuriou signific in regress involv 
i(0) and i(1) variables. empir economics, 41, 565–571. 

144 



stiglitz J. (1969). distribut of incom and wealth among individuals. 
econometrica, 37(3), 382-397 

taylor A. (2002). A centuri of current account dynamics. journal of inter- 
nation money and financ 21, 725–48. 

travaglini G. (2008). An exact consumpt rule with liquid constraint 
and stochast income. econom bulletin, 5, 1-9. 

wagner M, hlouskova J. (2010). the perform of panel cointegr 
methods: result from a larg scale simul study. econometr reviews, 
29(2), 182-223 

white H, granger cwj. (2010) consider of trend in time series. jour- 
nal of time seri econometrics, 3(1), 1–38. 

zeld sp. (1989). consumpt and liquid constraints: an empir in- 
vestigation. the journal of polit economy, 97(2), 305-346. 

145 



146 



appendix G 

panel cointegr test by 
banerje and carrion-i-silvestr 
(2006) 

panel cointegr test develop by banerje and carrion-i-silvestr (2006) 
be base on the normal bia and the pseudo t-ratio test statist by 
pedroni (2004). the data gener process behind pedroni’ test statist 
be give by: 

yit = fi(t) + x′it + eit, 
△xit = vit, 

eit = ρiei,t−1 + ϵitζit = (ϵit, vit)′, 

(g.1) 

where fi(t) includ member specif fix effect and determinist trends. 

the data gener process be describ a a partit vector z′it ≡ 
(yit, xit) where the true process be gener a zit = zi,t−1 + ζit, ζ ′it = (ζ 

y 
itζ 

X 
it ) 

(pedroni 2004). 1√ 
T 
∑[tr]t=1 ζit be assum to converg to a vector brownian 

motion with asymptot covari of Ωi a T ð→∞. the individu process 
be assum to be i.i.d. so that e[ζitζ ′js] = 0 ∀s, t, i ≠ j. 

let êit denot the estim residu of obtain from (g.1) and ω̂i the 

147 



consist estim of ωi. the two test statist can now be defin a : 

z̃ρ̂nt−1 ≡ 
N 

∑ 
i=1 
( 

T 

∑ 
t=1 
ê2i,t−1) 

−1 T 
∑ 
t=1 
(êi,t−1∆êit − λ̂i), 

z̃∗ 
t̂nt 
≡ 

N 

∑ 
i=1 
( 

T 

∑ 
t=1 
ŝ∗2i ê 

∗2 
i,t−1) 

−1/2 T 
∑ 
t=1 
(ê∗i,t−1∆ê∗it), 

where λ̂i = 1/t ∑kis=1 (1 − s/(ki + 1))∑ 
T 
t=s+1 µ̂itµ̂i,t−s, σ̃2nt ≡ 1/n ∑ 

N 
i=1 L̂ 

−2 
11iσ̂ 

2 
i , 

ŝ∗2i ≡ 1/t∑ 
T 
t=1 µ̂ 

∗2 
it , s̃∗2nt ≡ 1/n ∑ 

N 
i=1 ŝ 

∗2 
i , l̂211i = 1/t ∑ 

T 
t=1 ϑ̂ 

2 
it 

+ 2/t ∑kis=1 (1 − s/(k − i + 1))∑ 
T 
t=s+1 ϑ̂i, ϑ̂i,t−s. the residu µ̂it, µ̂∗it and ϑ̂it be 

attain from regressions: êit = γ̂êi,t−1 + µ̂it, êit = γ̂iêi,t−1 +∑k−ik=1 γ̂ik∆êi,t−k + µ̂∗it, 
∆yit = ∑mm=1 b̂mi∆xmi,t = ϑ̂it. (pedroni 1999, 2004) 

the statist pool the between dimens of the panel and they be con- 
struct by comput the ratio of the correspond convent time seri 
statist and then by comput the standard sum of the N time seri 
of the panel. pedroni (1999, 2004) show that under the null of no cointe- 
gration the asymptot distribut of the two statist present abov 
converg to normal distribut with zero mean and varianc of one a N 
and T sequenti converg to infinity. 

banerje and carrion-i-silvestr (2006) extend the model by pedroni 
(2004) to includ common factors: 

yi,t = fi(t) + x′i,t + ui,t, 
△xi,t = vi,t, 

fi(t) = µi + βit 
uit = F ′tπi + eit 

(g.2) 

where ei,t = ρiei,t + ϵi,t and F ′t :s be the common factor which be use to 
account for the possibl cross-sect dependence. 

148 



appendix H 

panel trace cointegr test 
statist by larsson and lyhagen 
(2007) 

the trace cointegr test by larsson and lyhagen (2007) be base on the 
follow model: 

△yt = µ +πyt−1 +σm−1k=1 γk∆yt−k + ϵt, (h.1) 

where µ = (µ′1, µ′2, ..., µ′n)′, ϵt = (ϵ′1t, ϵ′2t, ..., ϵ′nt), yt−1 and ∆yt−k be of order 
np×1, Π and Γk be np×np, and ϵt be assum to be multivari normal 
distribut with mean zero and covari matrix ωij. 

It be assum that matrix Π have a reduc rank of nr, 0 ≤ r ≤ p, which 
be specifi a Π = αikβ′kj (larsson and lyhagen 2007). matric α and β be 
both order of np×nr and the former contain the short-run coeffici and 
the latter the long-run coefficient. In β, βii ≡ βi for each rank of r. becaus 
of the restriction, βkj = 0 ∀i ≠ j, the block matrix element of Π be give by 
σnk=1αikβ 

′ 
kj = αijβ′j. 

the cointegr rank be estim by sequenti test 

h(r) ∶ rank(π) ≤ Nr (h.2) 

against the altern 

h(p) ∶ rank(π) ≤ np, (h.3) 

149 



which be the same method a in johansen (1995). 
defin QT a the maximum likelihood ratio test statist for the test of 

h(r) against h(p), and assum that the matrix α′ ⊥ Γβ ⊥ have a full rank 
and that the root of the characterist polynomi 

a(z) = (1 − z)inp − αβ′z −σm−1i=1 γk(1 − z)zi (h.4) 

lie outsid the complex unit circle. now, if r > 0, 

-2 log Qt 
wð→ U + V, (h.5) 

a T Ð→ ∞, where V be χ2 with n(n − 1)r(p − r) degre of freedom inde- 
pendent of U , and 

U = tr {∫ dbf ′ (∫ FF ′) 
−1 

∫ fdb′} . (h.6) 

larsson and lyhagen (2007) show that the limit distribut of the test 
statist (h.5) equal the convolut of dickey-ful distribut (b) and 
an independ χ2 variat (F ). the distribut can be simul by approx- 
imat the wiener process of B by a random walk. 

150 



appendix I 

panel dsur and panel var 
estim 

i.1 panel dsur estim by mark et al. (2005) 

the data gener process in mark et al. (2005) dsur estim be of the 
form 

yit = αi + λit + θt + β′xit + uit, (i.1) 

△xit = eit (i.2) 

where there be n cointegr regress each with T observations, (1−β′) 
be the cointegr vector between yit and xit, and xit and eit be k × 1 di- 
mension vectors. panel dsur elimin the possibl endogen between 
explanatori variabl and the depend variabl by assum that uit be 
correl at most with pi lead and lag of △xit (mark et al. 2005). the 
possibl endogen can be control by project uit onto these pi lead 
and lags: 

uit = 
pi 

∑ 
s=−pi 

δ′i,s△ xi,t− + uit∗ = δ′izit + u∗it. (i.3) 

the project error u∗it be orthogon to all lead and lag of △xit and the 
estim equat becomes: 

yit = αi + λit + θt + β′xit + δizit + u∗it, (i.4) 

where δ′izit be a vector of project dimensions. panel dsur estim a long- 
run covari matrix that be use in estim of equat (i.1). thi make 

151 



panel dsur more effici when cross-sect be dependent. the effici 
of panel dsur actual improv a the correl between cross-sect 
increases. asymptot properti of the estim be base on T Ð→ ∞ 
with N fixed. 

i.2 panel var estim by breitung (2005) 

breitung (2005) propos a panel var(p) model which can be present a 
a panel vector error-correct model (vecm) a 

△yit = ψidt + αiβ′y,t−1 +Σ 
p−1 
j=1γij △ yi,t−j + ϵit, (i.5) 

where dt be a vector of determinist variabl and ψi a k × k matrix of un- 
know coefficients, γij be unrestrict matrix, and ϵit be a white nois error 
vector with e(ϵit) = 0 and posit definit covari matrix Σi = e(ϵitϵ′it). 
the model be estim in two stages. first, the model be estim sepa- 
rate acrossn cross-sect units. then cointegr vector be normal 
so that they do not depend on individu specif parameters. second, the 
system be transform to a pool regress of the form: 

ẑit = β′yi,t−1 + v̂it, (i.6) 

where ẑit = (α̂′iς̂−1i α̂i)−1α̂′iς̂−1i △ yit and v̂it be defin in similar fashion. the 
cointegr matrix, β, can now be estim from (i.6) use the ol esti- 
mator. It be assum that the statist unit includ in the panel have the 
same cointegr rank. consist estim be base on sequenti limits. 
cross-sect correl be account by use an estim asymptot 
covari matrix. 

152 






incom inequ IN the process OF 
econom development: AN empir 
approach 
content 
acknowledg 
chapter 1 
introduct 
1.1 background 
1.2 incom inequality: the wisdom of economicthought and global trend 
1.2.1 what determin the divis of product amongth factor of land, labor, and capital? 
1.2.2 measur incom inequ 


1.3 the process of incom variat and thedistribut of incom 
1.4 theoret effect of incom inequ oneconom growth 
1.4.1 the origin 
1.4.2 modern theori 



1.5 analyz panel data 
1.5.1 basic estim of panel data 

1.6 contribut of the thesi 
1.6.1 the effect of incom inequ on econom growthin the short run 
1.6.2 the long-run relationship between incom inequalityand econom develop 
1.6.3 the relationship between inequ and save 



bibliographi 
appendix A 
chapter 2 inequ and growth: anotherlook at the subject with a newmeasur and method 
2.1 introduct 
2.2 the theoret effect of inequ on growth 
2.2.1 credit market imperfect 
2.2.2 polit economi 
2.2.3 unrest relat to social polici 
2.2.4 save rate 


2.3 summari of the main problem encounteredin the field of studi 
2.3.1 problem with the deining and squir (1996)gini index 
2.3.2 estim of group-rel elast 


2.4 data 
2.5 estim 
2.6 conclus 
bibliographi 
appendix bcountri list 
chapter 3 estim the long-runrelationship between incomeinequ and economicdevelop 
3.1 introduct 
3.2 the main theoret relationship betweeninequ and growth 
3.2.1 the incom approach 
3.2.2 the credit-market imperfect and combin approach 
3.2.3 the polit economi approach 


3.3 time seri analysi of panel data 
3.3.2 unit root test 
3.3.3 cointegr test 
3.3.1 data 


3.4 estim of the cointegr coefficientof inequ 
3.4.1 estim and infer in cointegr panel 
3.4.2 estim result 
3.4.3 estim of incom group-rel elast ofgrowth 



3.5 conclus 
bibliographi 
appendix C panel unit root test 
appendix D pedroni’ and banerje &carrion-i-silvestre’ panelcointegr test 
appendix E panel dol and panel dsurestim 
e.2 panel dsur 

appendix F countri list 
chapter 4 incom inequ and savings: areassess of the relationshipin cointegr panel 
4.1 introduct 
4.2 theoret and empir consider 
4.3 data and unit root test 
4.3.1 data 
4.3.2 unit root test 

4.4 cointegr test 
4.4.2 test for the cointegr rank 

4.5 estim 
4.6 conclus 
bibliographi 
appendix G panel cointegr test bybanerje and carrion-i-silvestre(2006) 
appendix H panel trace cointegr teststatist by larsson and lyhagen(2007) 
appendix I panel dsur and panel varestim 
i.1 panel dsur estim by mark et al. (2005) 
i.2 panel var estim by breitung (2005) 



