






































intellig anim | the ucsb current 


intellig anim 

ucsb engineers, disney research and pixar anim studio collabor to incorpor AI into a 
computer-bas render system 

By jame badham 
wednesday, juli 26, 2017 - 09:15 
santa barbara, CA 

modern film and TV show be fill with spectacular computer-gener sequenc comput by render system 
that simul the flow of light in a three-dimension scene and convert the inform into a two-dimension 
image. but comput the thousand of light ray (per frame) to achiev accur color, shadows, reflect and 
other light-bas characterist be a labor-intensive, time-consum and expens undertaking. An altern be to 
render the imag use onli a few light rays. that save time and labor but result in inaccuraci that show up a 
objection “noise” in the final image. 

UC santa barbara electr and comput engin ph.d. student steve bako and hi advisor, pradeep sen, be 
advanc on a solution. over the past coupl of years, the two have work with research at disney research 
and pixar anim studio to develop a new technolog base on artifici intellig (ai) and deep learn to 
elimin that nois and enabl production-qu render at much high speeds. bako will present the find at 
the siggraph conference, the premier venu for technic research in comput graphics, to be held juli 31-august 
3 in lo angeles. 

bako spent a year work at pixar. the team test the softwar by use million of exampl from the film 
“find dory” to train a deep-learn model know a a convolut neural network. through thi process, the 
system learn to transform noisi imag into noise-fre version that resembl those comput with significantli 
more light rays. onc trained, the system success remov the nois on test imag from entir differ films, 
such a pixar’ late release, “car 3,” and their upcom featur “coco,” even though they have complet 
dispar style and color palettes. 

“nois be a realli big problem for product rendering,” say toni derose, head of research at pixar. “thi new 

intellig anim | the ucsb current http://www.news.ucsb.edu/2017/018150/intelligent-anim 

1 sur 2 02/08/2017 09:12 



technolog allow u to automat remov the nois while preserv the detail in our scenes.” 

the work present a signific step forward over previou state-of-the-art denois methods, which often left 
artifact or residu nois that requir artist to either render more light ray or to tweak the denois filter to 
improv the qualiti of a specif image. disney and pixar plan to incorpor the technolog in their product 
pipelin to acceler the movie-mak process. 

“other approach for remov imag nois have grown increasingli complex, with diminish returns,” say marku 
gross, vice presid for research at disney research. “bi leverag deep learning, thi work present an import 
step forward for remov undesir artifact from anim films.” 

To facilit further explor of thi excit area, the team will make their code and the deep learn model’ 
train weight avail to the research community. 

contact info: 

pradeep sen 
(805) 893-4265 
psen at ece.ucsb.edu 

jame badham 
(805) 893-3648 
jbadham@engineering.ucsb.edu 

copyright © 2017 the regent of the univers of california. 
all right reserved. 
privaci | term of use | access | webmast 

intellig anim | the ucsb current http://www.news.ucsb.edu/2017/018150/intelligent-anim 

2 sur 2 02/08/2017 09:12 


