






































inverse-design approach lead to metadevic | new 


inverse-design approach lead to 
metadevic | new 

jan 22, 2018 // stephan benzkof 

imagin wafer-thin eyeglass or a smartphon camera so small it be 

invis to the nake eye. 

imagin an aerodynam sensor that can conform to the exact slope and 

angl of a jet airplan wing. 

imagin a materi that can coat a tank to make it seem to disappear. 

these vision of futur technolog emerg from a technic paper 

titl “inverse-design broadband all-dielectr electromagnet 

metadevices” publish onlin today in scientif reports. 

koray aydin 

the northwestern engin team use invers design principl and 

a basic 3D printer purchas from amazon — technolog not 

commonli use in their field — to creat highli efficient, non-resonant, 

broadband metadevic at millimeter-wav frequenc that could prove 

revolutionari for consum products, defense, and telecommunications, 

includ next-gener 5G wireless networks. 

“I feel like we’r realli on the verg of someth big,” say koray aydin, 

assist professor of electr engin and comput scienc at the 

mccormick school of engineering, who be lead the research effort in 

inverse-design approach lead to metadevic | new http://www.mccormick.northwestern.edu/news/articles/2018/01/inverse-d... 

1 sur 4 29-01-18 à 22:52 



inverse-design metadevices. “there’ a lot that need to be do in 

the research part, but we’r go in the right direction.” 

As oppos to forward design, invers design start with a function and 

ask what structur be need to achiev the desir result. use 

comput modeling, optim softwar and complex algorithms, the 

team set out to build metadevic that could bend or focu millimet 

wave but that avoid problem with convent approaches, such 

low efficiency, narrow bandwidth and the bulki of the devices. 

prem kumar 

“what we’v achiev here be a new way of creat electromagnet 

devic that achiev certain function that convent seem 

imposs to do,” say prem kumar, professor of electr engin 

and comput scienc in mccormick and of physic and astronomi in 

the weinberg colleg of art and sciences. kumar liken the process 

to machin learn and say it could produc unexpect outcomes, for 

exampl the function over a broad bandwidth. 

francoi callewaert, a mccormick school of engin graduat 

student who work with aydin, develop the invers design algorithm 

and perform the numer simulations. vesselin velev, a physic and 

astronomi graduat student who work with kumar, help with the 

detail millimeter-wav measurements. 

inverse-design approach lead to metadevic | new http://www.mccormick.northwestern.edu/news/articles/2018/01/inverse-d... 

2 sur 4 29-01-18 à 22:52 



alan sahakian 

aydin describ the eye-open moment a the algorithm spit out the 

design for a complex geometr shape. 

“these be not know shapes, not intuit shapes,” aydin said. 

and that present it own problem. 

“how on earth be we go to make this?” aydin recal thinking. 

convent manufactur method would be difficult and expensive. 

the answer be additive, or 3d, printing. 

“thi be the heart of the study,” aydin said. “we’r the first to combin 

these two to make work devices.” 

kumar agreed. “the import thing to me be the multidisciplinari 

natur of it,” he said. “we can design a len in a way that it doesn’t look 

like a lens.” 

anoth great strength of their process, aydin said, be that it be 

immin scalabl from the microwav to the visibl frequenc rang 

becaus of the flexibl of 3D printing. 

“it be an excit result,” say alan V. sahakian, the john A. dever chair 

and professor of electr engin and comput science. “where 

in the past somebodi might have do a long analysi tri to 

approxim the behavior, here we essenti input the behavior we 

want into a comput and the comput optim a structur that 

have that behavior and then it come out the other end of thi three- 

dimension printer. 

“it be truli a breakthrough in the way you can solv problem in a 

inverse-design approach lead to metadevic | new http://www.mccormick.northwestern.edu/news/articles/2018/01/inverse-d... 

3 sur 4 29-01-18 à 22:52 



seamless and conveni way.” 

inverse-design approach lead to metadevic | new http://www.mccormick.northwestern.edu/news/articles/2018/01/inverse-d... 

4 sur 4 29-01-18 à 22:52 


