






































japanes scientist use artifici intellig to decod thought 


japanes scientist use artifici 
intellig to decod thought 

catherin clifford 

imagin a realiti where comput can visual what you be thinking. 

sound far out? it' now closer to becom a realiti thank to four 

scientist at kyoto univers in kyoto, japan. In late december, 

guohua shen, tomoyasu horikawa, kei majima and yukiyasu kamitani 

releas the result of their recent research on use artifici 

intellig to decod thought on the scientif platform, biorxiv. 

machin learn have previous be use to studi brain scan (mris, 

or magnet reson imaging) and gener visual of what a 

person be think when refer to simple, binari imag like black 

and white letter or simpl geograph shape (a show in figur 2 

here). 

but the scientist from kyoto develop new techniqu of "decoding" 

thought use deep neural network (artifici intelligence). the new 

techniqu allow the scientist to decod more sophist 

"hierarchical" images, which have multipl layer of color and structure, 

like a pictur of a bird or a man wear a cowboy hat, for example. 

"we have be studi method to reconstruct or recreat an imag a 

person be see just by look at the person' brain activity," kamitani, 

one of the scientists, tell cnbc make it. "our previou method be to 

assum that an imag consist of pixel or simpl shapes. but it' know 

that our brain process visual inform hierarch extract 

differ level of featur or compon of differ complexities." 

and the new AI research allow comput to detect objects, not just 

binari pixels. "these neural network or AI model can be use a a 

proxi for the hierarch structur of the human brain," kamitani says. 

for the research, over the cours of 10 months, three subject be 

show natur imag (like photograph of a bird or a person), artifici 

geometr shape and alphabet letter for vari length of time. 

japanes scientist use artifici intellig to decod thought https://www.cnbc.com/2018/01/08/japanese-scientists-use-artificial-intell... 

1 sur 5 11-01-18 à 10:48 



In some instances, brain activ be measur while a subject be 

look at one of 25 images. In other cases, it be log afterward, 

when subject be ask to think of the imag they be previous 

shown. 

onc the brain activ be scanned, a comput reverse-engin (or 

"decoded") the inform to gener visual of a subjects' 

thoughts. 

the flowchart, emb below, be make by the research team at the 

kamitani lab at kyoto univers and break down the scienc of how a 

visual be "decoded." 

the two chart emb below show the result the comput 

reconstruct for subject whose activ be log while they be 

look at natur imag and imag of letters. 

japanes scientist use artifici intellig to decod thought https://www.cnbc.com/2018/01/08/japanese-scientists-use-artificial-intell... 

2 sur 5 11-01-18 à 10:48 



As for the subjects' whose brain wave be measur base on 

rememb the images, the scientist have anoth breakthrough. 

"unlik previou methods, we be abl to reconstruct visual imageri a 

person produc by just think of some rememb images," 

kamitani says. 

As see in the chart emb below, when decod brain signal 

japanes scientist use artifici intellig to decod thought https://www.cnbc.com/2018/01/08/japanese-scientists-use-artificial-intell... 

3 sur 5 11-01-18 à 10:48 



result from a subject rememb images, the AI system have a 

harder time reconstructing. that' becaus it' more difficult for a 

human to rememb an imag of a cheetah or a fish exactli a it be 

seen. 

"the brain be less activated" in that scenario, kamitani explain to 

cnbc make it. 

As the accuraci of the technolog continu to improve, the potenti 

applic be mind-boggling. the visual technolog would 

allow you to draw pictur or make art simpli by imagin something; 

your dream could be visual by a computer; the hallucin of 

psychiatr patient could be visual aid in their care; and brain- 

machin interfac may one day allow commun with imageri or 

thoughts, kamitani tell cnbc make it. 

while the idea of comput read your brain may sound posit 

jetson-esque, the japanes research aren't alon in their futurist 

japanes scientist use artifici intellig to decod thought https://www.cnbc.com/2018/01/08/japanese-scientists-use-artificial-intell... 

4 sur 5 11-01-18 à 10:48 



work to connect the brain with comput power. 

for example, former googlex- mari lou jepsen be work to build a 

hat that will make telepathi possibl within the decade, and 

entrepreneur bryan johnson be work to build comput chip to 

implant in the brain to improv neurolog functions. 

japanes scientist use artifici intellig to decod thought https://www.cnbc.com/2018/01/08/japanese-scientists-use-artificial-intell... 

5 sur 5 11-01-18 à 10:48 


