











































research new 

contact 
jani eitner | fraunhofer-gesellschaft, munich | commun | phone +49 89 1205-1333 | presse@zv.fraunhofer.d 
ann rommel | fraunhof institut for telecommunications, heinrich hertz institut, hhi | phone +49 30 31002-353 | 
einsteinuf 37 | 10587 berlin | www.hhi.fraunhofer.d | anne.rommel@hhi.fraunhofer.d 

februari 2018 || page 1 | 3 

camera technolog in vehicl 

low-lat imag data compress 

the number of camera in car be increasing. however, through the flood of 
data the intern network be be push to their limits. special compressi- 
on method reduc the amount of video data, but exhibit a high degre of 
latenc for coding. fraunhof research have adapt video compress in 
such a way that a latenc be almost no longer perceivable. It be therefor of 
interest for use in road traffic or for autonom driving. thi technolog will 
be on display at the embed world from 27 februari until 1 march 2018 in 
nuremberg in hall 4 (booth 4-470). 

Up to 12 camera be current instal in new vehicl models, mostli in the headlight 
or taillight and the side mirrors. An on-board comput built into the car us the data 
for the lane assistant, park assist system or to recogn other road user or possibl 
obstacles, for example. "if autonom drive catch on a quickli a predicted, the 
number of camera will increas further," forecast prof. benno stabernack of the 
fraunhof institut for telecommunications, heinrich hertz institut, hhi in berlin. 

ten time more data 

thi mean even more strain on the intern data network of vehicles. currently, these 
can process a data volum of around one gigabit per second. In HD quality, thi data 
quantiti be alreadi reach with one camera. "compress method help here," say 
stabernack. the fraunhof hhi, for example, have make a decis contribut to the 
develop of the two video cod standard h.264/advanc video code (avc) 
and h.265/mpeg high effici video code (hevc). "with these methods, the data 
quantiti can be sharpli reduced. In thi way, more than ten time the quantiti of data 
can be transmitted," emphas the group leader of the "video code and machin 
learning" depart at the fraunhof hhi. 

normally, 30 to 60 imag per second be sent from a camera to the vehicle’ central 
computer. By compress the imag data, a small delay in transmiss occurs, know 
a the latency. "usually, thi be five to six imag per second," explain stabernack. the 
reason for thi be that the method compar an imag with those that have alreadi 
be transmit in order to determin the differ between the current imag and 
it predecessors. the network then onli send the chang from imag to image. thi 
determin take a certain amount of time. 



research new 

februari 2018 || page 2 | 3 

latenc of less than one imag per second 

"however, thi loss of time can be of decis import in road traffic," say staber- 
nack. In order to avoid latency, the professor and hi team onli use special mechan 
of the h.264-code method, wherebi determin the differ in individu imag 
no longer take place between images, but within an image. thi make it a low- 
latenc method. "with our method the delay be now less than one imag per second, 
almost real time. We can therefor now also use the h.264 method for camera in 
vehicles," be how stabernack describ the addit value. the technolog be 
implement in the form of a special chip. In the camera it compress the imag data, 
and in the on-board comput it decod them. 

higher imag repetit frequenc and resolution. 

the research in berlin have have their method patent and sell their know-how to 
the industri in the form of a license. custom be automot suppliers, and the first 
vehicl model with the fraunhof technolog be alreadi on the market. "dure 
develop we combin our know-how from work on the video compress 
standard and our hardwar expertise. the transmiss of imag data in real time be a 
precondit for the video compress of video data from car camera becom 
established. with it, the use of devic with a high imag repetit frequenc and 
resolut would then be possible. for camera model which produc even more data 
and be therefor more precis and faster," be how stabernack summar the signifi- 
canc of the technology. 

In the next stage, the research also want to transfer their method to the hvec 
standard and put their experi to good use in upcom standard formats. 
they be exhibit their technolog at the embed world from 27 februari until 1 
march 2018 in nuremberg in hall 4 (booth 4-470). 



research new 

februari 2018 || page 3 | 3 

the fraunhofer-gesellschaft be the lead organ for appli research in europe. it research activ be conduct by 69 institut 
and research unit at locat throughout germany. the fraunhofer-gesellschaft employ a staff of 24,500, who work with an annual research 
budget total 2.1 billion euros. Of thi sum, 1.9 billion euro be gener through contract research. more than 70 percent of the fraunhofer- 
gesellschaft’ contract research revenu be deriv from contract with industri and from publicli financ research projects. intern collabo- 
ration with excel research partner and innov compani around the world ensur direct access to region of the great import to 
present and futur scientif progress and econom development. 

camera be installed, for ex- 

ample, in revers lamps. they 

help with park or detect 

obstacles. To minim the 

size of the imag data, video 

compress techniqu be 

used. thank to the develop- 

ment work of the fraunhof 

hhi, thi now happen almost 

without delay. 

© istock | pictur in color 

and print quality: www. 

fraunhofer.de/en/press 

the expert 

prof. benno stabernack, group leader of the "video code and machin learning" 
depart at the fraunhof institut for telecommunications, heinrich hertz institut, 
hhi in berlin: "the transmiss of imag data in real time be a precondit for video 
compress also catch on in the case of video data from car cameras. with it, the 
use of devic with a high imag repetit frequenc and resolut would then be 
possible." 

experi technolog live 

the scientist will be demonstr rapid video compress at the embed world 
from 27 februari until 1 march 2018 in nuremberg (hall 4, booth 4-470). 

web 

fraunhof hhi, research group »embed systems«: 
https://www.hhi.fraunhofer.de/en/departments/vca/research-groups/embedded- 
systems.html 


