


















































machin learn and data science- the next big shift in aml 


commerci solut 

the next big shift in the fight against financi 
crime and money launder be advanc machin 
learn and sophist data science. 

commerci solut | financi crime 

big shift 
what’ next 
IN aml 

booz allen’ financi crime solut team have 
produc thi paper to explain whi incorpor 
machin learn and data scienc into anti-money 
launder (aml) transact monitor will improv 
program effectiveness. 

A brief histori of big shift 

the aml industri have wit sever signific 
turn point over the past 40 year that have lead u 
to where we be today. 

relianc on transact monitor 

the most recent shift in aml have be the 
priorit and emphasi on transaction-monitor 
technology. Is thi approach working? 

technolog evolution, machin learn and 
data scienc 

rapid advanc in technolog have enabl u to 
creat smarter system which can detect pattern 
across enorm data sets. 

how machin learn and data scienc can 
revolution the approach to transaction- 
monitor 

these advanc in technolog can improv the way 
that we do transact monitoring, kyc, and other 
aml activities. 



2 

commerci solut | group (e.g., commerci energy) 

A brief histori 

how we get to where we be today 
the histori of aml be mark by period and comprehens shift in the way that financi 
institut fight money laundering. 

• from the 1970 through 2001, compani larg focu on creat aml programs/ 
depart that have matur governance, policies, processes, and strategi that 
would respond to evolv legislation. aml investig and analyst reli heavili 
on collabor with law enforc to identifi suspici actors. complianc be a 
product of proper organization, record-keeping, and collabor with regul and 
law enforcement. 

• the event of septemb 11th, 2001 trigger a monument shift in the fight against 
money launder and terrorist financing. institut saw transform and 
unpreced priorit of aml a a critic compon of their complianc 
requirements. the patriot act, revis to the bank secreci act and other 
consider regul escal the requir on financi institutions. the 
organization, processes, technology, and cultur of aml program have to expand and 
adapt to these wide scale shifts. 

• As pressur to thwart terrorist financ continu to build, financi institut have 
implement technolog solut design to detect suspici activ within their 
stream of transactions. So much focu and effort have be appli to these large-scal 
system (from institutions, regulators, and industry) that financi institutions’ program 
have becom larg transaction-monitor centric. onc again, organization, 
processes, technology, and cultur have chang to respond to thi shift. 

our relianc on transact monitor 
today, mani aml program be dictat by how their transact monitor system 
function. regul be focu more on analyz the transact monitor rule and 
models, valid their effectiveness, and audit alert respons procedur and incidents. 
indeed, it seem a if mani aml program be specif design to revolv around these 
technologies. institut have hundr of analyst whose job be sole to investig the 
alert that these technolog generate. they have auditor and qualiti assur team 
who must valid the work of these analysts. institut dedic some of their smartest 
“quant” type analyst to tuning, improving, and valid the model that these technolog 
enforce. 

financi institut be spend more and more of their budget on transact monitor 
technology. additionally, these institut have scaled-up their intern technolog staff, and 
have brought in contractor to support these systems. signific invest have also 
be alloc to implementation, hosting, support, and train for these systems. 

the aml commun have 
come a long way in the 
past 40 years, but it be time 
to evolv and improve. 

big shift IN 
anti money launder 

commerci solut | financi crime 



3 

commerci solut | group (e.g., commerci energy) 

with so much relianc on transact monitor in our 
aml programs, we must evalu the effect of thi 
approach. 

Is our approach to transact monitor working? 

the technolog be inadequ 
generally, transact monitor technolog examin financi transact against a set 
of discret rules, and gener “alerts” on the transact that match one or more rule 
(e.g., cash deposit in excess of $10,000 would be flag for a cash transact report). 
while some rule be more sophisticated, all be base on decade-old data processing, 
computation, and analyt techniques, and they be rampant with massiv false-posit 
alert issues. from a technolog perspective, current system be plagu with 
architectur defici includ – data manag in relat databases, process 
within “n-tier”-styl busi layers, and lack of elast resourcing. 

these technolog limit lead to a meaning problem 
In mani cases, hundr of thousand of transact alert be be gener which 
requir investigation. the resourc need to support these investig requir an 
armi of analysts, investigators, and auditors, and repres the larg expens of aml 
program within most financi institutions. understand a compani cannot surviv 
if it spent all it earn hire aml analysts, therefor program consist feel under 
resourc compar to the volum of alert and report they must review. consequently, 
aml leader be forc to select arbitrari threshold upon which they decid which alert to 
review and which to ignore. thi lead to the glare “catch 22” in the aml world: 

set the transact monitor threshold too low and you be forc to hire more and more 
people. set the threshold too high and risk heighten attent from regulators. 

thi have lead to the notion that pay the price to deal with 80-95% fals posit rate be just 
“the cost of do business”. 

Do these technolog prevent aml relat regulatori penalties, fines, citations? 
mani would agre that despit implement of these systems, most financi institut 
be still face stiff regulatori pressure, fines, and citations. these system still produc fals 
neg and miss subtl money launder behavior. So seemingli the answer would be 
“no”- current transact monitoring-centr approach be not solv the problem. 

Do these technolog help reduc cost of compliance? 
the answer to thi question be an emphat “no”. thi tradit approach requir 
expens technology, expens upkeep, and bad of all, it requir numer analyst to 
keep up with the thousand of alert that monitor system produc (95% of which be 
fals positives). 

Do these technolog employ a “risk based” approach? 
In balanc regul expect to disposit everi alert, and corpor pressur 
to make a profit, compani may end up with just enough resourc to manag the flow. 
each analyst brain be so engag in the effort of disprov what a machin have gener 
that they often have no time to proactiv seek out, prioritize, and mitig risk face the 
institution. the ongo regulatori action against countless compani that have built their 
program around these system demand that the answer be “no”. 

commerci solut | financi crime 



4 

commerci solut | group (e.g., commerci energy) 

machin learn and data scienc 

technolog evolut 
with the rapid evolut in distribut comput and the grow sophist of data 
science, the adopt of machin learn have be a game-chang for mani industries. 
through machin learning, compani have construct algorithm that can learn from 
and make predict on data. In particular, the retail industri have benefit by improv 
the onlin shop experience, predict product that user may prefer base on 
previou buy habits. healthcar compani have also benefit from machin learn 
by incorpor it into research and development, suggest new compound for drug 
development. the govern have also adopt machin learn to learn the behavior of 
crimin and terrorist and prevent incid befor they occur. data scienc be simpli the 
scienc of extract knowledg from data. 

the advent of machin learn have creat a paradigm shift for data scientists. wherea 
histor data scientist have to know what exactli they be look for befor exploit 
the data, with machin learning, these data scientist can allow the machin to discov 
hidden or non-obvi insight from the data. 

machin learn and advanc data scienc present a power solut to the current 
problem face aml program at financi institut and be the next big thing in the 
evolut of aml. 

what machin learn and data scienc can do for aml 
machin learn can transform the way that transact monitor technolog identifi 
suspici activity. machin learn can be use to: 

• learn transact behavior for similar custom 

• discov transact activ of custom with similar trait (busi type, geograph 
location, age, etc.) 

• pinpoint custom with similar transact behavior 

• identifi outlier transact and outlier custom 

• learn money launder typolog and identifi typolog specif risk 

• dynam learn correl between alert which produc verifi suspici 
activ report 

• continu analyz false-posit alert and learn common predictor 

A deeper look: machin learn and data scienc techniqu appli to aml 
machin learn be a matur science, which provid a toolkit of algorithm and method for application. some of the techniqu that can be use to achiev the 
above-ment goal include: 

• unsupervis similar cluster 
• iter winnow 
• typology-bas bayesian belief 
• random forest 
• supervis train base on valid true posit and true neg 
• train binari classif review 
• statist comparison against baselin perform 

enter machin learn and sophist data science: 
the next big shift in aml 

commerci solut | financi crime 



5 

commerci solut | group (e.g., commerci energy) 

the futur of aml 

cut edg technolog and special investig unit 
machin learn will revolution the way that aml program operate. the futur of aml 
will not be defin by the grow number of analyst investig of false-posit alert 
– an approach that be ineffect and not sustainable. rather, the futur will be driven by 
the advanc of machin learn and other technolog which can improv the automat 
detect of suspici activity, make it more difficult for crimin activ to go undetected. 

stove-pip technolog and analyst team be becom irrelev and more costly. the 
futur of aml program be leaner, smarter, and more agile, support by sophist 
technolog that can detect and respond dynam a their aml risk evolve. the 
member of these team poss hybrid skill set from across the relev disciplin (e.g., 
cam certifi data scientist and financi intellig analyst that can code). 

about booz allen’ financi crime technolog solut 

booz allen have be on the cut edg of advanc in distribut comput and machin 
learning. booz allen have lead the transform of sever govern organ 
includ treasury, irs, dod, and law enforcement, along with sever of the world’ larg 
financi institutions, help these organ unlock the power of machin learn 
and big data analyt to improv their abil to investig threat actors. booz allen have 
now leverag thi technolog to creat a suit of technolog design to help financi 
institut improv their abil to combat financi crimes. 

design by our financi crime task forc consist of aml expert from top tier 
financi institutions, regulatori expert from our fincen and treasuri support teams, and 
technologist from our strateg innov group, our financi crime technolog solv 
complex challeng for financi institutions. our technolog aim to improv regulatori 
compliance, oper efficiency, and cost savings. 

booz allen be commit to help financi institut achiev 
regulatori compliance, enhanc oper efficiency, and 
regulatori cost reduction. our decad serv the regul and 
law enforcement, combin with over 100 year of manag 
consulting, and unmatch technolog capabl make u the 
best partner for your aml program. 

To learn how booz allen hamilton can 
help your busi thrive, contact: 

jessica gimbel 
associ 
gimbel_ jessica@bah.com 
tel +904-687-5310 

joseph gillespi 
senior associ 
gillespie_ joseph@bah.com 
tel +703-957-8966 

david kletter 
execut vice presid 
kletter_david@bah.com 
tel +917-305-8026 

www.boozallen.com 

booz allen hamilton have be at the forefront of strategi and technolog consult for nearli a century. the firm provid busi and technolog 
solut to major corpor in the financi services, health, and energi markets, leverag capabl and expertis develop over decad of help 
US govern client in the defense, intelligence, and civil market solv their toughest problems. 

booz allen be headquart in mclean, virginia, employ more than 22,000 people, and have revenu of $5.48 billion for the 12 month end march 31, 2014. 
In 2014, booz allen celebr it 100th anniversari year. To learn more, visit www.boozallen.com. (nyse: bah) 

commerci solutions- financi crime 


