






































machine-learn earthquak predict in lab show promis 


contact 

nanci 
ambrosiano 
(505) 667-0471 
email 

“at ani give 
instant, the 
nois come 
from the lab 
fault zone 
provid 
quantit 
inform 
on when the 
fault will slip,” 
say paul 
johnson. 

listen to faultline’ grumbl give 
countdown to futur quak 

lo alamos, n.m., aug. 30, 2017—bi listen to the acoust 
signal emit by a laboratory-cr earthquake, a comput 
scienc approach use machin learn can predict the time 
remain befor the fault fails. 

“at ani give instant, the nois come from the lab fault zone 
provid quantit inform on when the fault will slip,” 
say paul johnson, a lo alamo nation laboratori fellow and 
lead investig on the research, which be publish today 
in geophys research letters. 

“the novelti of our work be the use of machin learn to 
discov and understand new physic of failure, through 
examin of the record auditori signal from the 
experiment setup. I think the futur of earthquak physic 
will reli heavili on machin learn to process massiv 
amount of raw seismic data. our work repres an 
import step in thi direction,” he said. 

not onli do the work have potenti signific to 
earthquak forecasting, johnson said, but the approach be far- 
reaching, applic to potenti all failur scenario 
includ nondestruct test of industri materi brittl 
failur of all kinds, avalanch and other events. 

machin learn be an artifici intellig approach to 
allow the comput to learn from new data, updat it 
own result to reflect the implic of new information. 

the machin learn techniqu use in thi project also 
identifi new signals, previous thought to be low-amplitud 
noise, that provid forecast inform throughout the 
earthquak cycle. “these signal resembl earth tremor that 

machine-learn earthquak predict in lab 
show promis 
A comput scienc approach use machin learn can predict the 
time remain befor the fault fail 

august 30, 2017 

machine-learn earthquak predict in lab show promis http://www.lanl.gov/discover/news-release-archive/2017/august/0830-m... 

1 sur 3 03/09/2017 23:35 



occur in associ with slow earthquak on tecton fault 
in the low crust,” johnson said. “there be reason to expect 
such signal from earth fault in the seismogen zone for 
slowli slip faults.” 

machin learn algorithm can predict failur time of 
laboratori quak with remark accuracy. the acoust 
emiss (ae) signal, which character the instantan 
physic state of the system, reliabl predict failur far into 
the future. thi be a surprise, johnson point out, a all prior 
work have assum that onli the catalog of larg event be 
relevant, and that small fluctuat in the AE signal could be 
neglected. 

To studi the phenomena, the team analyz data from a 
laboratori fault system that contain fault gouge, the ground- 
up materi creat by the stone block slide past one 
another. An acceleromet record the acoust emiss 
eman from the shear layers. 

follow a friction failur in the labquake, the shear 
block move or displaces, while the goug materi 
simultan dilat and strengthens, a show by 
measur increas shear stress and friction. “a the 
materi approach failure, it begin to show the 
characterist of a critic stress regime, includ mani small 
shear failur that emit impuls acoust emissions,” johnson 
described. 

“thi unstabl state conclud with an actual labquake, in 
which the shear block rapidli displaces, the friction and 
shear stress decreas precipitously, and the goug layer 
simultan compact,” he said. under a broad rang of 
conditions, the apparatu slide-slip fairli regularli for 
hundr of stress cycl dure a singl experiment. and 
importantly, the signal (due to the goug grind and 
creak that ultim lead to the impuls precursors) 
allow predict in the laboratory, and we hope will lead to 
advanc in predict in earth, johnson said. 

the paper: "machin learn predict laboratori earthquakes" 
geophys research letters. 

the funding: lo alamo nation laboratori direct 
research and develop (ldrd). 

machine-learn earthquak predict in lab show promis http://www.lanl.gov/discover/news-release-archive/2017/august/0830-m... 

2 sur 3 03/09/2017 23:35 



about lo alamo nation laboratori 

lo alamo nation laboratory, a multidisciplinari 
research institut engag in strateg scienc on behalf 
of nation security, be oper by lo alamo nation 
security, llc, a team compos of bechtel national, the 
univers of california, bwxt govern group, and urs, 
an aecom company, for the depart of energy’ 
nation nuclear secur administration. 

lo alamo enhanc nation secur by ensur the 
safeti and reliabl of the u.s. nuclear stockpile, 
develop technolog to reduc threat from weapon of 
mass destruction, and solv problem relat to energy, 
environment, infrastructure, health, and global secur 
concerns. 

machine-learn earthquak predict in lab show promis http://www.lanl.gov/discover/news-release-archive/2017/august/0830-m... 

3 sur 3 03/09/2017 23:35 


