









































make bitcoin legal 

ross anderson, ilia shumailov and mansoor ahm 
cambridg univers comput laboratori 

when you come to a fork in the road, take it – yogi berra 

abstract 

what would happen if the exist law be actual enforc on 
the rich and powerful? social reform often clamour for new rule 
but ignor the huge chang that might happen if our exist rule 
be appli equal to all. and in the brave new world of ico and 
thousand percent cryptocurr inflation, the rich and power be 
the bitcoin exchanges. what would happen if fincen regul and 
the law against money launder be appli to them, and extend 
by sensibl case law? We argu that thi could mitig most of the 
bad excess of cryptocurr world, and turn a danger system 
into a much safer one. the curiou thing about thi chang be that it 
would not involv chang the protocol. It would not even necessarili 
involv chang the law. It might be enough to take some inform 
that’ alreadi public, publish it again in a more easili understood 
format. 

1 introduct 

bitcoin set out to provid a work onlin currenc outsid the control of 
governments, and have develop from a cypherpunk toy through a way to buy 
drug onlin to a mean of get flight capit out of countri with exchang 
control – to an invest product quot on major exchanges. It have be 
criticis for wast a lot of electricity, for be a classic invest bubble, 
for provid no consum protect to it users, and for facilit crime 
– from old crime such a drug dealing, to new one such a ransomware. 

1 



the purpos of thi paper be twofold. first, we discu how the law might 
actual regul bitcoin and other cryptocurr so a to provid the ben- 
efits, rang from low-cost intern money transfer and decentralis 
resili oper to competit innovation, while mitig the harm – 
specif the use of cryptocurr in extortion, money launder and 
other crimes, and the difficulti that crime victim experi in get re- 
dress. We show that where the relev case law be use a a basis, it becom 
much easi to track steal bitcoin than previous thought. 

second, we use thi discuss to illustr that the characterist of a 
payment protocol can depend much more sensit than one might expect 
on the surround context. thi may be of scientif interest to the protocol 
community, and also of practic interest to regulators. payment system 
suffer from strong network effect and it may be harder than it seem to 
sustain a government-back ‘goodcoin’ in competit with establish 
system such a bitcoin and ethereum. It be therefor import to explor 
the practic option for tame the system that alreadi exist. 

On the polici front, we have repeatedli see a pattern wherebi the pro- 
moter of an onlin platform claim that old law will not apply. the internet 
be suppos to interpret censorship and rout around it; yet child sex abus 
imag be ban almost everywhere. napster set out to free all music from 
the surli bond of copyright; it be close down. uber be go to creat a 
singl taxi firm that work worldwid from a conveni app, regardless of 
local legaci monopolies; yet when legaci taxi driver complain about their 
new competitor work sixteen hour a day, and passeng safeti issu 
pile up, uber be ban in one citi after another. yet such innov 
often make a real differ onc a new legal equilibrium be achieved. the 
music-compani mafia have yield to spotifi and youtube, which make 
most music avail to anyon who’ll listen to occasion ads; competit 
from uber have cut cambridg taxi fare by over 20%; and the internet have 
make mani more good thing avail to all. 

the key be make onlin challeng obey the law – and the law may 
not need to chang much, or even at all. fix new problem use exist 
law be usual preferable, give the difficulti of get primari legisl 
passed. 

So where do thi leav bitcoin? 
In thi paper we assum the reader be familiar with the mechan of 

bitcoin and of blockchain in general. A late paper will present more detail 
for reader interest in law or policy. 

2 



2 ideal regul 

the obviou first step toward regul be to bring bitcoin exchang 
within the financi system by appli anti-money-laund (aml) reg- 
ulat to them. thu anyon wish to exchang bitcoin for cash, or for 
ether or ani other mean of payment, have to satisfi know-your-custom 
(kyc) rule just a if they be open a bank account, typic by show- 
ing government-issu photo ID plu two util bill a proof of address. thi 
start in 2013, when the financi crime enforcm network (fincen) 
direct bitcoin exchang to regist a money servic busi [3]. most 
countri have now follow suit, partit the world of exchang into 
compliant and rogu components. 

the second step would be for both enforc agenc and exchang to 
have effect mean of track taint coins. If my bitcoin wallet be steal 
I can now go to the polic and report it. the steal asset be complet 
traceabl through the blockchain and whenev anybodi tri to bank them 
at an exchange, they can be seized. how might the court actual do that? 

2.1 clayton’ case 

until now, there be two algorithm use for taint track in the blockchain 
– poison and haircut [12]. these taint multisourc transactions, of which one 
input be tainted, either completely, or in proportion. thu a transact 
whose input be three steal bitcoin and then seven good bitcoin have an 
output on ‘poison’ of ten steal bitcoin, and on ‘haircut’ of ten bitcoin each 
of which be mark a 30% stolen. 

however, thi ignor the preced of clayton’ case, where a court in 
1816 have to tackl the problem of mix good and bad fund through an 
account after a bank go bust and the outcom depend on which deposit 
to an account be to be match with which late withdrawals. the master 
of the roll set a simpl rule of first-in-first-out (fifo): withdraw from 
an account be deem to be drawn against the deposit first make to it [16]. 

In order to test thi rule, we cod fifo and haircut taint tracking, and 
ran them from the genesi block to 2016, start from 132 well-publicis 
bitcoin crimes. fifo turn out to be veri much more precise. the 2012 theft 
of 46,653 bitcoin from linod taint 2,694,051 addresses, or almost 5% of 
the total, use the haircut algorithm, while with fifo, it’ 371,544 or just 
over 0.67%. the effect be even more pronounc with a shorter propag 

3 



period; for example, the 2014 flexcoin hack (where ‘the world’ first bitcoin 
bank’ close after all their coin be stolen) taint onli 18,208 account 
by 2016 use fifo, but 1,429,794 use haircut. overall, most bitcoin 
accounts1 have zero taint use fifo, while less than 24% escap taint if we 
use a haircut approach. 

thi be a veri strike result. mani peopl assum that bitcoin track 
be usual impractical, becaus the taint spread wide a coin circulate. 
howev onc we appli the law and use fifo, track turn out to be much 
more practical. and fifo track be reversible; you can track forward from 
a coin that’ be report stolen, or backward from a coin you’v just be 
offered. thi isn’t possibl with haircut tainting, a it lose information. 

We also look at bitcoin laundri or mixes. these be base on the idea 
that if you put one black coin in a bag with nine white one and shake hard 
enough, you’ll get ten white one out. but depend on the algorithm in use, 
fifo taint will decid that one of the output be black (and no owner of 
a white coin will want to risk that outcome), or that all coin be a sandwich 
of black and white compon (which be also an undesir outcome). In 
ani case, mix have never have the scale, throughput or latenc to cope with 
the proce of seriou crime; the bitcoin steal from Mt gox be trace to 
btc-e which be raid and it oper arrest [8]. 

there be an interest piec of research to be do here on protocols, 
document the precis effect of fifo taint on the variou mix and 
money-laund strategi propos to date, or document in the wild [11, 
13, 14]. peopl who have be do research on financi anonym without 
pay attent to clayton’ case have simpli be use the wrong metric. 

effici coin trace may damag the fungibl of bitcoin. A commod 
be call fungibl if one unit can replac another; exampl be gold coins, 
and ear of corn. technolog have in the past reduc fungibility. If ten sheep 
wander in roman time from marcus’ field into pliny’s, then the court 
would let marcu take ani ten of pliny’ sheep; but today, all sheep have 
electron tags, so marcu can get the right sheep back. So too with bitcoin. 

2.2 nemo dat quod non habet 

‘nobodi can give what isn’t theirs’ be a fundament principl of law in 
england, with variant in mani other jurisdictions. you cannot get effect 

1slightli over 72% of all bitcoin account with a nonzero balanc 

4 



titl to steal good simpli by buy them; indeed, you can be prosecut 
for receiv them. If alic steal bob’ hors and sell it to charlie, charli 
doesn’t own it; whenev bob seem him rid it, he can demand it back. 

there be a few exceptions. for centuries, if steal good be sell at a 
‘market overt’ – a design public market – between sunris and sunset, 
then the buyer would get good title. (so if charli have bought bob’ hors in 
cambridg market, all bob could now do would be to sue her for the value, 
or perhap have her transport to the colonies.) thi rule be abolish in 
the UK in 1995, follow abus by antiqu thieves, but it surviv in specif 
form in some market to which the idea have spread in the meantime. the 
relev case for our purpos be money. 

where good start to function a money – a with gold – regul 
develop to accommod it. bank start in some countri a goldsmith 
who would give receipt for gold, and on demand would give an appropri 
amount of gold back, though not necessarili the same bars. So a gold thief 
might lodg hi loot at a goldsmith, and take the receipt back a week late 
to get clean bar instead2. 

fast forward through a lot of history, and you can now get good titl to 
steal money in two main cases. 

1. you get the money in good faith for value. for example, you bought 
a microwav oven at a high street store and get a £10 note in your 
change. that note be now your even if it be steal in a bank robberi 
last year. 

2. you get the money from a regul institution, such a from an atm. 
then even if it be steal in a robberi last year, that’ now the bank’ 
problem, not yours. 

It be not surpris that the cryptocurr industri would veri much 
like to have bitcoin declar to be money, a thi would enabl everyday 
user to stop worri about the possibl that some of their bitcoin be 
stolen. and thi be a real fear; the major report robberi alon account 
for about 6–9% of all bitcoin in circul [10]. If we add the proce 

2monetari law over the centuri have have the same ambival attitud about whether 
money consist of the physic good that use to embodi it, such a coin or notes, or 
the valu they embodi – just a bitcoin promot claim that cryptocurr be money 
or good depend on which will best help them escap regul 

5 



of crime more gener we will get a much larg figur but will encount 
mani complex of definition, jurisdict and so on. the proce of drug 
crimes, in particular, be expos to quit draconian seizur law in a number 
of countries. 

howev noth in life be free, and be a regul financi institut 
have signific cost of it own: capit adequaci requirements, criminal- 
record background check for staff, and (most import for our purposes) 
‘know your customer’ (kyc) rule feed into anti-money-laund (aml) 
surveil systems. larg transact be reported, a be pattern of 
small ones, and bank demand your passport and a coupl of util bill 
when you open an account. 

sinc 2013, the US treasuri department’ financi crime enforc 
network (fincen) have direct bitcoin exchang to regist and follow these 
rules; other countri have be follow suit. sinc 2017, sever non- 
compliant exchang have be prosecut [6]. the late develop be 
that the EU propos to amend the 4th anti-money launder direct so 
a to extend regulation, includ a kyc duty, to firm that oper host 
wallet services. that may eventu bring most bitcoin user under the 
umbrella. the question then will be how the regul will discharg the 
respons they have now assumed. might they do someth to reassur 
ordinari investor that they won’t lose money a a result of buy steal 
bitcoin? Of cours they could demand that regist exchang make good 
ani custom to whom they sell bitcoin that late turn out to be stolen, but 
be there anyth else? 

2.3 regist or even insur titl 

one way of insur titl would be for the state to regist ownership, a it 
do in mani countri with real estate, motor vehicl and patents. but 
there be subtleti here about whether or not the regist be constitut of 
ownership, a with patents, or not, a with cars; and whether it provid a 
guarantee, a with property. 

but give the scale of bitcoin theft and robberies, and the anonym 
prefer of bitcoin users, state guarante be unlik to be an attract 
option for mani stakeholders. A government-control blockchain would 
give neither the platform for innov that cryptocurr do, nor the 
price, perform and market respons of ordinari bank accounts. 

6 



2.4 might the court do the job? 

So far, no govern have declar bitcoin to be money, although japan and 
itali have tipto around the edg of this. however, court may find that 
bitcoin can be treat a money for some purposes. A relev preced 
establish that carbon credit be property, and they poss mani of the 
same characterist a bitcoin [5]. 

monetari statu might be thought ideal for investor who hold cryp- 
tocurr in the hope of capit gains. At present, the investor can onli 
check that her asset have not yet be report a crime proce – but most 
crime report don’t come with public list of affect addresses. If bitcoin 
be money, and she get her bitcoin directli from a regul exchange, she 
would have good title. 

If someon hack your bitcoin wallet, or us ransomwar to extort bitcoin 
from you, or hold you up at gunpoint and forc you to transfer your save 
to them – a crime that’ becom extrem fashion of late [15] – then the 
steal bitcoin can be traced. now that coin trace be practical, the victim 
can trace the steal bitcoin through the blockchain, and sue the current 
holder – or ani regul exchang through which it passed. 

So honest custom would like the exchanges’ address to be public, 
so that anyon trace steal fund could see that a coin go through a 
regul exchang befor they bought it. the exchang will resist, not 
want to make it easi for theft victim to sue them. bitcoin enthusiast 
might well side with the exchanges, on the principl that bitcoin public key 
be pseudonyms. but it’ increasingli the investor who’r float the boat. 

3 chang the rule of the game 

thi pressur point may give an opportun to chang the rule of the game. 
fox note “inform about the taint proven of individu cyber- 
coin may be discover by specialis forens techniques. but there be 
a yet no standard practic of appli them to routin payments” [4, 5]. 
We have show that coin proven can be track veri much more easili 
than peopl assumed. the econom pressur point sit on a technic fis- 
sure, between the technic community’ insist that the onli concept of 
ownership of bitcoin be control of the privat key for the wallet in which it’ 
store [1] versu the lawyers’ insist that the registr of a bitcoin on 

7 



the blockchain be not ‘constitut of ownership’ a be the case with regist 
properti right such a patents. 

cryptocurr promot and investor will continu to lobbi for a law 
make bitcoin fungible, argu that govern make money from sell 
bitcoin confisc a the proce of crime [7] – even if in the past they have 
ineptli sell bitcoin at way below market valu [2]. they will also point out 
that when the govern of korea tri to crack down on cryptocurrencies, 
it suffer a public backlash [9]. 

but even if bitcoin becom money, the law and the blockchain will still 
diverg when you buy a bitcoin know it to be steal – or be on notic 
that it might be, or be neglig that it might be. 

for bitcoin to work a some of it promot wish, govern would 
have to go further than declar it to be money. they would have to declar 
the blockchain to be constitut of ownership. thi would be an extrem 
measure, and seem unlikely, give that even regist of motor vehicl don’t 
have such a status. the regist simpli record where speed fine and 
unpaid toll should be sent; it do not establish ownership. If we want to 
make ownership of bitcoin more certain, we need a differ approach. 

4 taintchain: a public trail of breadcrumb 

As fox noted, taint proven can be discov use forensics, yet ap- 
pli these to routin payment be not standard practice. 

our critic new assumpt be this. suppos there exist free and open- 
sourc softwar that make an up-to-d taint analysi publicli available. 
thi will follow the blockchain forward from all report crimes, and also 
from crime whose exist can be reliabl deduc from the intern evi- 
denc of the blockchain, and will mark everi bitcoin in exist with a taint. 
either the coin be clean, or some part of it be stolen. In that case, the taint 
will document the chain of evid back to the crime and quantifi it under 
certain assumpt (which we discu later). We call thi public trace the 
taintchain, and propos to make our fifo trace softwar public so that 
anyon can build one. 

there may well be multipl versions. for example, if a chines nation 
us bitcoin to extract money from china in contravent of it exchang 
control laws, that will not be a crime in the UK which have no exchang 
controls. similarly, if a softwar compani in estonia pay a develop in 

8 



ukrain in bitcoin so she can evad both exchang control and tax, the 
author in tallinn may well not be interested. differ legislatur take 
differ view of right and wrong; differ taintchain be the inevit 
result. the machineri of intern law – mlats, dual-crimin check 
for extradit warrants, evid rule – may eventu find it express 
in protocol and in chain analysi code. 

let u ignor issu of jurisdict for the time being, and consid two 
possibl way forward. first, what might happen under optim but light- 
touch regulation? and second, might privat law get u there instead – in 
other words, if the victim of bitcoin crime be to sue to get their asset 
back, then might decis in the court get u to roughli the same place? 

4.1 protocol research problem 

suppos the govern simpli declar that peopl who purchas bitcoin 
in good faith from regul exchang follow establish aml and kyc 
rule will get good title, and that the exchang must refund theft victims. 

thu when someon pay in a bitcoin amount, of which (say) 8.4% have 
be report stolen, the exchang will seiz that portion of the deposit 
amount and appli due process to return either the actual coin or their valu 
to the right owners. 

there be mani technic protocol aspect to explore. can we support 
protocol that will let an exchang custom check whether a bitcoin payment 
will be accepted, or whether some of it will be confisc a crime proceeds? 
If an identifi custom say ‘hi, what will you give me for utxo x?’ 
and the exchang replies, ‘sorry, 22% of that be steal in a robberi last 
tuesday, so we’ll onli give you 78%’ do the custom then have to turn 
over the crime proceeds? we’d presum so. (the exchang have her passport 
and util bill on file, after all.) 

If someon invent a protocol to check valu in zero knowledge, they 
might be prosecut for obstruct of justice. even if not, the exchang 
would be a leeri of that a the credit card compani be at present of small 
transact which might be use by thief to check whether a card’ be 
report steal yet. In fact, the difficulti of do pre-purchas coin check 
be a strong argument for a public taintchain. 

then there be issu familiar to the protocol community, of revoc 
and freshness. suppos alic check a utxo against the taintchain, see 
that it’ ok, and then transfer it to an exchang in good faith in order to 

9 



cash it for dollars. meanwhil the victim of a bitcoin robberi report some 
of it stolen, and by the time alice’ transact be mine into the blockchain, 
it’ tainted. Or perhap the miner refus to touch it a they don’t want 
taint mine fees. how do you sort out the mess? what combin of 
technic measures, social norm and legal rule might put u in a sweet spot? 
presum the exchang will have to pick up some of the tab, a bank do 
at present, but what rule might work and what protocol might support 
them? 

thi be actual an old problem. under the common-law statut of limi- 
tations, I can sue for neglig for up to seven years, and there be no limit in 
england for return of steal goods. under the old system for chequ clear- 
ing, I might be abl to claw back fund for a few day to weeks. under the 
EU payment servic directive, payment becom irrevoc after 48 hours, 
and custom complaint must be make within 13 months. the dispar of 
rule indic a role for the lawgiv in clarifi grace period for cryp- 
tocurrencies. clearli law enforc will lobbi for a long period while the 
exchang will lobbi for a short one. 

further rule need to be be explored. where we can identifi clearli 
conspiratori behaviour, such a a mix, the whole of the output may be 
strongli consid tainted, at least in the case of bitcoin be money – 
where the requir for good titl be to transact ‘in good faith’. curiously, 
make cryptocurr into money would make anonym harder, at least 
insofar a it’ provid by detect technic mechanisms. cryptocurr 
such a monero and zcash might forev be incap of be treat a 
money, becaus of their built-in laundromats. there, a default assumpt 
of bad faith seem prudent. 

4.2 So what might govern do? 

Up till now, cryptocurr promot have campaign for monetari sta- 
tu (often under the slogan of ‘fungibility’) while govern have larg 
drag their heels, no doubt fear that control would be complet lost, 
and that the trace and recoveri of crime proce would becom even 
harder. We hope we’v show that it’ not that simple. 

one possibl way forward would be the creation of a ‘nemo dat exception’ 
for regul bitcoin exchanges, with a suitabl notic period, and more 
detail provis for the extent to which crime victim might be make 
good beyond that. We propos that exchang should also maintain a reserv 

10 



proport to their trade activities, a bank do, so that they can continu 
to make victim good even when there be spike of claims. 

An altern approach might be private-sector titl insurance; onc we 
have a good public taintchain, a bitcoin exchang or a bank might simpli 
guarante titl to ani bitcoin it sells, and publish it wallet address so that 
the track can stop and start there. 

A use start point for negoti between govern and exchang 
operators, or just for increment polici development, might be the eu’ 
second payment servic directive, which encapsul europe’ experi 
to date in deal with consumer-fac payment systems. just a uber be 
brought to heel by mayor say ‘we don’t care if you claim to be a platform, 
whatev that is; you’r a taxi company, and you’ll get a licens or we’ll run 
you out of town’, so a sound open gambit would be to start enforc the 
law a it stands. 

for ani of thi to be feasible, a public taintchain may be the key. En 
route, there be mani interest protocol problem to tackle. 

5 conclus 

the bitcoin protocol be fascinating. It have creat what appear to be a global 
trust comput out of a mixtur of cryptographi and incentives, despit 
the fact that mani of the actor be shadi and mani of the circul 
cryptocoin have be steal at least once. 

out of thi swamp, the valu of bitcoin have soar to peak that few 
would have predict two year ago. the demand be now larg for invest- 
ment rather than transactions; so now may be the time to clean up bitcoin. 
how can we start? 

track steal coins, so that crime victim can sue to get their properti 
back, be the key. Up to now, peopl have be use haircut taint to 
track steal bitcoin. we’v show that’ wrong, a a matter of both law and 
engineering. the law say you should use fifo, and when you do so, the 
engin work way better. it’ much more precise, and be also reversible: 
in addit to trace forward from a steal bitcoin to see where it went, you 
can trace backward from ani utxo and get it entir genealogy. In short, 
fifo track be a power new analyt tool. 

the way be now clear for financi regul to appli the exist law on 
steal properti and on payment servic to bitcoin exchanges. 

11 



the thought experi in thi paper illustr a deeper fact. A proto- 
col’ secur properti can depend in veri subtl way on context. there 
be some preced for this; for example, the bug in shared-secret needham- 
schroeder becom appar onc peopl start to consid insid threats. 

the contextu chang need for bitcoin be realli just a matter of clarity. 
the taint inform be right there in the blockchain, and in the public theft 
reports; but combin the two so a to work out the taint on even one singl 
utxo have involv a key conceptu insight (fifo) and some engin 
effort. the output it a public taintchain that make steal coin visibl to 
all. then a test case, or regulation, might creat a soft fork between good 
coin and bad. and a invest demand trump transact demand, good 
coin might drive out bad ones; and miner might also avoid bad one a they 
won’t want taint transact fees. 

honest user of bitcoin would then buy them from regul exchanges, 
and pay them in again directly. bitcoin would still support peer-to-p pay- 
ments, and would not in ani engin sens be ‘centralised’ or otherwis 
changed3. but most user would start to use bitcoin rather like they use 
other electron money, which pass from the bank to the custom to the 
merchant and back to the bank. 

In short, we might be abl to turn a rather danger system into a much 
safer one – simpli by take some inform that be alreadi public (the 
blockchain) and publish it in a more access format (the taintchain). 
Is that not remarkable? 

acknowledg 

We acknowledg help discuss with david fox, shehar bano, tyler 
moore, nicola christin, rainer böhme, johann bezuidenhoudt, lawrenc 
esswood, joe bonneau and variou attende at financi cryptographi 
2018 where we present some of the idea here at a rump session talk. 

refer 

[1] J. bonneau, J. clark, A. narayanan, J. kroll, and E. felten. sok: research 
perspect and challeng for bitcoin and cryptocurrencies. ieee s&p 

3the mainten of the taintchain could and should be open, which in itself give rise 
to interest question of governance, which will lead to protocol design question too 

12 



2015, 2015. 

[2] E. cheng. US govern miss out on $600 million payday by sell dirti 
bitcoin too early. cnbc, 3 oct 2017. 

[3] financi crime enforc network. applic of fincen’ regul 
to person administering, exchanging, or use virtual currencies. 2013. 

[4] D. fox. properti right in money. oxford, 2008. 

[5] D. fox. cyber-curr in privat law. univers of edinburgh, 2016. 

[6] P. hardy. failur to regist with fincen sustain guilti pleas by virtual 
currenc exchangers. money launder watch, 24 april 2017. 

[7] S. higgins. US marshal servic to auction off $54 million in bitcoin. coin- 
desk, 11 jan 2018. 

[8] S. hudak. fincen fine btc-e virtual currenc exchang $110 million 
for facilit ransomware, dark net drug sales. 2017. 

[9] C. kim and H. yang. uproar over crackdown on cryptocurr divid 
south korea. reuters, 12 jan 2018. 

[10] T. lee. A brief histori of bitcoin hack and frauds. ar technica, 12 may 
2017. 

[11] S. meiklejohn, M. pomarole, G. jordan, K. levchenko, D. mccoy, G. voel- 
cker, and S. savage. A fist of bitcoins: characteris payment among 
men with no names. imc 2013, 2013. 

[12] M. möser, R. böhme, and D. breuker. toward risk score of bitcoin 
transactions. financi cryptography, 2014. 

[13] M. möser, R. böhme, and D. breuker. An inquiri into money launder 
tool in the bitcoin ecosystem. ieee, ecrim 2013. 

[14] A. narayanan, J. bonneau, E. felten, A. miller, and S. goldfeder. bitcoin 
and cryptocurr technologies. princeton, 2016. 

[15] N. popper. bitcoin thiev threaten real violenc for virtual currencies. 
new york times, 18 februari 2018. 

[16] D. v noble. 35 er 767, 781, 1816. 

13 


