






































mayor de blasio announc first-in-n task forc To examin autom decis system | citi of new york 


mayorfirst ladynewsoffici 

mayor de blasio announc first-in- 
nation task forc To examin 
autom decis system use By 
the citi 

may 16, 2018 

new york— today, mayor de blasio announc the creation of the autom 
decis system task forc which will explor how new york citi us algorithms. 
the task force, the first of it kind in the u.s., will work to develop a process for 
review “autom decis systems,” commonli know a algorithms, through the 
len of equity, fair and accountability. 
“a data and technolog becom more central to the work of citi government, the 
algorithm we use to aid decis make must be align with our goal and values,” 
say mayor de blasio. “the establish of the autom decis system task 
forc be an import first step toward great transpar and equiti in our use of 
technology.” 

“fair and equiti be at the heart of human rights, and we be pleas to be 
partner with leader in and out of govern to make sure citi govern itself 
align with these core values,” say chair and commission of the nyc 
commiss on human rights, carmelyn P. malalis. “the nyc commiss on 
human right be proud to be part of new york city’ groundbreak effort to ensur 
equiti and transpar in the city’ use of algorithm tool and we look forward to 
work with member of the task forc and nyc divers commun on thi effort.” 

the task force, the product of a law pass by citi council in decemb 2017, aim to 
produc a report in decemb 2019 recommend procedur for review and 
assess citi algorithm tool to ensur equiti and opportunity. 

“we be excit to be the first citi in the countri bring our best technolog and polici 
mind togeth to understand how algorithm affect the daili life of our constituents. 
whether the citi have make a decis about school placements, crimin justice, or the 
provis of social services, thi unpreced legisl get u one step closer to 
make algorithm accountable, transparent, and free of potenti bias. I thank my 
former colleague, jame vacca, for spearhead thi effort while he be in the council, 
and the mayor for hi support,” say speaker corey johnson. 

the task forc will be co-chair by emili W. newman, act director of the mayor’ 
offic of operations, and brittni saunders, deputi commission for strateg 

mayor de blasio announc first-in-n task forc To examin au... http://www1.nyc.gov/office-of-the-mayor/news/251-18/mayor-de-blasio-... 

1 sur 3 06-06-18 à 19:13 



initi at the commiss on human rights. It will be compos of citi agenc 
commission or their designees, a well a repres from a varieti of fields, 
includ individu from academ and legal communities, expert in data and 
technology, and leader of nonprofit and think tanks. repres from the 
depart of social services, the new york citi polic department, the depart of 
transportation, the mayor’ offic of crimin justice, the administr for children’ 
services, and the depart of educ be will also be name to the task force. 

“i’m honor to co-chair the ad task force, a it work will no doubt contribut to 
make new york citi the fairest big citi in the country,” say emili W. newman, 
act director of the mayor’ offic of operations. “with equiti and fair a our 
guid principles, I look forward to work alongsid leader and expert from multipl 
field a we examin how the citi us algorithm to guid it decis making.” 

“a emerg technolog evolve, it be imper that they be develop and use with 
equiti in mind,” say deputi commission for strateg initi at the 
commiss on human rights, brittni saunders. “I be honor to co-chair thi 
import task forc and look forward to work alongsid leader and expert to 
increas transpar around these critic tools.” 

“citi must oper through the len of understand the mani facet that make up 
their divers mosaics,” say brooklyn borough presid eric L adams. “thi 
algorithm data task force, which have an incred broad cross-sect of members, be 
a welcom step in ensur that the city’ day-to-day function and resourc alloc 
meet new yorkers’ need while address gener disparities. equiti should be at 
the forefront of all servic deliveri in everi function of our municip government.” 

"open data promot open government. today, our citi make anoth big step toward 
a more transpar govern for all new yorkers," say council member peter koo, 
chair of the committe on technology. "the find of the autom decis 
system task forc will allow u to good understand what data be used, and how it be 
used, and will help u creat a more equal system for all of our residents. I thank mayor 
De blasio and the nyc commiss on human right for make our govern more 
open, fair, and accountable, and I look forward to work with the new task forc to 
ensur these valu remain a prioriti for all citi agencies." 

task forc co-chairs: 

emili W. newman, act director of the mayor’ offic of oper 

brittni saunders, deputi commission for strateg initi at the nyc commiss 
on human right 

task forc member include: 

solon barocas, assist professor, cornel univers 

shelbi chestnut, nation organ and polici strategist, transgend law center 

khalil cumberbatch, associ vice presid for policy, the fortun societi 

mayor de blasio announc first-in-n task forc To examin au... http://www1.nyc.gov/office-of-the-mayor/news/251-18/mayor-de-blasio-... 

2 sur 3 06-06-18 à 19:13 



judith H. germano, esq., founder, germanolaw llc; senior fellow on cybersecurity, 
nyu center on law & secur 

afaf nasher, esq., execut director, council on american-islam relat – new 
york 

jennif rodgers, esq., execut director, center for the advanc of public 
integr at columbia law school 

juli samuels, esq., execut director, tech:nyc 

vincent southerland, esq., execut director, center on race, equality, and the law at 
nyu law school 

julia stoyanovich, assist professor of comput science, drexel university; data, 
respons 

meredith whittaker, co-founder, AI now institute; distinguish research scientist, 
nyu 

maya D. wiley, esq., senior vice presid for social justice, the new school; co- 
director, digit equiti laboratori at the new school 

jeannett M. wing, avanessian director of the data scienc institut and professor of 
comput scienc at columbia univers 

pressoffice@cityhall.nyc.gov 

(212) 788-2958 

mayor de blasio announc first-in-n task forc To examin au... http://www1.nyc.gov/office-of-the-mayor/news/251-18/mayor-de-blasio-... 

3 sur 3 06-06-18 à 19:13 


