






































measur distanc with a singl photo 


measur distanc with a singl photo 

26 juli 2017 

most camera just record colour but now the 3D shape of objects, captur through onli a singl lens, can be accur estim use new softwar 
develop by ucl comput scientists. 

measur distanc with a singl photo http://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/0717/260717-measuring-distance-with-a-single-photo 

1 sur 7 02/08/2017 09:10 



measur distanc with a singl photo http://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/0717/260717-measuring-distance-with-a-single-photo 

2 sur 7 02/08/2017 09:10 



video 

the method, publish today at cvpr 2017, give state-of-the-art result and work with exist photos, allow ani camera to map the depth for 
everi pixel it captures. 

the technolog have a wide varieti of applications, from augment realiti in comput game and apps, to robot interaction, and self-driv cars. 
histor imag and video can also be analys by the software, which be use for reconstruct of incid or to automat convert 2D film 
into immers 3d. 

“infer object-rang from a simpl imag by use real-tim softwar have a whole host of potenti uses,” explain supervis researcher, Dr 
gabriel brostow (ucl comput science). 

“depth map be critic for self-driv car to avoid collisions, for example. currently, car manufactur use a combin of laser-scann and/or 
radar sensors, which have limitations. they all use camera too, but the individu camera couldn’t provid meaning depth information. So far, 
we’v optimis the softwar for imag of residenti areas, and it give unparallel depth mapping, even when object be on the move.” 

the new softwar be develop use machin learn method and have be train and test in outdoor and urban environments. It success 
estim depth for thin structur such a street sign and poles, a well a peopl and cars, and quickli predict a dens depth map for each 512 x 256 
pixel image, run at over 25 frame per second. 

currently, depth map system reli on bulki binocular stereo rig or a singl camera pair with a laser or light-pattern projector that don’t work 
well outdoor becaus object move too fast and sunlight dwarf the project patterns. 

there be other machine-learn base system also seek to get depth from singl photographs, but those be train in differ ways, with some 
need elus high-qual depth information. the new technolog doesn’t need real-lif depth datasets, and outperform all the other systems. onc 
trained, it run in the field by process one normal single-len photo after another. 

“understand the shape of a scene from a singl imag be a fundament problem. We aren’t the onli one work on it, but we have get the high 
qualiti outdoor results, and be look to develop it further to work with 360 degre cameras. A 360 degre depth map would be fantast use – 
it could drive wearabl tech to assist disabl peopl with navigation, or to map real-lif locat for virtual realiti gaming, for example,” add first 
author and ucl phd student, clément godard (ucl comput science). 

co-author, Dr oisin mac aodha, previous at ucl and now at caltech, added: “at the moment, our softwar requir a desktop comput to process 
individu images, but we plan on miniaturis it, so it can be run on hand-held devic such a phone and tablets, make it more access to app 
developers. we’v also onli optimis it for outdoor use, so our next step be to train it on indoor environments.” 

the team have patent the technolog through ucl business, but have make the code avail free for non-commerci use. fund for the research 
be kindli provid by the engin and physic scienc research council. 

measur distanc with a singl photo http://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/0717/260717-measuring-distance-with-a-single-photo 

3 sur 7 02/08/2017 09:10 


