






































mediterranean diet be still good for you but onli if youâ•žr rich 


mediterranean diet be still good for you but onli if you’r 
rich 

By chelsea whyte 

marian vejcik/getti 

it’ suppos to be good for you. So say a studi publish in 2013 that track the effect of the 
mediterranean diet over five years, but it result have now be call into question. 

the origin research found that the diet – featur fresh fruit and vegetables, seafood, nuts, oliv oil and 
red wine, but veri littl red meat or sugar – reduc the risk of cardiovascular disease, contribut to slight 
reduct in rate of heart attack and earli death, and more significantli lower the risk of stroke. 

advertis 

sinc then, studi after studi have found other benefits, such a stave off age in the brain or delay the 
onset of alzheimer’ disease. 

but the 2013 study, know a predimed, be recent retract and republish (new england journal of 
medicine, doi.org/cq2s). that’ becaus not all of the study’ 7447 particip be fulli randomised. 

for instance, particip be assign to follow either the low-fat control diet or one of two version of the 
mediterranean diet – with an emphasi on fat deriv from either oliv oil or walnuts. but some coupl 
be both assign to the same diet becaus of their marit status, so it wasn’t truli random. 

the author reanalys their data, remov about 21 per cent of the participants. they found that the 
protect effect of the diet held up under thi new scrutiny, but their scope be more limited: the health 
benefit be onli see for peopl with a high risk of heart disease. 

“should we all be eat like the greeks? one studi say your bank balanc be an import factor” 

given these limit benefits, should we realli all be eat like the greeks? anoth studi suggest your bank 
balanc be an import factor. research at the mediterranean neurolog institut in itali carri out a 
studi of more than 18,000 men and woman over four years. they found a 15 per cent reduct in 
cardiovascular risk for those on the mediterranean diet, but onli if they earn £35,000 a year or more. for 
the less advantaged, the benefit of the diet weren’t see at all. 

even though all studi particip follow the mediterranean diet, those with high incom tend to eat 

mediterranean diet be still good for you but onli if you’r rich https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg23831832-900-mediterranean-di... 

1 sur 2 17-07-18 à 18:07 



food that have more heart-protect antioxid and polyphenols, and which be grown with few 
pesticides. those with low incom have less access to a wide varieti of fruits, veget and whole grains, 
and tend to buy food that have low nutrit valu (intern journal of epidemiology, 
doi.org/cbhh). 

“the real extra virgin oliv oil that be use in the predim trial be about 8 euro per bottle,” say 
marialaura bonaccio at the mediterranean neurolog institute. “so the question is, do I get the same 
benefit from a bottl of oliv oil that cost 10 euros, a compar to the low qualiti one that I paid 2 euro 
for?” 

she and her colleagu be plan a follow-up studi to determin whether peopl be eat the quantiti 
of food suggest by the mediterranean diet, which will also look at the qualiti of those foods. she suspect 
that the differ in benefit may come down to high qualiti food that cost far more. 

“it’ a real paradox. when the mediterranean diet be discovered, it be the diet of the poorest peopl in itali 
and greece. now, it’ the diet of the rich people,” she says. 

thi articl appear in print under the headlin “whi splash out on oliv oil may pay off” 

mediterranean diet be still good for you but onli if you’r rich https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg23831832-900-mediterranean-di... 

2 sur 2 17-07-18 à 18:07 


