


















































model structur and resili of the dark network 

manlio De domenico1, ∗ and alex arenas1 

1departa d’enginyeria informàtica i matemàtiques, 
universitat rovira i virgili, 43007 tarragona, spain 

while the statist and resili properti of the internet be no more chang significantli 
across time, the darknet, a network devot to keep anonym it traffic, still experi rapid 
chang to improv the secur of it users. here, we studi the structur of the darknet and we 
find that it topolog be rather peculiar, be character by non-homogen distribut of 
connect – typic of scale-fre network –, veri short path length and high cluster – typic 
of small-world network – and lack of a core of highli connect nodes. 

We propos a model to reproduc such features, demonstr that the mechan use to 
improv cyber-secur be respons for the observ topology. unexpectedly, we reveal that it 
peculiar structur make the darknet much more resili than the internet – use a a benchmark 
for comparison at a descript level – to random failures, target attack and cascad failures, a 
a result of adapt chang in respons to the attempt of dismantl the network across time. 

I. introduct 

sinc when internet becom a publicli access in- 
frastructur and commun network, it resili 
to random failur – caused, for instance, by unexpect 
crash due to nodes’ malfunct or protocol’ error – or 
attack – action devot to isol node that play a vital 
role in the network – have be wide investigated[1–5]. 
In fact, the internet exhibit highli nontrivi structur 
and dynam properties, from heavy-tail distribut 
of connect – know a scale-fre property[6] – to a 
moder amount of cluster – proport to the frac- 
tion of node that form close triangl –, whose model- 
ing have be the subject of intens research activity[7– 
11]. In fact, sever year after the internet first proper 
crash, in 1980, the focu of mani studi have been, and 
still is, to improv it resilience[10, 12–17]. In late 90s, 
about 30 year after the first internet prototype, the US 
defens advanc research project agenc (darpa) 
and the offic of naval research start to develop a 
commun network, at the applic layer, base 
on anonym connect and, in principle, resist to 
both eavesdrop and traffic analysis[18]. thi net- 
work be base on onion routing, a special infrastructur 
for privat commun over a public network that be 
abl to hide the content of a messag and the ident of 
peer who be exchang it[19]. nowadays, thi infras- 
tructur be good know a tor network and repres 
the backbon of the darknet, an web of hidden servic 
that be not reachabl from within the internet. the 
darknet turn out to be the most suitabl communica- 
tion network to exchang sensit information, both licit 
and illicit, becom soon the target of govern try- 
ing to identifi dissid or of intellig agencies, such 
a cia and gchq[20], to contain unauthor news 
leaks, distribut of illeg content or trade of illeg 
substances. 

∗ To whom correspond should be addressed; e-mail: man- 
lio.dedomenico@urv.cat. 

here, we character the structur properti of the 
darknet across time, from 2013 to 2015, and we compar 
them against the internet topology. It be worth remark- 
ing that throughout the manuscript we model and char- 
acter the darknet from a complex system perspective, 
mean that we attach to the represent of both the 
internet and the darknet from avail data, while fo- 
cuse the studi on the particular network structur 
they provide. note that thi comparison be perform at 
a descript level, use the structur of the internet a a 
benchmark to highlight the salient featur of the dark- 
net. the autonom system data captur connect 
at the internet layer (ip packages), while tor work on 
the applic layer, which mean that be built on top of 
the internet and transport layers. We propos a model, 
base on how tor functions, to reproduc with high ac- 
curaci the most salient characterist of the darknet. 
finally, we perform a thorough analysis, base on simula- 
tions, of the resili of both network to three differ 
type of failures, static – due to random disrupt or 
target attacks[1] – and dynam – due to the cascad 
failur induc by attack a singl specif node of the 
network[21, 22], and show that the darknet be much more 
robust than the internet under ani perspective. 

ii. overview OF the data set 

for our analysis, we use publicli avail data set for 
both the internet and the darknet. the internet topol- 
ogy, at the level of autonom system (as), be sampl 
from histor as-level topolog data deriv from bor- 
der gateway protocol (bgp) monthli snapshots, con- 
sist of ipv4 and ipv6 link appear between differ- 
ent endpoint dure that month. the data be host 
by the ucla comput scienc department’ internet 
research lab[23]. 

the darknet topolog be sampl from the data ob- 
tain by probe the tor network to improv it 
performance[24]. the link between endpoint be ex- 
tract from the chain of circuit built by tor client to 

ar 
X 

iv 
:1 

61 
2. 

01 
28 

4v 
1 

[ 
ph 

y 
ic 

s. 
so 

c- 
ph 

] 
5 

D 
ec 

2 
01 

6 

lphilipp 
zone de text 
final publish a http://journals.aps.org/pre/abstract/10.1103/physreve.95.022313 



2 

probe the network. the network be directed, but we will 
treat it a undirected, in the following. the full raw data 
be avail upon request and a partial releas can be 
download from a public repository[25]. although such 
data be obtain to studi the perform of the tor 
network and not it topology, they provid the best ap- 
proxim to the underli topolog of the darknet 
to date. 

In both cases, we have be abl to build three tem- 
poral snapshots, correspond to the network in de- 
cember 2013, may 2014 and januari 2015. the internet 
network snapshot have 46,462, 47,626 and 49,635 node 
with 195,446, 204,254 and 221,470 connections, in the 
three periods, respectively. the darknet network snap- 
shot have 5,921, 4,953 and 5,535 node with 2,017,542, 
536,287 and 274,831 connections, in the three periods, re- 
spectively. the structur of both network for the 2015 
period be show in fig.1a. 

iii. the structur OF the darknet 

A. character the darknet topolog 

let u indic with A 
[ξ] 
ij (t) the entri of the adjac 

matrix of each network (ξ = internet and darknet) at 
time t (t = 2013, 2014 and 2015), with valu equal to 
one if i and j be connected, and zero otherwis (here 
i, j = 1, 2, ..., N [ξ](t), where N indic the number of 
node in the network and E the number of edges). 

for ani node i in each network, we calcul the de- 

gree k 
[ξ] 
i (t) = 

∑ 
j 

A 
[ξ] 
ij (t) – character the number of 

connect of each node – and the local cluster co- 

effici c 
[ξ] 
i (t) – character the tendenc of node to 

form triangl –, defin by the ratio between the num- 
ber of close triangl involv node i and the maximum 

number of triangl 12k 
[ξ] 
i (t)[k 

[ξ] 
i (t) − 1] node i might be 

part of. the mean degre be defin by k̄[ξ](t) = 〈k[ξ]i (t)〉, 
wherea the averag local cluster coeffici if give 

by c̄[ξ](t) = 〈c[ξ]i (t)〉. anoth macroscop structur 
descriptor of interest be the global cluster coeffici 
C [ξ](t), defin by the ratio between the total number 
of close triplet and the total number of connect 
triplet of node in the network. In general, the valu of 
c̄[ξ](t) and C [ξ](t) be differ for network with a non- 
homogen connectivity. throughout the analysi no 
power-law fit be performed, the power law indic 
in the plot be a simpl eye-guide. 

the degre distribut be show in fig. 1 and exhibit 
highli inhomogeneity, with evid heavi tail that re- 
sembl two differ truncat power law with cut-off. 
the distribut of the local cluster coeffici be also 
differ in the two cases, with much more unclust 
node in the internet than the darknet. In the inter- 
net, a signific fraction of node have local cluster 
equal to 1 and few node have intermedi values, at 

varianc with the darknet where the local cluster be 
more uniformli distribut and peak around 0.3. On 
average, darknet node have mean degre close to 100 
and be more cluster than internet nodes, which have 
mean degre close to 10. 

To quantifi how easi be to transmit inform be- 
tween ani two node of each network, we calcul the 
averag path length `[ξ](t), obtain by averag the 
length of all shortest path connect ani pair of nodes, 
and the diamet d[ξ](t), defin a the length of the 
long shortest path. the internet have averag path 
length close to 3.5, with diamet between 10 and 12, 
wherea the averag path length in the darknet rang 
between 2 and 2.5, with diamet between 4 and 5 (see 
supplementari figur 1). therefore, assum no time 
constraint in the propag of the inform for both 
networks, commun in the darknet is, in princi- 
ple, much faster than the internet, with the two most 
extrem node separ by no more than 5 hops, less 
than half of the internet. given that the traffic in the 
darknet be encrypt and the rout be decentralized, at 
varianc with the internet, the shortest path for commu- 
nicat compens the high latenc and throughput 
of the channels. 

In fig. 1C be show the relationship between the size 
of the networks, their averag path length and their 
global cluster for the three snapshot under consider- 
ation. the presenc of high cluster and short averag 
path length be strong indic that the two network 
have nontrivi topolog and format mechanisms. In 
fact, both network exhibit the properti know a small- 
worldness[26]. small-world network be character by 
high clustering, with respect to random expectation, and 
characterist length scale a ` ∼ logn . the averag 
local cluster of the internet be more than 1000 time 
high than it uniformli random expectation, wherea 
the cluster of the darknet be between 7 and 32 time 
larg than it uniformli random expectation, suggest 
nontrivi triadic closur mechan underli both 
networks. the characterist length of the darknet be 
larg than it uniformli random expectations, wherea 
thi be not the case for the internet. although small- 
world be good understood a a tendency, rather than 
be quantifi by a singl number, it be worth remark- 
ing that `(t) ≈ logn(t) – a in small world – for the 
internet snapshot and `(t) ≈ log logn(t) – a in ultra- 
small worlds[27] – for the darknet ones. 

the internet and the darknet also exhibit differ 
type of higher-ord correlations, a show in fig. 1d, 
where the averag nearest-neighbors’ degre and the av- 
erag local cluster coeffici be scatter against the 
degree. thi kind of analysi be gener use to shade 
light on the degree-degre correl of the network: 
if the degre or the cluster of each node be inde- 
pendent on the node in the neighborhood, no trend 
be expected. instead, the two system present highli 
anti-correlations, with hub (i.e. node with larg de- 
gree) tend to be connected, on average, to node with 



3 

internet darknet 

A B 

C D 

fig. 1. structur analysi of internet and darknet topologies. force-direct visual of the (a) internet and 
the darknet in 2015, with node color to put in evid the underli mesoscal structure. (b) densiti of the degre (solid 
line be for guidanc only) and local cluster coeffici for the two network in 2015. (c) scatter plot of network sizes, averag 
path length and global cluster coeffici for the three tempor snapshot consid in thi study. (d) averag nearest- 
neighbors’ degre (left) and averag local cluster coeffici (right) against degree, to character higher-ord correl 
(see supplementari figur 1 for other structur descriptor and their evolut between 2013 and 2015). 

much small degre and local cluster coefficient. thi 
tendenc be confirm by the neg assort mix- 
ing measur in both network (see supplementari fig- 
ure 1), defin by the pearson’ correl coeffici of 
the degre of link pair of nodes[28, 29]. 

from thi structur analysi we find that while struc- 
tural descriptor of the internet do not chang over time, 
thi be not the case for the darknet, that be still evolv- 
ing (see supplementari figur 1 for other structur de- 
scriptor and their evolut between 2013 and 2015). 
nevertheless, while the internet have be wide investi- 
gate and sever model have be propos to explain 
it structure, the peculiar properti of the darknet and 
the previou unavail of data about it structur 
call for a model that be abl to reproduc it most salient 
characteristics. 

B. model the darknet structur 

To model the darknet, it be crucial to understand 
how the tor network functions. ani tor client initi 
queri the directori author to get the consensus, 
a tabl provid inform about all activ node in 

the network and their metadata. the metadata be then 
evalu to build a circuit, a chain of three node use 
to connect the client to the server where the (possibl 
hidden) servic be located. the choic of the node of 
the circuit be subject to sever constraints, by default. 
for instance, the same node can not be chosen twice and 
node run by the same oper be usual avoided. the 
choic of the first node be not perform uniformli ran- 
dom: instead, node with larg bandwidth be favored, 
with prioriti to long-liv node call “guard”. 

We model the abov procedur with the follow sim- 
ple grow model. At time τ = 0 a small random net- 
work with n0 � N node and e0 edg be creat first. We 
assign a timestamp T (n) to such node (n = 1, 2, ..., n0), 
that will allow to calcul their age a(n, τ) late at 
ani time τ , and a properti b(n), not vari on time, 
whose valu be sampl from a heavy-tail distribution, 
to mimic the empir bandwidth distribution. In the 
following, we will use a log-norm distribution. 

At each time step τ = 1, 2, ..., n−n0, a new node n and 
M link enter the network. the timestamp T (n) = τ and 
a bandwidth be assign to n, a previous described. 
It be crucial to remark that the M link do not involv 
node n necessarily, at varianc with process base on 



4 

fig. 2. model the darknet structur in 2015. de- 
gree distribut obtain from an ensembl of 50 random 
realiz of our model compar against the empir dis- 
tribut (the dash line be for guidanc only, to show the 
deviat of the degre distribut from a pure power-law 
with scale expon equal to -1. 

the tradit preferenti attachment. In fact, in a trust 
network like the darknet, new node have to increas 
their reput befor be trust and thi be more 
like to happen with aging. nevertheless, link have to 
be creat between trust node at time τ , therefor 
2M node be randomli chosen with probabl 

pn′(τ) = 
aβ(n′, τ)bγ(n′) 
n∑ 
i=1 

aβ(i, τ)bγ(i) 
, (1) 

where a(n′, τ) = τ − T (n′) be the age of node n′ at time 
τ . the node be then randomli link into M pairs. 
crucially, the degre of each node at each time step do 
not play ani role in the grow process, that be com- 
plete driven by exogen node’ properti such age 
and bandwidth. the final step be to rewir node ran- 
domly, while preserv the degre distribution: thi last 
stage destroy possibl structur correl due to the 
previou stage of the model and it be crucial to introduc 
a high level of random in connectivity. 

thi darknet stochast model be veri gener and, 
vari the expon β and γ, it be possibl to explor 
differ scenarios, e.g. where probabl be invers 
proport to age (β < 0) and proport to band- 
width (γ > 0). In practice, the valu of M be fix by the 
data a M = (E − e0)/(n − n0) and therefore, the onli 
free paramet of the model are, in general, β and γ. In 
the following, we do not fit the paramet and we just 
consid the simplest scenario with linear proportion 
(β = γ = 1). 

our simul reveal that thi model gener 
network that be remark close to the observ one 
from differ perspectives. the high cluster and 
small characterist length be satisfactorili reproduced, 

although the main find here be that the degre dis- 
tribut of simul network reproduc with excel 
accuraci the empir one, a show in fig. 2. 

thi result be of particular interest because, in general, 
network with degre distribut scale a power law 
with expon small than -2 (and especi close to 
-1) and cutoff be veri difficult to model. mechan 
involv degree-bas preferenti attach and the 
influenc of some exogen properties, like age and 
cost, have be proposed[30] although they be abl to re- 
produc power-law scale with expon equal or larg 
than -2 with cutoff. 

the ensembl of random realiz of our model be 
suffici to reproduc the main topolog properti 
of the darknet, includ it structur resili a we 
will see later. figur 3 show the comparison between 
observ valu and their expect accord to our 
model. 

C. lack of “rich club” effect in the darknet 

It have be show that in mani complex networks, 
especi the internet, node that be veri central tend 
to interconnect more each other. thi effect, call rich 
club, produc a core of node that be realli import for 
the stabil and the robust of the network and can be 

quantified[31, 32]. let u denot by E 
[ξ] 
>k(t) the number of 

connect among the N 
[ξ] 
>k(t) node with degre larg 

than the threshold k. the rich-club coeffici be defin 
by 

φ 
[ξ] 
k (t) = 

2E 
[ξ] 
>k(t) 

N 
[ξ] 
>k(t)[n 

[ξ] 
>k(t)− 1] 

. (2) 

however, to understand to which extent the observ 
rich-club effect be not due to chance, we gener an en- 
sembl of 1000 random network preserv the empir 
degre distribut and calcul the expect coeffici 

φ̃ 
[ξ] 
k (t). therefor we studi how the ratio φ 

[ξ] 
k (t)/φ̃ 

[ξ] 
k (t) 

chang a a function of k: when thi ratio be close to 1 
the observ rich-club be compat with random fluc- 
tuations, wherea when it be larg (smaller) than 1 it 
indic the exist (absence) of a rich core of nodes. 
We show in fig. 4 the calcul valu of the ratio for 
the internet and the darknet in 2015. the internet ex- 
hibit a clear rich-club effect for node with intermedi 
degree, around k = 50, with larg hub tend to be 
not interconnect each other. conversely, the darknet 
do not exhibit a rich core, with slight tendenc of the 
larg hub to be not interconnect each other, effect 
that in be magnitud significantli small than the case 
of the internet. 

sum up, the internet consist of a backbon of 
high-centr nodes, wherea the darknet do not. 
thi result be compat with the fact that nowaday 
internet be a veri central network provid an easi 
way to manag and search for onlin services, wherea 



5 

fig. 3. reproduc the darknet (2015) structur descriptors. differ structur descriptor obtain from an 
ensembl of 400 random realiz of our model compar against the observ values. In the last panel, we report the mean 
rel differ between the valu calcul from the data and the valu calcul from the model (“d” be for diameter, 
“apl” be for averag path length and “gc” be for global clustering). 

the darknet be veri decentr (a the usenet, the an- 
cestor of the internet) but it be more difficult to manag 
and search for hidden onlin services. 

iv. resili OF the darknet 

A. resili to static failur 

here we investig how the structur properti of the 
darknet and the internet be reflect in their resili 
to perturbations. We consid three differ type of 
disturb base on topolog and dynam pertur- 
bations. topolog perturb be static remov 
of node that might mimic either random disrupt or 
target attacks[1]. dynam perturb start with 
the disrupt of a singl node, gener the one with 
high degree, that trigger a cascad of failures[21, 22]. 

In random disruptions, a fraction pfail of node be cho- 
sen uniformli random in the network and removed. In 
target disruptions, the fraction pfail of node be chosen 
accordingli to their rank with respect to a measur 
of centrality. usually, the degre be used, but also the 
betweenness[33] – quantifi central with respect to 
the commun flow – and k-coreness[34] – base on 
the core decomposit of a network and character 
to which nest shell a node belong to. It be common 
to quantifi the resili of a network to such pertur- 
bation by observ how the rel size of the larg 
connect compon chang a a function of 1− pfail, 
i.e. the fraction of surviv nodes. thi method allow to 
quantifi if the surviv node be cluster all togeth 
or if they form small disconnect cluster which hinder 
the network’ function. 

non-homogen random network be know to be 
veri robust to random disrupt but veri sensit to 
target attacks. In fact, our find confirm that both 
the internet and the darknet be fairli robust to random 

failures, wherea they be more damag by target at- 
tack (see supplementari figur 2, 3 and 4). It be worth 
remark that the critic point, i.e. the fraction of dis- 
ruption for which the size larg connect compon 
of the network be minimum, be veri differ for the two 
networks. In fact, while it be enough to target the 10% 
of internet node to reach the critic point, in the case 
of the darknet much more effort be needed, requir a 
40% of disrupt (thi result be in excel agreement 
with expect from our model, see supplementari fig- 
ure 6). the correspond rel differ between 
the two network be explicitli show in fig. 5a, where 
it be evid that the darknet be by order of magnitude, 
more resili than the internet, even with respect to 

fig. 4. “rich club” structur of internet and darknet 
in 2015. ratio between the rich-club coeffici calcul 
for the empir network and it random expect (see the 
text for further details) a a function of the degre threshold. 
coeffici not show for degre valu for which the number 
of node be small than 100 (about 2% of darknet and 0.2% 
of internet). 



6 

random disruptions. 

B. resili to dynam failur 

anoth type of disruption, veri suitabl for commu- 
nicat networks, be base on the induc cascad fail- 
ures. the rational behind thi method be that a node 
i in a commun network be character by a cer- 
tain capac ci, a fix featur quantifi the maximum 
amount of load they can oper with, and a load li(τ), 
a dynam featur depend on the state of the net- 
work. node with high degre be assum to be the 
one with high capacity, and at ani time the total load 
of the network be constant, i.e. L = 

∑ 
i 

li(τ). If a node 

with high capac be disrupted, it load must be redis- 
tribut among the other node of the network: but if the 
new load exceed their capacities, a new set of node will 
suffer a disruption, redistribut the load through the 
remain node and so on, thu gener a cascad of 
failur that can paralyz the system. the dynam of 
cascad failur and the resili of the network can be 
studi a a function of a paramet α which improv 
the capac of each node to (1 + α)ci. By vari α 
and calcul the rel size of the larg connect 
compon at the end of the cascade, we can estim 
the requir enhanc in capac to make the net- 
work resili to thi attack. the detail result be 
show in supplementari figur 2, 3 and 4, wherea the 
differ be show in fig. 5b. again, the darknet be 
much more resili than the internet to thi catastroph 
cascad of failures, requir just α ≈ 0.2 to remain fulli 
operative, wherea the internet requir at least α = 0.28 
to keep oper almost the 90% of it node (full op- 
erat be guarante for valu of α close to 1). thi 
result is, one more time, in excel agreement with ex- 
pectat from our model (see supplementari figur 6). 
the rel differ between the resili of the two 
network clearli indic that befor and close to the crit- 
ical point the darknet be more resili than the internet. 
thi properti have direct econom implications, becaus 
larg the valu of α high the cost to make the network 
more robust. 

V. conclus and discuss 

We have investig the structur properti of the 
darknet, the commun network develop in the 
last two decad to guarante safe and anonym nav- 
igation. the darknet exhibit some interest featur 
that be not share by the structur of the internet. 
triadic closur in the darknet be more like than in 
the internet, with commun path much shorter in 
the former. like the internet, the darknet be character- 
ize by a non-homogen connect distribut and 
the presenc of higher-ord degree-degre correlations. 

however, the topolog of the darknet be more interest 
becaus of the peculiar heavy-tail scale of the degre 
distribution, with scale expon close to -1 and cut- 
off, at varianc with the internet, appear more like a 
power-law with scale expon close to -2 and no evi- 
dent cutoff. 

the rich-club analysi have reveal the lack of a core of 
highli central node interconnect each other, at vari- 
anc with the internet where thi effect be remarkable. We 
argu that such topolog differ be respons for 
the differ resili exhibit by the two communica- 
tion system in respons to random disruption, target at- 
tack and induc cascad failures. We have thoroughli 
show that the peculiar topolog of the darknet, charac- 
teriz by highli cluster commun circuits, small 
characterist distanc between hop and lack of a rich 
core, make thi network much more resili than the 
internet a a result of adapt chang in respons to 
the attempt of dismantl it across time. 

while the resili of the internet be not significantli 
chang over time, the resili of the darknet be still 
changing. In fact, it resili to topolog disrupt 
slightli decreas between 2013 and 2014, remain un- 
chang in 2015, wherea in the same year the darknet 
becom slightli less resili to induc cascad failures. 
togeth with the trend reveal by other structur de- 
scriptors, such a decreas clustering, slightli increas- 
ing characterist length and increas assortativity, we 
argu that the darknet might be undergo a transit 
from decentr to central of it services. It 
will be interest to confirm thi predict in the future, 
when longer histor data will be available. 

By mimic how the darknet actual works, we 
have propos a model – base on a preferenti at- 
tachment mechan depend on exogen properti 
such a age and bandwidth and independ on endoge- 
nou properti such a node’ degre – to reproduc the 
empir degre distribut with remark accuracy. 
the analysi show that our model be suffici to under- 
stand the structur correl and the robust of 
the darknet. 

We recogn that there be mani possibl flaw in the 
represent of both systems, the darknet and the in- 
ternet, a to claim to have the true topolog networks. 
nevertheless, from the data avail it be inde possibl 
to start think about properti of the structur and it 
implications. the comparison between both structur 
have be develop at a descript level from the under- 
lie graphs, with no other goal than use the internet 
a a benchmark to good highlight some salient featur 
of the darknet. finally, the propos of a model driven 
by the main featur of the darknet seem to be enough 
to captur it more promin topolog features. 

sum up, the main result of thi work be the indica- 
tion that the mechan adopt to guarante anony- 
mou traffic in the darknet and to improv the cyber- 
secur of it user could be the main respons for the 
peculiar topolog of the darknet observ so far, and it 



7 

A B 

fig. 5. rel differ in resilience. (a) differ between the darknet and the internet in resili to random 
and target attack (see supplementari figur 5 for the differ in topolog resili in 2013 and 2014) and (b) induc 
cascad failures. 

resilience. acknowledg 

the author thank robert annessi and martin 
schmiedeck for provid the tor raw data and sup- 
port on data processing. mdd acknowledg financi 
support from the spanish program juan de la cierva 
(ijci-2014-20225). AA acknowledg financi support 
from icrea academia and jame S. mcdonnel foun- 
dation and spanish mineco fis2015-71582. 

[1] R. albert, H. jeong, and a.-l. barabási, natur 406, 
378 (2000). 

[2] R. cohen, K. erez, D. ben-avraham, and S. havlin, 
physic review letter 85, 4626 (2000). 

[3] D. S. callaway, M. E. newman, S. H. strogatz, and D. J. 
watts, physic review letter 85, 5468 (2000). 

[4] R. pastor-satorras, A. vázquez, and A. vespignani, 
physic review letter 87, 258701 (2001). 

[5] R. pastor-satorra and A. vespignani, evolut and 
structur of the internet: A statist physic approach 
(cambridg univers press, 2007). 

[6] a.-l. barabási and R. albert, scienc 286, 509 (1999). 
[7] A. vázquez, M. boguná, Y. moreno, R. pastor-satorras, 

and A. vespignani, physic review E 67, 046111 (2003). 
[8] M. A. serrano, M. boguná, and A. dı́az-guilera, phys- 

ical review letter 94, 038701 (2005). 

[9] M. á. serrano, M. boguná, and A. diaz-guilera, the 
european physic journal b-condens matter and 
complex system 50, 249 (2006). 

[10] M. boguná, F. papadopoulos, and D. krioukov, natur 
commun 1, 62 (2010). 

[11] F. papadopoulos, M. kitsak, M. á. serrano, M. boguná, 
and D. krioukov, natur 489, 537 (2012). 

[12] S. savage, T. anderson, A. aggarwal, D. becker, 
N. cardwell, A. collins, E. hoffman, J. snell, A. vah- 

dat, G. voelker, et al., micro, ieee 19, 50 (1999). 
[13] B. fortz and M. thorup, comput optim 

and applic 29, 13 (2004). 
[14] J. C. doyle, D. L. alderson, L. li, S. low, M. roughan, 

S. shalunov, R. tanaka, and W. willinger, pna of the 
unit state of america 102, 14497 (2005). 

[15] M. boguna, D. krioukov, and K. C. claffy, natur 
physic 5, 74 (2009). 

[16] M. boguná and D. krioukov, physic review letter 102, 
058701 (2009). 

[17] B. brisco and J. manner, internet engin task 
forc rfc, 7141 (2014). 

[18] P. F. syverson, M. G. reed, and D. M. goldschlag, 
journal of comput secur 5, 237 (1997). 

[19] D. goldschlag, M. reed, and P. syverson, communica- 
tion of the acm 42, 39 (1999). 

[20] the guardian, “nsa and gchq target tor network 
that protect anonym of web users,” http://goo.gl/ 
uizypd, accessed: 2016-05-20. 

[21] A. E. motter and y.-c. lai, physic review E 66, 
065102 (2002). 

[22] A. E. motter, physic review letter 93, 098701 (2004). 
[23] ucla comput scienc department’ internet re- 

search lab, “internet as-level topolog archive,” http: 
//irl.cs.ucla.edu/topology/. 

http://goo.gl/uizypd 
http://goo.gl/uizypd 
http://irl.cs.ucla.edu/topology/ 
http://irl.cs.ucla.edu/topology/ 


8 

[24] R. annessi and M. schmiedecker, in ieee european 
symposium on secur and privaci (2016). 

[25] R. annessi and M. schmiedecker, “navigator,” https: 
//naviga-tor.github.io/. 

[26] D. J. watt and S. H. strogatz, natur 393, 440 (1998). 
[27] R. cohen and S. havlin, physic review letter 90, 

058701 (2003). 
[28] M. E. newman, physic review letter 89, 208701 

(2002). 
[29] M. E. newman, physic review E 67, 026126 (2003). 

[30] L. A. N. amaral, A. scala, M. barthelemy, and H. E. 
stanley, pna 97, 11149 (2000). 

[31] V. colizza, A. flammini, M. A. serrano, and A. vespig- 
nani, natur physic 2, 110 (2006). 

[32] T. opsahl, V. colizza, P. panzarasa, and J. J. ramasco, 
physic review letter 101, 168702 (2008). 

[33] L. C. freeman, sociometri , 35 (1977). 
[34] S. B. seidman, social network 5, 269 (1983). 

https://naviga-tor.github.io/ 
https://naviga-tor.github.io/ 

model structur and resili of the dark network 
abstract 
I introduct 
II overview of the data set 
iii the structur of the darknet 
A character the darknet topolog 
B model the darknet structur 
C lack of ``rich club'' effect in the darknet 

IV resili of the darknet 
A resili to static failur 
B resili to dynam failur 

V conclus and discuss 
acknowledg 
refer 




