






































more than half of github be duplic code, research find â•¢ the regist 


more than half of github be duplic 
code, research find • the regist 

By richard chirgwin 21 nov 2017 at 03:57 

boffin beware: random sampl be therefor 

useless for research 

given that code share be a big part of the github mission, it should 

come at no surpris that the platform store a lot of duplic code: 70 

per cent, a studi have found. 

An intern team of eight research didn't set out to measur 

github duplication. their origin aim be to tri and defin the 

“granularity” of copi – that is, how much file chang between 

differ clone – but along the way, they turn up a “stagger rate 

of file-level duplication” that make them chang direction. 

present at thi year' oopsla (part of the late-octob associ of 

comput machinery) splash confer in vancouver, the 

univers of california at irvine-l research found that out of 428 

million file on github, onli 85 million be unique. 

befor reader say “so what?”, the reason for thi studi be to improv 

other researchers' work. anybodi studi softwar use github 

probabl seek random samples, and the author of thi studi argu 

duplic need to be take into account. 

As open sourc watcher adrian colyer blogged, “simpl random 

select be like to lead to sampl includ high duplication, which 

may bia the result of research”, so the paper' result public index of 

code duplication, which they'v dub “déjàvu”, help “understand 

the similar relat in sampl of projects, or to curat sampl to 

reduc duplicates”. 

for example, the studi said, if a research be studi how mani C and 

c++ program use assertions, duplic clearli skew their output; 

similarly, a softwar qualiti studi need to take duplic into 

more than half of github be duplic code, research find • the regist https://www.theregister.co.uk/2017/11/21/github_duplicate_code/ 

1 sur 3 30-11-17 à 18:54 



account. 

X = files, Y = commits, color = dupes. source: déjàvu: A map of code 

duplic on github, lope et al at acm 

déjàvu map file clone in java, c++, javascript and python. 

the research assess code duplic use a varieti of hash 

techniques. ident code be easy, sinc they produc ident 

hashes, but it be also necessari to take into account softwar with 

small chang (space or tabs), or even larg changes. 

To draw these other duplic into their sample, the research 

appli a “token hash” that captur minor chang in spaces, 

comments, and ordering; and a packag call 

sourcerercc 

to captur clone with edit too larg for the token hash. 

javascript be the most clone environ of all: a mere six per cent 

of file spawn the other 94 per cent of javascript file on github. Of 

more than half of github be duplic code, research find • the regist https://www.theregister.co.uk/2017/11/21/github_duplicate_code/ 

2 sur 3 30-11-17 à 18:54 



the c++ ecosystem, 73 per cent of file be duplicates; 71 per cent of 

python program be dupes. 

java develop be the most individualist of the four environ 

researched, “but even for java, 40% of the file be duplicates”. 

the other thing that probabl won't surpris reader be that duplic 

be primarili dependency-driven. javascript provid a good example: 

peopl creat a project would commit npm librari into their new 

repositori a if they be part of the applic code. 

As colyer wryli noted: “if ever you have felt like you be download 

the univers when run npm install, here’ the data to prove it: 

includ nest depend (nest up to 47 level deep be 

discovered, with median five) the number of uniqu includ project 

have median 63, and maximum 1261.” 

similarly, nearli all javascript programm suck jqueri into their 

projects. 

there' also programmers' habit a git users: “there be a lot more 

duplic of code that happen in github that do not go through 

the fork mechanism, and instead, go in via copi and past of file and 

even entir libraries”, the studi noted. ® 

more than half of github be duplic code, research find • the regist https://www.theregister.co.uk/2017/11/21/github_duplicate_code/ 

3 sur 3 30-11-17 à 18:54 


