




















































use virtual realiti to assess ethic decis in road traffic scenarios: applic of value-of-life-bas model and influenc of time pressur 


origin research 
published: 05 juli 2017 

doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2017.00122 

frontier in behavior neurosci | www.frontiersin.org 1 juli 2017 | volum 11 | articl 122 

edit by: 

nuno sousa, 

instituto de pesquisa em ciência da 

vida e da saúde, portug 

review by: 

claudio lucchiari, 

università degli studi di milano, itali 

fuat balci, 

koç university, turkey 

*correspondence: 

leon R. sütfeld 

lsuetfel@uos.d 

received: 06 march 2017 

accepted: 06 june 2017 

published: 05 juli 2017 

citation: 

sütfeld lr, gast R, könig P and 

pipa G (2017) use virtual realiti to 

assess ethic decis in road 

traffic scenarios: applic of 

value-of-life-bas model and 

influenc of time pressure. 

front. behav. neurosci. 11:122. 

doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2017.00122 

use virtual realiti to assess 
ethic decis in road traffic 
scenarios: applic of 
value-of-life-bas model and 
influenc of time pressur 
leon R. sütfeld*, richard gast, peter könig and gordon pipa 

neuroinformatics, institut of cognit science, osnabrück university, osnabrück, germani 

self-driv car be pose a new challeng to our ethics. By use algorithm to make 

decis in situat where harm human be possible, probable, or even unavoidable, 

a self-driv car’ ethic behavior come pre-defined. Ad hoc decis be make in 

milliseconds, but can be base on extens research and debates. the same algorithm 

be also like to be use in million of car at a time, increas the impact of ani inher 

biases, and increas the import of get it right. previou research have show 

that moral judgment and behavior be highli context-dependent, and comprehens 

and nuanc model of the underli cognit process be out of reach to date. 

model of ethic for self-driv car should thu aim to match human decis make 

in the same context. We employ immers virtual realiti to ass ethic behavior 

in simul road traffic scenarios, and use the collect data to train and evalu a 

rang of decis models. In the study, particip control a virtual car and have to 

choos which of two give obstacl they would sacrific in order to spare the other. We 

randomli sampl obstacl from a varieti of inanim objects, anim and humans. 

our model comparison show that simplemodel base on one-dimension value-of-lif 

scale be suit to describ human ethic behavior in these situations. furthermore, 

we examin the influenc of sever time pressur on the decision-mak process. We 

found that it decreas consist in the decis patterns, thu provid an argument 

for algorithm decision-mak in road traffic. thi studi demonstr the suitabl 

of virtual realiti for the assess of ethic behavior in humans, deliv consist 

result across subjects, while close match the experiment set to the real world 

scenario in question. 

keywords: self-driv cars, moral judgment, ethic decisions, modeling, virtual reality, value-of-lif scale, time 

pressur 

introduct 

privat own car with autopilot first becom a realiti with a softwar updat which tesla 
motor releas to it fleet in octob 2015, and mani compar system will be on the market 
soon. while initially, these system be like to be restrict to highway use, they will eventu 
make their way into cities, with estim predict autonom vehicl (avs) domin road 

http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neurosci 
http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neuroscience/editorialboard 
http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neuroscience/editorialboard 
http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neuroscience/editorialboard 
http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neuroscience/editorialboard 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2017.00122 
http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.3389/fnbeh.2017.00122&domain=pdf&date_stamp=2017-07-05 
http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neurosci 
http://www.frontiersin.org 
http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neuroscience/arch 
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 
mailto:lsuetfel@uos.d 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2017.00122 
http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnbeh.2017.00122/abstract 
http://loop.frontiersin.org/people/408334/overview 
http://loop.frontiersin.org/people/433603/overview 
http://loop.frontiersin.org/people/269/overview 
http://loop.frontiersin.org/people/4053/overview 


sütfeld et al. adv ethic assess and model 

traffic by the 2040 (marcus, 2012; litman, 2014). the new 
technolog be expect to reduc the number of car accid 
significantly: the german feder statist agenc report that 
in 2015, 67% of all accid with injuri to peopl be 
caus by driver misconduct. A 2008 survey by the nation 
highway traffic safeti administr (nhtsa) even show 
that human error play a crucial role in 93% of traffic accid 
in the us. these number outlin the enorm potenti of 
self-driv car regard road safety. In fact, johansson and 
nilsson (2016) claim that self-driv car will adjust their drive 
style and speed such that safe handl of ani unexpect 
event be guarante at all times. however, thi approach appear 
unrealist for mani mix traffic (human and avs) and inner 
citi scenarios. To ensur absolut safeti even in veri unlik 
events, the car would have to drive in an overli cautiou manner, 
and a a result may be switch off by mani drivers, or tempt 
other driver to engag in riski overtaking. other rare events, 
such a a distract human driver swerv into the opposit lane, 
seem veri hard to evad altogeth under ani circumstances. 
even when complet take human driver out of the equation, 
we be left with a consider number of accidents, caused, for 
instance, by technic or engin failur (goodall, 2014b). 
altogether, with over a billion car in oper worldwide, the 
sheer amount of traffic virtual guarante that, in spite of the 
overal expect reduct of accidents, critic situat will 
occur on a daili basis. 

with accid involv autonom car be and 
becom a reality, ethic consider will inevit come 
into play. ani decis that involv risk of harm to a human 
or even an anim be consid to be an ethic decision. 
thi includ everyday decisions, e.g., decid if and when to 
take a minor risk in overtak a cyclist. but it also includ 
quit rare situat in which a collis be unavoidable, but a 
decis can be make a to which obstacl to collid with. By 
reli on algorithm to make these decisions, a self-driv car’ 
ethic come pre-defin by the engineer, whether it’ do with 
sophist ethic system or simpl rule such a “alway stay 
in the lane.” thi develop pose a new challeng to the 
way we handl ethics. If human driver be in an accid and 
make a bad decis from an ethic standpoint, we count in 
their favor that they have incomplet knowledg of the situat 
and onli fraction of a second to make a decision. therefore, 
we typic refrain from assign ani blame to them, moral 
or legal (gogol and müller, 2017). algorithm in self-driv 
cars, on the other hand, can estim the potenti outcom of 
variou option within milliseconds, and make a decis that 
factor in an extens bodi of research, debates, and legisl 
(lin, 2013).moreover, the same algorithm be like to be use in 
thousand or million of car at a time. situat that be highli 
unlik for an individu car becom highli probabl over the 
whole fleet. thi enhanc the import of get it right, and 
unprepared to handl thi type of situat may result in a 
signific number of bad decis overall. 

ultimately, moral decision-mak system should be 
consid a necess for self-driv car (goodall, 2014a). the 
present studi address the question of how to ass and how 
to model human moral decision-mak in situat in which 

a collis be unavoid and a decis have to be make a to 
which obstacl to collid with. We conduct a virtual realiti 
(vr) studi in which particip have to make exactli thi type 
of decis for vari combin of obstacles, and use the 
obtain data to train and evalu a number of differ ethic 
decision-mak models. In the next section, we will review the 
current state of psycholog research with respect to moral 
judgment and decision-making, and deriv the outlin for the 
present experiment. 

the psycholog of moral judgment 
the scenario in thi studi can be see a an adapt of 
the trolley dilemma, a thought experi commonli use in 
research on moral judgment and decision-making, in which a 
runaway trolley be head toward a group of five people. the 
onli way to save these five be to pull a lever and divert the trolley 
onto a differ track, kill a singl person instead (thomson, 
1985). the utilitarian choic here be to pull the lever and sacrific 
one person in order to save five. By contrast, deontolog 
focu on the right of individuals, often put these ahead 
of utilitarian considerations. from thi perspective, the act of 
kill a person would be consid moral wrong, even if 
it mean save five other lives. In a popular alter of the 
trolley problem, call the footbridg dilemma, the subject find 
themself on a bridg over the track with a stranger. push 
the stranger off the bridg in front of the oncom train 
would stop the train and save the five peopl stand on the 
track. interestingly, most peopl say they would pull the lever 
in the origin trolley dilemma, but onli a minor also say 
they would push the stranger off the bridg in the footbridg 
dilemma (green et al., 2001). An extens bodi of psycholog 
research be concern with the affective, cognit and social 
mechan underli thi judgment, our ethic intuit and 
behavior (huebner et al., 2009; christensen and gomila, 2012; 
cushman and greene, 2012; waldmann et al., 2012; avramova 
and inbar, 2013). most prominently, the dual process theory, put 
forward by green et al. (2004), propos two distinct cognit 
system in competition. the first be an intuitive, emot 
root system, elicit neg affect when behavior rule 
be violated, favor decis in line with deontolog ethics. 
the second one be a controlled, reasoning-bas system, favor 
decis correspond with utilitarian ethics. greene’ dual- 
process theori thu explain the differ endors rate of 
utilitarian behavior in the trolley and footbridg dilemma by 
the more emot engag natur of the latter. push a 
stranger off a bridg instead of pull a lever requir person 
forc and us harm a a mean to an end, rather than a a side 
effect, both increas the emotion of the situation, and thu 
shift focu to the system favor deontolog ethic (green 
et al., 2001). similarly, frame a dilemma a more person (“i 
would do...” instead of “it be accept to...”) and increas 
the emot proxim to the potenti victim will also result 
in few utilitarian choic (green et al., 2001; tassi et al., 
2013). neuroscientif evid be provid by tassi et al. (2012), 
show that disrupt the right dorsolater prefront cortex, 
associ with emot processing, increas the likelihood 
of utilitarian responses. valdesolo and desteno (2006) found 

frontier in behavior neurosci | www.frontiersin.org 2 juli 2017 | volum 11 | articl 122 

http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neurosci 
http://www.frontiersin.org 
http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neuroscience/arch 


sütfeld et al. adv ethic assess and model 

an increas probabl of utilitarian respons when induc 
posit affect, argu that the posit affect may cancel out the 
neg affect connect to rule violations. 

however, the dual-process theory, base on the emotion- 
cognit distinct be not undisputed. cushman (2013) 
argu that while a distinct between compet process be 
necessary, the distinct between affect and non-affect 
process be inadequate, sinc both process must involv 
cognition, a well a affect content. instead, he propos a 
distinct base on two cognit mechan borrow from 
the field of reinforc learning. the first be an action-bas 
system, assign reward valu to possibl action in a give 
situation. these reward valu be learn from experi and 
static assign to a give situation-action-pair. the second 
mechan be outcome-bas and reli on an underli world 
model. In simplifi terms, it predict the consequ of the 
possibl action in a give situat and reassign the valu of 
the consequ to the action that lead to it. In the trolley 
dilemma, the outcome-bas system would favor utilitarian 
behavior, and the action-bas system would not interven 
becaus the action of pull a lever be not gener associ 
with neg reward. conversely, the action of push a person 
off a bridg be associ with neg reward, thu explain the 
low endors rate of utilitarian behavior in the footbridg 
dilemma. further evid in favor of the action vs. outcom 
distinct in dual-process model be given, e.g., in cushman et al. 
(2012) and franci et al. (2016). 

In anoth theori in the realm of moral judgment, haidt 
and graham (2007) aim to explain differ view of oppos 
polit camp (liber and conservatives) with a model of 
moral base on five factors, and the rel import of each 
of these factor to member of the polit camps. finally, base 
on a larg bodi of neuroscientif evidence, moll et al. (2008) 
propos a detail account of moral emot a the foundat 
of our moral judgment. while none of the two entail concret 
predict with respect to moral decision-mak in the trolley 
dilemma and similar scenarios, they demonstr that the scope 
of the dual-process theori be limited, and that we be a long way 
from a comprehens theori about the cognit mechan 
govern our moral judgment and behavior. 

virtual realiti assess and effect of 
time contraint 
while most of the aforement research reli on abstract, 
text-bas present of dilemma situations, a grow 
number of studi make use of the possibl provid by 
virtual realiti (vr) technology. vr, and in particular immers 
VR use head-mount display (hmds) and head-tracking, 
allow assess moral behavior in a naturalist way, immers 
the subject in the situation, provid much richer contextu 
information, and allow for more physic input methods. In 
an immers VR version of the trolley dilemma, navarret et al. 
(2012) be abl to confirm the utilitarian choice’ approv rate 
of 90%, previous found in text-bas studies. further, they 
found a neg correl between emot arous and 
utilitarian choices, in line with the predict of the dual process 

theory. In contrast to this, patil et al. (2014) found both emot 
arous and endors of utilitarian choic to be high in a 
desktop-vr set with 3D graphic on a desktop screen than in 
a text-bas setting. while hint toward a possibl distinct 
between moral judgment and behavior, the result also suggest 
that featur other than emot arous play a major role 
in our moral judgment. the author argu that the contextu 
salienc (includ a depict of the train run over the 
virtual humans) may have shift the subjects’ focu from the 
action itself toward the outcom of their decision. the tendenc 
to favor utilitarian judgment would then fit cushman’ account of 
the dual-process theory. In a similar studi by franci et al. (2016), 
particip be confront with the footbridg dilemma, either 
in an immers VR environ or in a text-bas scenario. In 
the text-bas condition, endors of the utilitarian choic 
be low at around 10%, in line with expect base on 
previou assessments. In the VR condition, however, subject 
opt to push the stranger off the bridg in up to 70% of the 
trials. these result be again in line with cushman’ account of 
the dual-process theory, and make a strong case for the notion 
of moral judgment and moral behavior be distinct constructs. 
In a differ approach, skulmowski et al. (2014) vari the 
standard design of the trolley dilemma in multipl ways. first, 
they virtual place particip in the trolley’ cockpit instead 
of a bystanders’ perspective. second, they design the track to 
split into three and block the middl track with a stationari 
trolley, which have to be avoided. particip be thu forc to 
choos between the outsid tracks, preclud the deontolog 
option of not interven in the situation. third, the subject 
have to react within 2.5 s after the obstacl becom visible. 
finally, in addit to vari the number of peopl on the 
avail tracks, the author add a number of trial with onli 
one person stand on either of the avail tracks. these 
differ in gender, ethnicity, and whether the person be face 
toward the trolley or away from it. unsurprisingly, the group 
be save in 96% of the the one-vs.-mani trials. In the singl 
obstacl trials, signific differ be onli found in the 
gender condit (decid between a man and a woman), with 
men be sacrific in around 58% of the cases. 

the natur pass of time be a featur inher to VR studi 
of thi kind. while in principle, it would be possibl to paus 
time in the virtual world, do so might break immers 
and would like lessen the ecolog valid of the obtain 
results. the previous mention studi all impos some 
time constraints, but no systemat variat of respons time 
window be performed. nevertheless, the dual-process theori 
would predict time pressur to influenc our moral judgment. 
the action-bas system in cushman’ account of the dual- 
process theori be thought to be simpl and quick, while the 
outcome-bas system involv high cognit load and be 
ultim slower. greene’ account of the dual-process theori 
suggest that in emot engag dilemmas, the control 
cognit system need to overrid the initi emot respons 
befor make a utilitarian judgment (greene, 2009). indeed, 
increas cognit load dure decis time be show to 
increas respons time in person dilemmas, when a utilitarian 
respons be give (green et al., 2008). paxton et al. (2012) 

frontier in behavior neurosci | www.frontiersin.org 3 juli 2017 | volum 11 | articl 122 

http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neurosci 
http://www.frontiersin.org 
http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neuroscience/arch 


sütfeld et al. adv ethic assess and model 

show that moral judgment can be chang with persuas 
arguments, but addit time for deliber be requir 
for the chang to occur. To the best of our knowledge, so far 
onli one studi systemat vari the length of respons time 
windows. In suter and hertwig (2011), particip be either 
restrict to give a respons within 8 s, or they have to first 
deliber for 3 min. for high-conflict scenarios, such a the 
footbridg dilemma, high time pressur lead to few utilitarian 
responses. A second experi in the same studi support thi 
finding. when no time limit be given, but one group 
be instruct to respond intuitively, and the other group be 
instruct to deliber befor enter a reaction, the intuit 
group’ respons time be a lot shorter than the deliber 
group’s, and they give few utilitarian responses. 

In conclusion, VR studi have show the import of 
contextu cue for our decision-mak and provid intrigu 
evid for a distinct of moral judgment and behavior. 
moreover, time constraints, a an inher featur to VR setups, 
have be recogn a a factor in our moral decision-making. 
there be evid suggest that longer deliber may 
facilit utilitarian decis in certain complex scenarios, but 
we still lack a systemat analysi of the influenc of time pressur 
on moral judgment. 

model of human moral behavior 
An import criterion that an ethic decision-mak system 
for self-driv car or other applic of machin ethic 
should meet be to make decis in line with those make by 
humans. while complex and nuanc ethic model capabl 
of replic our cognit process be out of reach to date, 
simpler model may deliv adequ approxim of human 
moral behavior, when the scope of the model be confin to a 
small and specif set of scenarios. value-of-life-bas model 
stand to reason a a possibl solut for ani situat in which 
a decis have to be make a to which one of two or more 
people, animals, other obstacles, or group thereof to collid 
with. An account of a value-of-lif model that be focu on 
a person’ age be give by johansson-stenman and martinsson 
(2008). the author conduct a large-scal survey in which 
peopl have to indic in sever instances, on which of two 
road-safety-improv measur they would rather spend a 
give budget. the avail measur differ with respect to 
the age and expect number of peopl that would be saved, 
a well a whether the one save would be pedestrian or car 
drivers. the author use a standard probit regress model to 
fit the observ data, and found that not the number of save 
lives, but rather the number of save life-year to be the most 
import factor in the subjects’ decision, allow for specif 
valu of life to be assign to each age group. beyond this, 
they found pedestrian to be valu high than car driver of 
the same age, indic consent a a factor in the valuation. 
while discrimin between potenti human crash victim 
base on age, or possibl gender, be unlik to gain gener public 
acceptance, goodal (2014a) suggest use value-of-lif scale 
in case where higher-level rule fail to provid the system with 
clear instructions. furthermore, if we take anim into account, 
value-of-lif scale stand to reason a a way of deal with vastli 

differ probabilities. when a decis have to be make between 
kill a dog with near certainti and take a 5% risk of injur 
a human, how should the algorithm decide? We don’t seem to 
take much issu with assign differ valu of life to differ 
species, and a system favor pet over game or bird might be 
accept in the public eye. while thi make the case for at least 
some form of value-of-lif model, it remain to be see to what 
extent such model be abl to captur the complex of human 
ethic decision-making. 

deriv and outlin the experi 
As discuss in previou sections, our moral judgment be highli 
depend on a wide varieti of contextu factors, and there be 
no ground truth in our ethic intuit that hold irrespect 
of context. We thu argu that ani implement of an 
ethic decision-mak system for a specif context should be 
base on human decis make in the same context. To date, 
our limit understand of the cognit process involv 
prevent u from construct a comprehens ethic model 
for use in critic real-world scenarios. In the context of self- 
drive cars, value-of-lif scale stand to reason a simpl model 
of human ethic behavior when a collis be unavoidable, and an 
evalu of their applic in thi context be the main focu 
of thi study. 

To thi end, particip be place in the driver’ seat of a 
virtual car head down a road in a suburban setting. immers 
VR technolog be use to achiev a maximum in perceiv 
presenc in the virtual world. A wide varieti of differ 
obstacles, both anim and inanimate, be randomli pair 
and present in the two lane ahead of the driver. particip 
have to decid which of the two they would save, and which 
they would run over. sinc prolong session in immers 
VR can caus nausea and discomfort, we opt for a pool 
experiment design with short session of 9 trial per condit 
and participant. We thu pool the trial of all participants, 
and use thi data set to train three differ logist regress 
model to predict the lane choic for a give combin of 
obstacles. (1) the pair model us each possibl pair of 
obstacl a a predictor. here, a give predict reflect the 
frequenc with which one obstacl be chosen over the other in 
the direct comparisons. sinc an obstacl be not repres with 
a singl numer value, the pair model be not a value-of-lif 
model, but serf a a frame of reference. (2) the obstacl model 
assign one coeffici to each obstacl and us the obstacles’ 
occurr a predictors. We interpret these coeffici a the 
obstacle’ valu of life. (3) the cluster model us onli one 
coeffici per categori of obstacles, a they result from a 
cluster base on the frequenc with which each obstacl 
be hit. 

We compar the three differ model to test a set of 
hypotheses. our first hypothesi be that a one-dimension 
value-of-life-bas model (i.e., the obstacl model) fulli captur 
the complex of pairwis comparisons. the obstacl model 
should thu be a accur a the pair model. thi would 
mean that our ethic decis can be describ by a simpl 
model in which each possibl obstacl be repres by a singl 
value, and the decis which obstacl to save be base onli on 

frontier in behavior neurosci | www.frontiersin.org 4 juli 2017 | volum 11 | articl 122 

http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neurosci 
http://www.frontiersin.org 
http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neuroscience/arch 


sütfeld et al. adv ethic assess and model 

these respect values. We further hypothes (hypothesi 2) 
that within-categori distinctions, for example, between human 
of differ age, be an import factor in the decisions. 
specifically, the obstacl model should prove to be superior 
to the cluster model. furthermore, sinc a certain amount of 
time pressur be inher to naturalist represent of thi 
scenario, we investig it influenc on the decis by vari 
the time to respond in two steps, give particip a respons 
window of either 1 or 4 s. We found 4 s of decis time to induc 
rel littl time pressur in the use scenario, while one 
second still left a suffici amount of time to comprehend and 
react. We hypothes (hypothesi 3) that more error would 
bemad under increas time pressure, and that ethic decis 
would thu be less consist across subject in these trials. the 
dual-process theori would predict a high endors of 
utilitarian choic with more time to deliber (i.e., in the slow 
condition). however, for comparison of singl obstacles, there 
be no clearli defin utilitarian choice. If anything, base the 
decis in human vs. human trial on a person’ expect year 
to live could be consid utilitarian, and be partli cover in 
hypothesi 2. moreover, the omiss of a lane change, despit 
run over the more valuabl obstacle, could be interpret a 
a deontolog choice, but we didn’t formul ani direct 
hypothesi regard thi factor prior to the study. 

method 

the experi ran in a 3D virtual realiti application, 
implement with the uniti game engine, use the oculu rift 
dk2 a the head-mount display. the audio be play through 
bose qc25 and sennheis hd215 headphon throughout the 
experiment. the particip be sit in the driver’ seat of 
a virtual car head down a suburban road. eventually, two 
obstacles, one on either lane, block the car’ path and the 
particip have to choos which of the two obstacl to hit. 
use the arrow key on the keyboard, the particip be 
abl to switch between the two lane at all times, up to a point 
approxim 15 m befor impact. thi way, we provid a high 
level of agency, intend to close resembl manual car driving, 
while make sure the decis could not be avoid by zig- 
zag in the middl of the road or crash the car befor 
reach the obstacles. We use 17 differ obstacl from three 
differ categories, i.e., inanim objects, animals, and human 
a singl obstacles, a well a composit obstacles. An empti lane 
be addit use a a control. for each trial, two of the 
17+1 obstacl be pseudo-randomli chosen and alloc to 
the two lanes, a be the start lane of the participant’ car. A 
wall of fog at a fix distanc from the participant’ point of view 
control the exact time of the obstacle’ onset. We vari the 
length of the reaction time window by vari the fog distanc 
and car speed, result in a window of 4 s for the slow, and 
one second for the fast condition. To indic how much time 
be left to make a decis at each point in time, a low-to-high 
sweep sound be play a an acoust cue. the sound start 
and end on the same respect frequenc in both conditions, 
thu sweep through the frequenc band quicker in the fast 
condition. after the decis time window have end around 

15 meter befor impact, the car kept moving, complet ani 
last instant lane changes. right befor impact, all movement 
be frozen, all sound stopped, and the screen fade to black, 
mark the end of a trial. figur 1 illustr the chronolog 
progress of the trial in the fast and slow condition, and 
give an overview of all obstacles. the fast and slow trial be 
present in separ block of 9 trial each. two more block of 
trial be present but not analyz in the current study, and 
all four block be present in random order. We chose 
obstacl pair such that each obstacl typic appear onc 
per subject and block. the frequenc of appear of all 153 
possibl pairings, a well a the lane alloc and start lanes, 
be balanc over all subjects. 

sampl and timelin 
our sampl consist of 105 particip (76 male, 29 female) 
between the age of 18 and 60 (mean: 31) years. We exclud one 
subject who report a partial misunderstand of the task, a 
well a three outlier whose decis be the opposit of the 
model predict (see below) inmor than 50% of their respect 
trials. most of the particip be univers student or visitor 
of the gap9 philosophi conference. befor participating, we 
inform all subject about the study, potenti risk and the 
option to abort the experi at ani time. they be also 
inform that the extern screen would be turn off dure 
the experiment, so that other could not observ their decisions. 
after sign a consent form, they be ask to put on the 
hmd and headphones, and then receiv all further inform 
within the application. As a first task, they have to complet 
a train trial, avoid three pylon by altern between 
the lanes. upon hit a pylon, the train trial be repeat 
until complet without error. thi procedur give particip 
a chanc to familiar themselv with the VR environment, and 
it make sure they have understood the control befor enter the 
experiment trials. the studi conform to the code of ethic 
of the american psycholog association, a well a to nation 
guidelines, and be approv by the osnabrück university’ 
ethic committee. 

result 

We pool all data and do not consid between-subject 
differ in the analysis. In the experiment trials, the mean 
number of lane switch per trial be 0.816 in the slow and 
1.037 in the fast condition. We estim error rate for both 
conditions, use trial in which one of the lane be empty. 
hit the onli obstacl in such a trial be consid an error, 
a we find it safe to assum that the outcom in these trial be 
a result of inadvert press the wrong button, instead of 
a meaning decision. thi event occur in 2.8% of all trial 
contain an empti lane in the slow condition, and in 12.0% of 
the relev trial in the fast condition. As a frame of reference, 
the chanc level for thi be at 50%. 

behavior model 
all model use in the present studi be logist regress 
models, use the occurr of obstacl pairings, individu 

frontier in behavior neurosci | www.frontiersin.org 5 juli 2017 | volum 11 | articl 122 

http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neurosci 
http://www.frontiersin.org 
http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neuroscience/arch 


sütfeld et al. adv ethic assess and model 

figur 1 | (left) overview of the experiment setting. (middle) timelin of the slow and fast conditions. (right) overview of all obstacl used. color indic 

cluster assignments. 

obstacl or clusters, i.e., obstacl categori (see below) in a 
particular trial a predictor for the lane choice. furthermore, we 
add a constant offset and the trial’ start lane a predictor 
to all models. the constant offset allow u to detect potenti 
bia in the overal lane prefer (left or right). such a bia 
could occur, for example, when particip be use to right- 
hand traffic and feel that use the right-hand lane be gener 
more acceptable. includ the start lane a a predictor 
allow u to detect a bia to stay in the respect trials’ start 
lane—w would label thi an omiss bias—or to move away 
from the start lane, i.e., a panic reaction bias. 

A model’ predict probabl of choos to drive in the left 
lane be give by p(i = left|x) = 1 

1+exp(−x) 
, with X be the 

model-specif represent of a particular trial. 
In the pair model, a trial be repres a Xp = cωi + 

sω + ωb, where ωi be the coeffici for obstacl pair i (e.g., 
{boy, woman}), c ∈ {−1, 1} be the lane configur in the 
respect trial (e.g., 1 if the boy be in the left lane, −1 if the 
woman be in the left lane), ωs be the start lane coefficient, 
s ∈ {−1, 1} be the start lane −1 if the start lane be right, 
and ωb be the coeffici for the lane bias. the model be thu 
make a predict base on a gener prefer for one of 
the lanes, the start lane of the respect trial, and which 
of the 153 possibl pair be present in the trial, result 
in 155 paramet in total. figur 2 left show the predict 
of the pair model. sinc each pair of obstacl have it 
own free parameter, the model allow for intransit and other 
complex relat between the obstacles. for example, in the slow 
condition, the pair model deem the goat to be more valuabl 
than the boar, and the boar to be more valuabl than the deer, 
but the goat to be less valuabl than the deer. consequentially, 
there be no singl valu of life for an obstacl in the pair model. 
An obstacle’ valu be onli defin rel to each of the other 
obstacles. 

In the obstacl model, a trial be repres a Xo = ωro − 
ωlo + sω + ωb, with ωro and ωlo be the coeffici for the 
right and left obstacl in the respect trial. each obstacl be 
thu repres by a singl characterist valu or valu of life. 
all pairwis comparison result directli from a subtract of 

the respect two valu of life. thus, when sort all obstacl 
accord to their valu of life on the abscissa and ordinate, 
the order in the vertic and horizont direct be strictli 
monoton (figur 2, middle). sinc there be 18 individu 
obstacles, the model have a total of 20 parameters, includ the 
lane bia and start lane coefficients. 

similarly, in the cluster model, a trial be repres a Xc = 
ωrc−ωlc+ sωs+ωb, with ωrc and ωlc be the coeffici of the 
cluster that the obstacl be assign to. We perform bottom- 
up cluster and subsequ model select to deriv the 
ideal number of cluster and cluster alloc of all present 
obstacl for the cluster model (see figur 3). logist regress 
model be first construct and fit for all possibl number 
of clusters, rang from 17 to 1. We then perform the model 
comparison via the bayesian inform criterion (bic). In 
the slow condition, the five cluster model be found to be 
the best of the cluster models. notably, it cluster alloc 
be perfectli in line with a categor in none, inanim 
objects, animals, humans, and group of human and animals. 
In the fast condition, a four cluster solut be found to be 
ideal, and it cluster alloc don’t align perfectli with the 
aforement semant categorization. thi be like the result 
of the high error rate in the fast condition. In order to still allow 
for a comparison between both conditions, we chose to use the 
aforement semant categor in five cluster for the 
fast condition, a well. for both conditions, the clustermodel thu 
have five paramet for the obstacl clusters, result in a total 
of onli seven parameters, includ the lane bia and start 
lane coefficients. figur 2 right show it predict in the slow 
condition. the model us onli one free paramet per cluster of 
obstacles, result in a block structure. sinc all obstacl within 
a cluster be consid equal in valu of life, the differ in the 
valu of life be alway exactli zero for within-clust comparisons. 
those decisions, therefore, depend entir on the start lane 
and overal lane preference. 

all model be fit use the logist regress algorithm 
in the scikit-learn (version 0.17.1) toolbox for python. We 
set the regular strength to a veri low valu of 10−9 

and base the model select on predict accuraci via 

frontier in behavior neurosci | www.frontiersin.org 6 juli 2017 | volum 11 | articl 122 

http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neurosci 
http://www.frontiersin.org 
http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neuroscience/arch 


sütfeld et al. adv ethic assess and model 

figur 2 | model predictions. (top) slow condition, (bottom) fast condition, (left) pair model, (middle) obstacl model, (right) cluster model. color indic 

the probabl of save the row-obstacl (y-axis) and sacrific the column-obstacl (x-axis). pink, green, blue, and black bar indic cluster assign base on 

agglom cluster in the slow condit (see figur 3). for mean of comparability, the cluster model in the fast condit be fit with the semant cluster 

assign from the slow condition. 

10-fold cross-validation, a well a the bayesian inform 
criterion. 

pair model vs. obstacl model 
In a first step, we compar the pair and the obstacl models. 
when model the train data set, model with a (much) 
high number of free paramet can describ the data better. 
however, in cross-validation, potenti overfit can lead to a 
reduc perform of the more detail model. indeed, with a 
predict accuraci of 91.64% in the slow condit and 80.75% 
in the fast condition, the obstacl model be slightli superior to 
the detail pair model, with predict accuraci of 89.33% 
and 78.77%, respectively. despit our extens data set with 
909 trial per condition, the larg number of paramet in the 
pair model caus overfitting. thi find translat to a much 
larg bic valu for the pair model (see tabl 1). thus, our 

result strongli favor the obstacl model for it low complex 
and reduc risk of overfitting. thi result, in combin with 
the high predict accuraci of the obstacl model in the slow 
condition, confirm our first hypothesis, i.e., one-dimension 
value-of-life-bas model can adequ captur the ethic 
decis we make in real life scenarios. 

obstacl model vs. cluster model 
In the slow condition, the obstacl model’ rank of coeffici 
valu within the categori mostli make sense, intuitively. for 
example, child be assign high valu than adult (boy: 
2.76, male adult: 2.12, correspond to a 65.5% chanc of save 
the boy in a direct comparison with a male adult). further, the 
dog be consist found to be the most valuabl of the animals. 
the predict accuracies, however, be essenti even between 
the obstacl model (91.64%) and the cluster model (91.20%), 

frontier in behavior neurosci | www.frontiersin.org 7 juli 2017 | volum 11 | articl 122 

http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neurosci 
http://www.frontiersin.org 
http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neuroscience/arch 


sütfeld et al. adv ethic assess and model 

figur 3 | dendrogram of bottom-up clustering, base on the observ frequenc with which each obstacl be spar (saved), for the slow and fast condit 

separately. 

with the cluster model score the low bic value, due to the 
reduc number of paramet (see tabl 1). these find 
be repeat in the fast condition. predict accuraci of the 
obstacl and cluster model be veri close to each other (80.75 
and 80.53%), and in term of bic valu the cluster model be 

superior. We thu have to reject our second hypothesis, becaus 
the cluster model with five cluster be select a superior to the 
obstacl model. In other words, we found no particular advantag 
of use obstacle-bas predictor instead of category-bas 
predictors. 

frontier in behavior neurosci | www.frontiersin.org 8 juli 2017 | volum 11 | articl 122 

http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neurosci 
http://www.frontiersin.org 
http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neuroscience/arch 


sütfeld et al. adv ethic assess and model 

tabl 1 | bic-valu and predict accuraci base on 10-fold cross-valid for the three model in the slow and fast condition. 

model SL LB paramet slow fast 

bic accuraci bic accuraci 

pair x x 155 1349.122 0.8933 1563.629 0.7877 

obstacl x x 20 556.845 0.9164 770.827 0.8075 

cluster x x 7 497.198 0.9120 691.389 0.8053 

cluster x 6 505.816 0.8922 685.797 0.8118 

cluster x 6 491.852 0.9120 684.656 0.8053 

cluster 5 499.809 0.8636 679.053 0.8229 

sl, includ the start lane a predictor; lb, includ a constant offset a predictor to model a lane bias. bold valu indic the best model in the list. 

bias 
To ass the two bia predictors’ import for the model, 
we ran anoth model comparison for three addit version 
of the cluster model. all three addit version be base 
on the abov model, but the first variant drop the start 
lane predictor, the second variant drop the lane bias, and 
the third variant drop both predictors. In the slow condition, 
the cluster model omit the lane bias, but includ the 
start lane predictor, score the low bic valu of all models. 
it predict accuraci be the same a that of the previous 
assess cluster model with both addit predictor (91.20%), 
make it the best explanatori model for the observ make 
in the slow condit (see tabl 1). thi be also reflect in 
the respect coefficients. when includ the predictor of the 
lane bias, it be fit to a valu of 0.15. the low valu indic 
onli a veri weak tendenc to the left lane, which make no 
signific contribut to the model fit. thus, even in thi rather 
realist scenario, particip treat both lane a equal valid 
drive lanes. the start lane predictor be fit to -0.47, 
indic a reluct to switch lane in the face of a decision, 
constitut an omiss bias. We can roughli quantifi the 
extent of thi reluct a be rather small, sinc coeffici 
differ between categori be in all case magnitud higher. 
the specif start lane in a trial would therefor not affect 
the decis in between categori comparisons. It does, however, 
play a role in within-categori decisions, a evid by the 4.8% 
gap in overal predict accuraci between the cluster model 
with and without the start lane a a predictor. In the fast 
condition, the best model, both in term of predict accuraci 
a well a bic score, be the one omit both bia predictor (see 
tabl 1). By omit the bia predictors, the predict accuraci 
increas from 80.53 to 82.29%, expos an overfit in the more 
complex model. In conclusion, the analysi of the bia predictor 
found lane prefer to have no substanti influenc on the 
decis make in thi paradigm, but do reveal an omiss bia 
when face similarli valu obstacl in the slow condition. 

influenc of increas time pressur 
We will now turn to a direct comparison of the slow and fast 
condition, to evalu the effect of increas time pressure. 
the most notabl differ between the two condit be the 
(estimated) error rate of 12.0% in the fast condition, mark a 
four-fold increas from the slow condition. As for the caus of 

the errors, we would expect an increas omiss bia if the 
error be caus by amer failur to react in time. interestingly, 
thi be not the case. instead, we found an omiss bia onli 
in the slow and not in the fast condition, indic that error 
in the fast condit be equal a result of stay in and 
switch into the lane of the more valuabl obstacle. A major 
increas in error rate also substanti decreas the expect 
predict accuraci even for a perfect model. thi be reflect in 
the predict accuraci for model in the fast condition, which 
be on averag roughli 10% below those for the correspond 
model in the slow condition. 

In the cluster analysis, we found a four cluster model to 
yield the low bic valu in the fast condition, instead of 
the five cluster model found to be ideal in the slow condition. 
moreover, the cluster assign for some of the obstacl be 
also different, and do no longer match the semant categori 
perfectli (see figur 2). these find be consist with the 
influenc of increas nois in the data, and can therefor 
also be ascrib to the increas error rates. sinc there be no 
match cluster model for both the slow and fast condition, 
we includ a comparison of the cluster model base on the 
semant defin categor in figur 4, but decid 
to focu on the obstacl model in the remaind of thi 
comparison. In the obstacl model, the coeffici rang in the 
fast condit be reduc to 50% of that in the slow condit 
(see figur 4). specifically, the obstacl on the extrem side 
of the spectrum—th empti lane and the group of human 
and animals—aren’t separ well from the adjac obstacl 
categories. To statist confirm thi observ difference, we 
use a nest model approach with log-likelihood ratio tests. 
for the nest model, we fit the joint dataset of fast and 
slow condit to the obstacl model use 19 predictors, i.e., 
the 18 obstacl plu the start lane. for the larg nest 
model, we add a second set of 19 predictors. these 19 be 
duplic of the first 19 predictors, but be fit onli on 
the slow condit trials. together, these two set form a 
model with 38 predictor in total. the log-likelihood ratio 
test between the nest and nest model be signific 
(p = 0.037), show that the reduct in paramet between 
the two significantli reduc model accuracy. In other words, the 
differ between the two condit be larg enough to justifi 
the use of two complet separ set of paramet to describ 
them. thi confirm our third hypothesis, i.e., increas time 

frontier in behavior neurosci | www.frontiersin.org 9 juli 2017 | volum 11 | articl 122 

http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neurosci 
http://www.frontiersin.org 
http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neuroscience/arch 


sütfeld et al. adv ethic assess and model 

figur 4 | (left) value-of-lif coeffici by condition. pictogram and color indic the categori empti lane, inanim objects, animals, humans, and group 

of human and anim (left to right). start lane coeffici depict a gray bars. (right) rel frequenc of “saving” the empti lane object, use a error rate 

estimates, for fast and slow condit separately. 

pressur significantli decreas the consist in the answer 
patterns. 

anoth notabl differ between the two condit be that 
we no longer observ a bia toward sacrific the male adult in 
direct stand-off with femal adults. instead, particip save 
male in 4 out of 7 case in the fast condition. the previous 
specul tendenc toward social desir would like reli 
on slow cognit processes, and thu not come into effect in 
fast-pac intuit decisions. 

discuss 

We investig the capabl of logist regression-bas value- 
of-lif model to predict human ethic decis in road 
traffic scenario with forc choic decisions, juxtapos a 
varieti of possibl obstacles, includ humans, animals, and 
inanim objects. the analysi incorpor variou contextu 
and psycholog factor influenc our moral decision-mak 
in these situations, and examin in particular the effect of 
sever time pressure. 

our first hypothesi be that a one-dimension value-of- 
life-bas model fulli captur the complex of pairwis 
comparisons. with predict accuraci well abov 90% in the 
slow condition, and clearli outperform the more complex 
pair model, the obstacl model prove to be capabl of 
accur predict the moral decis make in the pairwis 
comparisons. the first hypothesi be thu confirmed. note that 
sinc we use a wide rang of obstacles, we cannot preclud 
some more complex effect happen on a more detail level. 
one possibl exampl of such an effect be the following: In 
the slow condition, the obstacl model show male and femal 
adult to have compar value-of-lif coeffici with a slight 
advantag for the male (2.12 vs. 1.79), predict a 41.8% 
chanc of sacrific the male adult in a direct comparison. thi 
predict be base on all the trial it have seen, i.e., the full 
dataset includ all possibl combin of the 18 obstacles. 
still, adult male be actual sacrific in 4 out of the 5 
case (80%) of direct comparison between male and femal 
adults. thi observ be in line with skulmowski et al. (2014), 

who also found male to be sacrific more often in a direct 
comparison. interestingly, the author found the tendenc to 
sacrific male to be correl with a gener tendenc to answer 
accord to social desirability. In our study, the tendenc to 
sacrific male onli pertain to the slow and not to the fast 
condition, which make sense, if we assum that the effect be 
root in a tendenc toward social desirability. consider 
of social desir could be constru a part of the outcome- 
base system in cushman’ account of the dual-process theory, 
which be thought to be the slow one of the two processes. 
however, the low number of direct comparison thi figur 
be base on, and the exploratori natur of thi find, dictat 
caution with respect to it interpretation. We consid it a 
leverag point for futur research, but not a major result of thi 
study. 

our second hypothesi be that within-categori distinctions, 
for exampl between human of differ age, be an import 
factor in the decisions. thi hypothesi could not be confirm 
in thi study, a the obstacl model fail to show an advantag 
over the cluster model in describ the collect data. however, 
there be hint at a meaning structur within the clusters. 
for example, the obstacl model found child to have 
high valu than adults, and the dog, a the onli common 
pet among the anim shown, to have the high valu 
within the anim cluster. thus, give a larg data basis, 
we would still expect within-categori distinct to improv 
the predict make by value-of-lif models. In particular, 
we would expect age to play a role in human vs. human 
comparisons. survey by cropper et al. (1994) and johansson- 
stenman and martinsson (2008) have previous show that the 
valu we assign to someone’ life decreas consider with 
the person’ age. To what degre these judgment-bas find 
would also be reflect in assess of behavior be unclear, 
sinc judgment and behavior can yield dramat differ 
outcom (patil et al., 2014; franci et al., 2016). base on 
our findings, we specul that the differ in value-of-lif 
between peopl of differ age may be less pronounc in 
behavior assessments, but more data be need to clarifi thi 
point. 

frontier in behavior neurosci | www.frontiersin.org 10 juli 2017 | volum 11 | articl 122 

http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neurosci 
http://www.frontiersin.org 
http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neuroscience/arch 


sütfeld et al. adv ethic assess and model 

irrespect of the exact outcom of such assessments, system 
discrimin base on age, gender or other factor may be 
consid unaccept by the public, a well a by lawmakers. 
nevertheless, the idea of weigh life against one anoth isn’t 
gener rejected. As bonnefon et al. (2016) showed, a major 
of peopl would prefer a self-driv car act in a utilitarian 
manner, at least when it isn’t themselves, who be be sacrific 
for the great good. independ of whether or not human life 
should be weigh against one another, assign differ valu 
of life to anim even seem to be the logic choice, judg 
from how differ we treat differ speci of anim in other 
aspect of life. value-of-lif model base on speci would allow 
u to differenti between common pet and other animals, and 
would give u a tool to deal with situat in which the death of 
an anim could be avoid by take a minor risk of harm to a 
human. 

our third hypothesi be that ethic decis would be less 
consist across and within subject when the time to react 
be reduced. thi hypothesi be confirmed. the error rate be 
drastic increased, the cluster analysi reveal few cluster 
with slightli differ cluster assignments, and the rang of value- 
of-lif coeffici be significantli reduced. however, we cannot 
deduct from our data whether the decis make under time- 
pressur be in fact less clear-cut than decis form with 
more time for deliberation, or if the effect can be fulli explain 
by the increas error rate. still, a full second of time to react be a 
lot more than we typic encount in real-lif scenario of thi 
kind, and the weak consist in the decis pattern be a sign 
that we be ill-equip to make moral decis quickly, even 
when the situat come expectedly. We therefor argu that, 
under high time pressure, algorithm decis can be larg 
prefer to those make by humans. 

anoth noteworthi differ between the fast and slow 
condit concern the omiss bias, which we onli found 
in the slow, but not in the fast condition. particip be 
thu less like to switch lane and interfer in the situat 
when give more time to decide. thi fact can be interpret 
a a sign of a more deontolog reasoning—choos not 
to interfer in the situation, and possibl tri to reduc 
one’ own guilt despit caus great damag a a result. 
A tendenc toward deontolog reason with more time, 
however, conflict with both greene’ and cushman’ account 
of the dual-process theory, a well as, e.g., suter and hertwig 
(2011), who found that more time to decid will caus a shift 
toward utilitarian responses. one possibl decis differ 
between the present study, and most other studi touch 
on the aspect of time in moral decision-making, be the type 
of scenario use and the correspond absolut respons 
times. typically, the scenario use be rel complex moral 
dilemmas, and respons time lie in the 8–10 s rang for short, 
and up to sever minut in the longer or unconstrain 
condit (green et al., 2008; suter and hertwig, 2011; 
paxton et al., 2012). In contrast, the reaction time window 
of 4 and 1 s use in the present studi rather repres a 
distinct between short deliber and pure intuition. the 
fast condit may thu fall out of the dual-process theori 
scope. 

In thi study, we purpos construct a simpl scenario 
with clearli defin outcomes, featur the variabl necessari 
to fit value-of-lif models. with the gener applic of 
these value-of-lif model established, a number of ensu 
question arise. for example, what influenc a person’ emot 
and cognit featur have on their decision, how differ 
probabl of a collis or differ expect crash sever 
affect our judgment, and how group of multipl peopl or 
anim should be treat in such models. moreover, the option 
of self-sacrific have be promin discuss in literatur 
(lin, 2014; greene, 2016; gogol and müller, 2017; spitzer, 
2016), and be assess via questionnair in bonnefon et al. 
(2016), but hasn’t be includ in behavior studi so far. 
We specul that immers and perceiv presenc may have 
a particularli strong influenc on decis that touch upon 
one’ own well-being. beyond this, consider of fair 
need to be address a well—for example, if one person be 
stand on a sidewalk and anoth have carelessli step onto 
the street. while the choic of a wide rang of obstacl have 
proven help in understand the big picture, more research be 
need to answer open question about effect happen within 
the categories. the design choic we make allow u to focu 
on the applic of value-of-lif models, but the present studi 
do not provid a fleshed-out model for implement in self- 
drive cars. instead, it constitut a start point from which 
to investig systematically, how a varieti of other factor may 
influenc our moral decis in thi type of scenario and how 
they could be implemented. 

A limit factor for thi studi be the use of onli one instanc 
of each of the present obstacles. We tri to select and creat 
3D model that be a prototyp a possibl for their respect 
classes, but we cannot rule out that the specif appear of 
the obstacl may have have an impact on the decisions, and 
by extension, the coeffici valu assign to the obstacles. 
futur studi or assess that put more emphasi on the 
interpret of singl value-of-lif coefficients, should includ 
a varieti of instanc of each obstacle. furthermore, larg and 
explicitli balanc sampl would be need to obtain model 
suffici repres of a society’ moral judgment. anoth 
fair point of critic concern the plausibl of the present 
scenario. there be no option of brake dure up to 4 s of 
decis time, and the car be keyboard-control and could 
onli perform full lane switches. while there be good reason 
for these design choices, name to allow for enough decis 
time and to enforc a clear decis base on an unambigu 
scenario, they limit the virtual world’ authent and may 
hinder the subjects’ immersion. unfortunately, thi issu seem 
unavoid in control experiment settings. We believ that 
the virtual world implement for thi studi nevertheless fulfil 
a high standard of authent overall, and, under the give 
constraints, illustr the scenario in question a close to realiti 
a current possible. 

futur studi should further investig the role of the 
present mode in thi specif context. We argu that base 
on moral dilemma studies, a distinct between judgment and 
behavior may be justified. however, it remain to be see if 
there be a seizabl differ for specif the kind of situat 

frontier in behavior neurosci | www.frontiersin.org 11 juli 2017 | volum 11 | articl 122 

http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neurosci 
http://www.frontiersin.org 
http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neuroscience/arch 


sütfeld et al. adv ethic assess and model 

use in thi studi that justifi the special effort that go into 
the design of a virtual realiti environment. finally, base on 
our findings, the influenc of time pressur could be assess in 
great detail, expand the consid time frame beyond the 
1-4 s range. 

conclus 

We argu that the high contextu depend of moral decis 
and the larg number of ethic relev decis that self- 
drive car will have to make, call for ethic model base on 
human decis make in compar situations. We show 
that in the confin scope of unavoid collis in road 
traffic, simpl value-of-lif model approxim human moral 
decis well. We thu argu that these model be a viabl 
solut for real world applic in self-driv cars. with 
respect to trust in the public eye, their simplic could constitut 
a key advantag over more sophist models, such a 
neural networks. furthermore, regress model can includ 
addit factor such a probabl of injuri for the parti 
involved, and help to make reason decis in situat 
where these differ greatly. they also provid an easi option 
to deal with a vast number of possibl obstacles, by test a 
few and make reason interpolations, e.g., for peopl of 
differ age, take away the requir of assess each 
conceiv obstacl individually. that be said, the model 
of within-clust differences, e.g., between human of differ 
age or between differ speci of animals, fail to improv 
upon the rather coars cluster models. We further found time 
pressure, a an inher featur to naturalist portrait of the 
scenario in question, to consider decreas the consist 

in the decis pattern and call for more investig of 
the effect of time pressur on moral decision-making. overall, 
we argu that thi line of research, despit be met with 
some skeptic (johansson and nilsson, 2016), be import 
to manufactur and lawmakers. the sheer expect number 
of incid where moral judgment come into play creat 
a necess for ethic decision-mak system in self-driv 
car (goodall, 2014a). We therefor hope to see more effort 
toward establish a sound basi for the methodolog of 
empir assess human ethic in the future, a the topic 
be becom increasingli import with more advanc in 
technology. 

author contribut 

ls: lead role in planning, implementation, data acquisit 
and data analysis. writer of the paper. rg: involv in planning, 
data acquisit and data analysis. gave feedback to earli 
version of the paper. GP and pk: involv in planning, data 
acquisit and data analysis, and give feedback to earli 
version of the paper. 

acknowledg 

the author would like to thank jann nagel for the 
implement of the uniti app, our research assist 
artur czeszumski, anja faulhaber, nicol knodel, maria 
sokotushchenko, lisa steinmetz, and lisa-mari vortmann for 
their help dure the data acquisit phase. We acknowledg 
support by deutsch forschungsgemeinschaft (dfg) and open 
access publish fund of osnabrück university. 

refer 

avramova, Y. r., and inbar, Y. (2013). emot and moral judgment. wiley 

interdiscip. rev. cogn. sci. 4, 169–178. doi: 10.1002/wcs.1216 

bonnefon, j.-f., shariff, a., and rahwan, I. (2016). the social dilemma of 

autonom vehicles. scienc 352, 1573–1576. doi: 10.1126/science.aaf2654 

christensen, J. f., and gomila, A. (2012). moral dilemma in cognit 

neurosci of moral decision-making: a principl review. neurosci. 

biobehav. rev. 36, 1249–1264. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2012.02.008 

cropper, M. l., aydede, S. k., and portney, P. R. (1994). prefer for life save 

programs: how the public discount time and age. J. risk uncertain. 8, 243–265. 

doi: 10.1007/bf01064044 

cushman, F. (2013). action, outcome, and valu a dual-system framework for 

morality. pers. soc. psychol. rev. 17, 273–292. doi: 10.1177/1088868313495594 

cushman, f., gray, k., gaffey, a., and mendes, W. B. (2012). simul murder: 

the avers to harm action. emot 12:2. doi: 10.1037/a0025071 

cushman, f., and greene, J. D. (2012). find faults: how moral 

dilemma illumin cognit structure. soc. neurosci. 7, 269–279. 

doi: 10.1080/17470919.2011.614000 

francis, K. b., howard, c., howard, I. s., gummerum, m., ganis, g., anderson, 

g., et al. (2016). virtual morality: transit from moral judgment to moral 

action? plo one 11:e0164374. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0164374 

gogoll, j., andmüller, J. F. (2017). autonom cars: in favor of amandatori ethic 

setting. sci. eng. ethic 23, 681–700. doi: 10.1007/s11948-016-9806-x 

goodall, N. J. (2014a). ethic decis make dure autom vehicl 

crashes. transport. res. record J. transport. res. board 2424, 58–65. 

doi: 10.3141/2424-07 

goodall, N. J. (2014b). “machin ethic and autom vehicles,” in road vehicl 

automation, ed G. meyer and S. beiker (cham: springer intern 

publishing), 93–102. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-05990-7_9 

greene, J. D. (2009). “the cognit neurosci of moral judgment,” in the 

cognit neurosciences, 4th edn., ed M. gazzaniga (mit press), 987–999. 

greene, J. D. (2016). our driverless dilemma. scienc 352, 1514–1515. 

doi: 10.1126/science.aaf9534 

greene, J. d., morelli, S. a., lowenberg, k., nystrom, L. e., and cohen, J. D. (2008). 

cognit load select interfer with utilitarian moral judgment. cognit 

107, 1144–1154. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2007.11.004 

greene, J. d., nystrom, L. e., engell, A. d., darley, J. m., and cohen, J. D. (2004). 

the neural base of cognit conflict and control in moral judgment. neuron 

44, 389–400. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.09.027 

greene, J. d., sommerville, R. b., nystrom, L. e., darley, J. m., and cohen, J. D. 

(2001). An fmri investig of emot engag in moral judgment. 

scienc 293, 2105–2108. doi: 10.1126/science.1062872 

haidt, j., and graham, J. (2007). when moral oppos justice: conserv 

have moral intuit that liber may not recognize. soc. just. res. 20, 98–116. 

doi: 10.1007/s11211-007-0034-z 

huebner, b., dwyer, s., and hauser, M. (2009). the role of emot in 

moral psychology. trend cogn. sci. 13, 1–6. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2008. 

09.006 

johansson, r., and nilsson, J. (2016). “disarm the trolley problem—whi 

self-driv car do not need to choos whom to kill,” in workshop car 

2016 - critic automot applications: robust and safety, ed M. roy 

(göteborg). avail onlin at: https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01375606/ 

file/cars2016_paper_16.pdf 

frontier in behavior neurosci | www.frontiersin.org 12 juli 2017 | volum 11 | articl 122 

https://doi.org/10.1002/wcs.1216 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaf2654 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2012.02.008 
https://doi.org/10.1007/bf01064044 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1088868313495594 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0025071 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17470919.2011.614000 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0164374 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-016-9806-x 
https://doi.org/10.3141/2424-07 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-05990-7_9 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaf9534 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2007.11.004 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2004.09.027 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1062872 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11211-007-0034-z 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2008.09.006 
https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01375606/file/cars2016_paper_16.pdf 
https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01375606/file/cars2016_paper_16.pdf 
http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neurosci 
http://www.frontiersin.org 
http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neuroscience/arch 


sütfeld et al. adv ethic assess and model 

johansson-stenman, o., and martinsson, P. (2008). are some life more 

valuable? an ethic prefer approach. J. health econ. 27, 739–752. 

doi: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2007.10.001 

lin, P. (2016). “the ethic of autonom cars,” in the atlantic. avail onlin 

at: https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2013/10/the-ethics-of- 

autonomous-cars/280360/ (access octob 10, 2016). 

lin, P. (2014). here’ terribl idea: robot car with adjust ethic 

settings. wired.com. avail onlin at: http://www.wired.com/2014/08/ 

heres-a-terrible-idea-robot-cars-with-adjustable-ethics-set 

litman, T. (2014). autonom vehicl implement predictions. victor. 

transp. polici inst. 28. 

marcus, G. (2012).moral machines. new yorker blogs. avail onlin at: http:// 

www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/moral-machin (access septemb 

28, 2016). 

moll, j., de oliveira-souza, r., zahn, r., grafman, j., and sinnott-armstrong, W. 

(eds.). (2008).moral psychology, vol. 3, the neurosci of morality: emotion, 

brain disorders, and development. cambridge, ma: mit press. 

navarrete, C. d., mcdonald, M. m., mott, M. l., and asher, B. (2012). virtual 

morality: emot and action in a simul three-dimension “trolley 

problem.” emot 12:364. doi: 10.1037/a0025561 

patil, i., cogoni, c., zangrando, n., chittaro, l., and silani, G. (2014). 

affect basi of judgment-behavior discrep in virtual experi 

of moral dilemmas. soc. neurosci. 9, 94–107. doi: 10.1080/17470919.2013. 

870091 

paxton, j.m., ungar, l., andgreene, J. D. (2012). reflect and reason inmor 

judgment. cogn. sci. 36, 163–177. doi: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2011.01210.x 

skulmowski, a., bunge, a., kaspar, k., and pipa, G. (2014). forced- 

choic decision-mak in modifi trolley dilemma situations: a 

virtual realiti and eye track study. front. behav. neurosci. 8:426. 

doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00426 

spitzer,m. (2016). editorial: sollt mein automich umbringenwollenmüssen. da 

google-auto und die ethik. nervenheilkund 35, 451–455. avail onlin at: 

http://www.schattauer.de/t3page/1214.html?manuscript=26096 

suter, R. s., and hertwig, R. (2011). time and moral judgment. cognit 119, 

454–458. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2011.01.018 

tassy, s., oullier, o., duclos, y., coulon, o., mancini, j., deruelle, c., et al. (2012). 

disrupt the right prefront cortex alter moral judgement. soc. cogn. affect. 

neurosci. 7, 282–288. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsr008 

tassy, s., oullier, o., mancini, j., and wicker, B. (2013). discrep between 

judgment and choic of action in moral dilemmas. front. psychol. 4:250. 

doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00250 

thomson, J. J. (1985). the trolley problem. yale law J. 94, 1395–1415. 

doi: 10.2307/796133 

valdesolo, p., and desteno, D. (2006). manipul of emot context 

shape moral judgment. psychol. sci. 17, 476–477. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9280. 

2006.01731.x 

waldmann, M. r., nagel, j., and wiegmann, A. (2012). “moral judgment,” in the 

oxford handbook of think and reasoning, ed K. J. holyoak and R. G. 

morrison (new york, ny: oxford univers press), 364–389. 

conflict of interest statement: the author declar that the research be 

conduct in the absenc of ani commerci or financi relationship that could 

be constru a a potenti conflict of interest. 

copyright © 2017 sütfeld, gast, könig and pipa. thi be an open-access articl 

distribut under the term of the creativ common attribut licens (cc by). 

the use, distribut or reproduct in other forum be permitted, provid the 

origin author(s) or licensor be credit and that the origin public in thi 

journal be cited, in accord with accept academ practice. No use, distribut 

or reproduct be permit which do not compli with these terms. 

frontier in behavior neurosci | www.frontiersin.org 13 juli 2017 | volum 11 | articl 122 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2007.10.001 
https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2013/10/the-ethics-of-autonomous-cars/280360/ 
https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2013/10/the-ethics-of-autonomous-cars/280360/ 
http://www.wired.com/2014/08/heres-a-terrible-idea-robot-cars-with-adjustable-ethics-set 
http://www.wired.com/2014/08/heres-a-terrible-idea-robot-cars-with-adjustable-ethics-set 
http://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/moral-machin 
http://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/moral-machin 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0025561 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17470919.2013.870091 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1551-6709.2011.01210.x 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00426 
http://www.schattauer.de/t3page/1214.html?manuscript=26096 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2011.01.018 
https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsr008 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00250 
https://doi.org/10.2307/796133 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01731.x 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 
http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neurosci 
http://www.frontiersin.org 
http://www.frontiersin.org/behavioral_neuroscience/arch 

use virtual realiti to assess ethic decis in road traffic scenarios: applic of value-of-life-bas model and influenc of time pressur 
introduct 
the psycholog of moral judgment 
virtual realiti assess and effect of time contraint 
model of human moral behavior 
deriv and outlin the experi 

method 
sampl and timelin 

result 
behavior model 
pair model vs. obstacl model 
obstacl model vs. cluster model 
bias 

influenc of increas time pressur 

discuss 
conclus 
author contribut 
acknowledg 
refer 


