






































voter ID law realli Do discriminate, a new studi show 


voter ID law realli Do discriminate, 
a new studi show 

author: issi lapowskyissi lapowski 

be abl to match voter with their record in ID databas use just a few 

basic detail might help dispel some myth about whom law do and don’t 

hurt. 

frank augugliaro 

after announc the closur of hi short-liv commiss to end voter 

fraud, presid trump make it clear thursday that he want more 

state to requir identif at the ballot box to prevent what he 

believ be rampant—but still unproven—elect rigging. 

ever sinc the suprem court struck down a key part of the vote 

right act in 2013, law requir voter to show identif when 

they vote have speckl the nation, pop up in state from rhode 

island to arizona. almost a quickly, vote right advoc have take 

state like texa and alabama to court, argu that these law 

intent discrimin against minor voters. just last summer, a 

feder judg toss out texas’ voter ID law, in a case that’ now be 

voter ID law realli Do discriminate, a new studi show https://www.wired.com/story/voter-id-law-algorithm/ 

1 sur 5 06-01-18 à 13:28 



revisit by an appeal court. but prove exactli how discriminatori 

these law be requir far more complex than it might seem. 

sure, there be endless anecdot of well-meaning, well-prepar 

citizen be turn away on elect day, but anecdot be not data. 

there be ampl survey ask voter whether these law come 

between them and the ballot box, but peopl can alway misrepres 

themselv on surveys, and court tend to dismiss them, anyway. seven 

state includ social secur number in voter file and driver' licens 

records, but across the rest of the country, determin whether a singl 

individu voter be also list in ani number of identif databas 

have becom a complex and nettlesom problem for vote access 

advoc and statist research alike. 

recently, however, research at tuft univers and harvard 

univers demonstr that it' possibl to match individu across 

govern databas with nearli perfect accuracy, use just a few 

basic identifi like a person’ name, date of birth, and address. they 

develop the algorithm while work a expert wit in the 

depart of justice' case against texas. now, in a newli publish 

paper, research stephen ansolabeher of harvard and eitan hersh 

of tuft have explain the underli methodology. their goal, 

accord to hersh, be to creat a system court can easili understand, 

which can not onli be use in futur voter ID law cases, but can also 

help dispel some myth about who those law do and don’t hurt. 

“the more we can agre on method that be easi to explain, the good 

off we are,” say hersh. 

A better model 

If all data be clean and complete, it wouldn’t be so hard to figur out 

if a voter named, say, john smith, be the same john smith list in 

the feder driver’ licens database. accord to hersh and 

ansolabehere’ research, onli 1 in 2.7 billion individu have the same 

zip code, gender, date of birth, and last name, make those four detail 

combin a fairli spot-on indic of a person’ identity. but often, 

govern record contain typos, incomplet fields, nicknames, or 

outdat addresses. To link databases, research often need to make 

do with less information. 

voter ID law realli Do discriminate, a new studi show https://www.wired.com/story/voter-id-law-algorithm/ 

2 sur 5 06-01-18 à 13:28 



they also need to be abl to show their work in a way that lawyer and 

judg can understand. So mani algorithm that purport to match 

peopl across databas run up against the so-cal black box problem. 

they may be abl to make statist sound decisions, but they can't 

easili explain how they make them. In a recent suprem court hear 

over partisan gerrymand in wisconsin, chief justic john robert 

dismiss research-back method to measur gerrymand a 

"sociolog gobbledygook." hersh and ansolabeher want to 

develop a tool that could be easili understood. 

'the more we can agre on method that be easi to explain, the good 

off we are.' 

eitan hersh, tuft univers 

so, work with the depart of justice, the research set out to 

determin whether they could match voter on the voter roll with their 

correspond record in ID databas use just a few basic details. To 

do that, they develop an algorithm that scan the state of texas’ 

voter roll and compar it to the feder list of driver licenses, state 

ids, and conceal handgun permits, among other form of accept 

identification. It scan each record by address, date of birth, gender, 

and name, to see if, for instance, a combin of address, gender, and 

name would be a accur a predictor a a combin of date of birth, 

gender, and name. 

To check their results, the research reli on a subset of the voter 

data that contain social secur numbers. those record effect 

serv a the algorithm’ answer key. they ultim found that 98 

percent of the record that could be match use social secur 

number could also be match use ani three of the four key 

identifiers—address, date of birth, gender, and name. 

“thi combin be a good a a social secur number,” hersh says. 

that high accuraci rate be essenti in court, say charl stewart iii, a 

polit scientist at massachusett institut of technology, who have 

serv a an expert wit in a case against south carolina' voter ID 

law. most database-match algorithm be use in low-risk scenarios, 

he explains, like advertising, where compani want to target custom 

across a rang of platforms. If they target the wrong customer, at worst, 

voter ID law realli Do discriminate, a new studi show https://www.wired.com/story/voter-id-law-algorithm/ 

3 sur 5 06-01-18 à 13:28 



they'v lose a margin amount of money. In court, it could mean lose 

the case altogether. "there be realli no room for error," stewart says, 

cite the risk of have to demonstr an algorithm' chop befor the 

bench. "if the judg doesn't get match properly, for instance, you 

might a well have not do anything." 

deep impact 

onc hersh and ansolabeher be confid they have properli 

match regist voter to their ID records, they use a commerci 

tool call catalist to predict each voter' race. that tool analyz name 

to determin how like a give name be to be associ with one race 

or another. It also account for the demograph of the censu block 

where a give voter lives. use thi tool, the research confirm 

what vote right advoc alreadi know to be true—that black voter 

be more like to lack adequ identif under voter ID laws. 

accord to the study, 3.6 percent of regist white voter have no 

match in ani state or feder ID database. By contrast, 7.5 percent of 

black regist voter be miss from those databases. 

the algorithm show a clear and disturb racial dispar on vote 

rights. but hersh say that it also show that voter ID law affect a 

rel small percentag of the population. across all regist 

voter in texas, the research found 4.5 percent lack proper 

identification. for regist voter who actual show up at the poll 

in 2012, it' 1.5 percent. 

"you'r down to a small percentag of the popul that doesn't have 

an id," say hersh. that' one reason why, despit alabama' restrict 

voter ID law, black turnout in the recent senat elect still exceed 

expectations. still, while the percentag may sound small, that 4.5 

percent still repres 608,470 texa citizen who could potenti be 

disenfranchised. 

hersh say he agre the public ought to be outrag by racial 

motiv attempt to suppress the vote, and that court ought to crack 

down on the practice. but he caution against democrat artifici 

inflat the impact of voter ID law in their messaging. shortli after 

the 2016 election, democrat senat tammi baldwin attribut the 

entir dropoff in voter turnout in wisconsin to the state' new voter ID 

voter ID law realli Do discriminate, a new studi show https://www.wired.com/story/voter-id-law-algorithm/ 

4 sur 5 06-01-18 à 13:28 



law. hersh point to plenti of other reason whi voter turnout may 

have be down in wisconsin in 2016, includ the simpl fact that 

hillari clinton didn't campaign in wisconsin. 

"it ... can be danger to sow doubt in the integr of the elect 

system with these big claims," hersh says. besides, the raw data be bad 

enough. 

and hersh' find be limit to texas. In other state with less of a 

car cultur and more dens popul cities, the number of peopl 

who lack ID may be a high a 10 percent, mit' stewart explains. and 

becaus thi studi onli look at voter who be current registered, 

stewart says, it doesn't take into account the discourag effect that 

voter ID law may have on peopl attempt to regist in the first 

place. 

"whether it’ intend to harm 600,000 african american and latino 

voter or 2 million, our concern be peopl be pass these law with 

the intent to discrimin or the effect of discriminating," say deuel 

ross, a civil right attorney for the legal defens fund. 

now, scienc be bring peopl like ross that much closer to prove it. 

update: 8:43 be ET 01/04/17 thi stori have be updat to includ 

the president' tweet and news about the voter fraud commission' 

closure. 

voter ID law realli Do discriminate, a new studi show https://www.wired.com/story/voter-id-law-algorithm/ 

5 sur 5 06-01-18 à 13:28 


