













































research new 

contact 
jani eitner | fraunhofer-gesellschaft, munich | commun | phone +49 89 1205-1333 | presse@zv.fraunhofer.d 
ann rommel | fraunhof institut for telecommunications, heinrich hertz institut hhi | phone +49 30 31002-353 | 
einsteinuf 37 | 10587 berlin | www.hhi.fraunhofer.d | anne.rommel@hhi.fraunhofer.d 

februari 2017 || page 1 | 3 

cebit 2017: analysi softwar for neural network 
watch comput think 
neural network be commonli use today to analyz complex data – for 
instanc to find clue to ill in genet information. ultimately, though, 
no one know how these network actual work exactly. that be whi fraun- 
hofer research develop softwar that enabl them to look into these 
black box and analyz how they function. the research will present their 
softwar at cebit in hannov from march 20 to 24, 2017 (hall 6, booth B 36). 

• the softwar recogn which paramet a neural network us to make 
decisions. 
• It be of interest for ani area in which data such a text, imag and signal 
be automat process and evalu by neural networks. 
• for example, the softwar can analyz complex product data and deduc 
which paramet be decis for product qualiti or possibl deviations. 

sort photo on the comput use to be a tediou job. today, you simpli click on 
face recognit and instantli get a select of photo of your daughter or son. 
comput have gotten veri good at analyz larg volum of data and search for 
certain structures, such a face in images. thi be make possibl by neural networks, 
which have develop into an establish and sophist IT analysi method (see 
box, “how neural network function”). 

the problem be that it isn’t just research who current don’t know exactli how 
neural network function step by step, or whi they reach one result or another. neural 
network are, in a sense, black box – comput program that peopl feed valu 
into and that reliabl return results. If you want to teach a neural network, for instance, 
to recogn cats, then you instruct the system by feed it thousand of cat pictures. 
just like a small child that slowli learn to distinguish cat from dogs, the neural 
network, too, learn automatically. “in mani cases, though, research be less 
interest in the result and far more interest in what the neural network actual 
do – how it reach decisions,” say dr. wojciech samek, head of the machin 
learn group at fraunhof heinrich hertz institut hhi in berlin. So samek and hi 
team, in collabor with colleagu from TU berlin, develop a method that make 
it possibl to watch a neural network think. 



research new 

februari 2017 || page 2 | 3 

machin learn enabl custom cancer treatment 

thi be important, for instance, in detect diseases. We alreadi have the capabl 
today to feed patients’ genet data into comput – or neural network – which then 
analyz the probabl of a patient have a certain genet disorder. “but it would be 
much more interest to know precis which characterist the program base it 
decis on,” say samek. It could be certain genet defect the patient have – and 
these, in turn, could be a possibl target for a cancer treatment that be tailor to 
individu patients. 

neural network in revers 

the researchers’ method allow them to watch the work of the neural network in 
reverse: they work through the program backwards, start from the result. “we can 
see exactli where a certain group of neuron make a certain decision, and how 
strongli thi decis impact the result,” say samek. the research have alreadi 
impress demonstr – multipl time – that the method works. for instance, they 
compar two program that be publicli avail on the internet and that be both 
capabl of recogn hors in images. the result be surprising. the first program 
actual recogn the horses’ bodies. the second one, however, focu on the 
copyright symbol on the photos, which point to forum for hors lovers, or rid 
and breed associations, enabl the program to achiev a high success rate even 
though it have never learn what hors look like. 

applic in big data 

“so you can see how import it be to understand exactli how such a network func- 
tions,” say samek. thi knowledg be also of particular interest to industry. “it be con- 
ceivable, for instance, that the oper data of a complex product plant could be 
analyz to deduc which paramet impact product qualiti or caus it to fluctuate,” he 
says. the invent be also interest for mani other applic that involv the neural 
analysi of larg or complex data volumes. “in anoth experiment, we be abl to 
show which paramet a network us to decid whether a face appear young or old.” 

accord to samek, for a long time bank have even be use neural network to 
analyz bank customers’ creditworthiness. To do this, larg volum of custom data 
be collect and evalu by a neural network. “if we knew how the network 
reach it decision, we could reduc the data volum right from the start by select 
the relev parameters,” he says. thi would certainli be in the customers’ interests, 
too. At the cebit trade fair in hannov from march 20 to 24, 2017, samek’ team of 
research will demonstr how they use their softwar to analyz the black box of 
neural network – and how these network can deduc a person’ age or sex from their 
face, or recogn animals. 



research new 

februari 2017 || page 3 | 3 


how neural network function 

neural network function, a their name suggests, base on the same principl a the 
brain. just a variou area of nerv cells, the neurons, cooper in our brain, math- 
emat unit work togeth in the artifici neural network. A photo that, to a 
computer, be initi onli an unord cloud of pixels, be systemat analyz by 
these group of artifici neurons. some neuron recogn edg while other recog- 
nize corners. bit by bit, the imag becom clear to the computer. ultimately, the 
outcom of thi neural comput oper be a probabl valu – the comput 
calculates, for example, how like it be that a face actual do correspond to that of 
the person be sought. 

fraunhof hhi’ analysi softwar us algorithm to visual complex learn process 

(schemat diagram). © fraunhof hhi | pictur in color and print quality: www.fraunhofer.de/ 

en/press 

the fraunhofer-gesellschaft be the lead organ for appli research in europe. it research activ be conduct by 67 fraunhof 
institut and research unit at locat throughout germany. the fraunhofer-gesellschaft employ a staff of 24,000, who work with an annual 
research budget total more than 2.1 billion euros. Of thi sum, more than 1.8 billion euro be gener through contract research. more than 
70 percent of the fraunhofer-gesellschaft’ contract research revenu be deriv from contract with industri and from publicli financ research 
projects. branch in the america and asia serv to promot intern cooperation. 


