






































We might onli see time becaus we canâ•žt think in quantum physic 


We might onli see time becaus we can’t think in quantum 
physic 

By leah crane 

A glass be much easi to smash than to unsmash 

sohl/getti 

predict the futur be easy, if you be a physicist. break a glass, and you can boldli assert that it will fall into 
a number of shards, assum you know the initi conditions. know the past be more difficult – you need 
to store much more inform to piec a pile of broken glass back together. 

thi “causal asymmetry” make it easi to determin caus and effect and thu place event in order. but it 
doesn’t exist in the quantum world, say mile Gu at nanyang technolog univers in singapore. quantum 
physic us the same amount of inform to trace an event backward in time a forwards. thi find could 
have implic for how we perceiv time itself. 

Gu and hi colleagu found that when a quantum comput model a system that seem causal 
asymmetr to a classic computer, the asymmetri can disappear. In some cases, the amount of memori 
you need to store inform be the same in both tempor directions, so there be no concept of caus and 
effect. 

advertis 

We might onli see time becaus we can’t think in quantum physic https://www.newscientist.com/article/2174978-we-might-only-see-time-... 

1 sur 2 04-08-18 à 12:16 



quantum movi 

Gu describ model ordinari physic a watch a film. “if you watch the movi in the correct direction, 
it make much more sense,” he says. but for a quantum movie, both direct make sense. 

hi team test thi idea with a simpl system, a list of one and zeroes. imagin the one and zero a tile 
on a path run south to north. you be task with cross out each zero that lie immedi north of a 
one. 

If you walk forwards, south to north, thi be simpl – if the last tile you step on be a one and now you be 
on a zero, you can cross it out. but if you walk backwards, north to south, you need to know what the next tile 
south be befor you reach it. that be whi the classic system requir store more inform move 
backward than forwards. 

In the quantum system, a you walk in either direction, you place all of the tile with zero into entangl 
quantum states, both cross off and not cross off. the entangl store some of that information, 
mean you use less memory, say gu. 

the weird properti of quantum physic mean that onc inform on all the tile have be gather in a 
quantum state, measur that state produc the correct answer, no matter which direct you travelled, he 
says. 

“thi be a big area in quantum comput – to see, onc we’v built these things, what they’ll be good for,” 
say gu. “system with causal asymmetri be a class of problem where these quantum machin can have 
a signific advantage.” 

A quantum model will alway need less memori than a classic one, so use a quantum comput to model 
a process in revers will take less inform than use a classic comput to model the process forwards. 
sometimes, a quantum comput will need the same amount of memori to run forward or backwards, 
elimin causal asymmetri all together. 

that mean that, in some cases, our percept of caus and effect may come from our inabl to process 
inform in a quantum way. “we perceiv thi asymmetri becaus we reason classically,” say gu. 
“it be possibl that if we evolv to reason quantum mechanically, we might not perceiv time.” 

other be less convinced. “I would not draw ani philosoph implic from thi work,” say howard 
wiseman at griffith univers in australia – after all, larg object like u can never perceiv the quantum 
world directly. 

journal reference: physic review X, doi: 10.1103/physrevx.8.031013 

more on these topics: 

quantum scienc 
time 

We might onli see time becaus we can’t think in quantum physic https://www.newscientist.com/article/2174978-we-might-only-see-time-... 

2 sur 2 04-08-18 à 12:16 


