






































what intellig machin need to learn from the neocortex - ieee spectrum 


machin won’t becom intellig unless they incorpor certain featur of 
the human brain. here be three of them 

advertis 

work and play, 

transport and medicine, entertain and 

sports. yet for all their power, these machin still 

cannot perform simpl task that a child can do, such 

a navig an unknown room or use a pencil. 

comput have transform 

the solut be final come within reach. It will 

emerg from the intersect of two major pursuits: 

the revers engin of the brain and the 

burgeon field of artifici intelligence. over the 

next 20 years, these two pursuit will combin to 

usher in a new epoch of intellig machines. 

whi do we need to know how the brain work to build 

intellig machines? although machine-learn 

techniqu such a deep neural network have 

recent make impress gains, they be still a world 

away from be intelligent, from be abl to 

understand and act in the world the way that we do. 

the onli exampl of intelligence, of the abil to learn 

from the world, to plan and to execute, be the brain. 

therefore, we must understand the principl 

underli human intellig and use them to guid 

u in the develop of truli intellig machines. 

, 

in redwood city, calif., we studi the neocortex, the 

brain’ larg compon and the one most 

respons for intelligence. our goal be to understand 

how it work and to identifi the underli principl 

of human cognition. In recent years, we have make 

signific stride in our work, and we have identifi 

sever featur of biolog intellig that we 

believ will need to be incorpor into futur 

think machines. 

At my company, numenta (http://numenta.com/) 

To understand these principles, we must start with 

some basic biology. the human brain be similar to a 

what intellig machin need to learn from the neocortex - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the... 

1 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36 



(/the-human-os/biomed 

/devices/tiny-implantable-microcoils-in- 

the-brain-activate-neurons-via-magnetic- 

fields) 

(/static/special- 

report-can-we- 

copy-the-brain) 

reptile’ brain. each have a spinal cord, which control 

reflex behaviors; a brain stem, which control 

autonom behavior such a breath and heart 

rate; and a midbrain, which control emot and 

basic behaviors. but humans, inde all mammals, 

have someth reptil don’t: a neocortex. 

(http://dev.biologists.org/content/141/1/11) 

the neocortex be a deepli fold sheet some 2 

millimet thick that, if laid out flat, would be about 

a big a a larg dinner napkin. In humans, it take up 

about 75 percent of the brain’ volume. thi be the part that make u smart. 

At birth, the neocortex know almost nothing; it learn through experience. everyth we learn about 

the world—driv a car, oper a coffe machine, and the thousand of other thing we interact with 

everi day—i store in the neocortex. It learn what these object are, where they be in the world, and 

how they behave. the neocortex also gener motor commands, so when you make a meal or write 

softwar it be the neocortex control these behaviors. language, too, be creat and understood by the 

neocortex. 

the neocortex, like all of the brain and nervou system, be make up of cell call 

thus, to 

understand how the brain works, you need to start with the neuron. your neocortex have about 30 billion 

of them. A typic neuron have a singl tail-lik 

and sever treelik extens call 

If you think of the neuron a a kind of signal system, the axon be the transmitt 

and the dendrit be the receivers. along the branch of the dendrit lie some 5,000 to 10,000 

synapses, each of which connect to counterpart on thousand of other neurons. there be thu more 

than 

synapt connections. 

neurons. 

(http://www.brainfacts.org/brain-basics/neuroanatomy/articles/2012/the-neuron/) 

axon (https://www.sciencedaily.com/terms/axon.htm) 

dendrites. (http://www.cerebromente.org.br/n07/fundamento 

/neuron/parts_i.htm) 

100 trillion (https://decodethemind.wordpress.com/2010/09/10/more-brain-connections-than- 

stars-in-the-universe-no-not-even-close/) 

your experi of the world around you—recogn a friend’ face, enjoy a piec of music, hold a 

bar of soap in your hand—i the result of input from your eyes, ears, and other sensori organ travel 

to your neocortex and caus group of neuron to fire. when a neuron fires, an electrochem spike 

travel down the neuron’ axon and cross synapsi to other neurons. If a receiv neuron get enough 

input, it might then fire in respons and activ other neurons. Of the 30 billion neuron in the 

neocortex, 1 or 2 percent be fire at ani give instant, which mean that mani million of neuron will 

be activ at ani point in time. the set of activ neuron chang a you move and interact with the world. 

your percept of the world, what you might consid your consciou experience, be determin by the 

constantli chang pattern of activ neurons. 

the neocortex store these pattern primarili by form new synapses. thi storag enabl you to 

recogn face and place when you see them again, and also recal them from your memory. for 

example, when you think of your friend’ face, a pattern of neural fire occur in the neocortex that be 

similar to the one that occur when you be actual see your friend’ face. 

remarkably, the neocortex be both complex and simpl at the same time. It be complex becaus it be 

divid into dozen of regions, each respons for differ cognit functions. within each region 

what intellig machin need to learn from the neocortex - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the... 

2 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36 



photo: dan saeling 

there be multipl layer of neurons, a well a dozen of neuron types, and the neuron be connect in 

intric patterns. 

the neocortex be also simpl becaus the detail in everi region be nearli identical. through evolution, a 

singl algorithm develop that can be appli to all the thing a neocortex does. the exist of such a 

univers algorithm be excit becaus if we can figur out what that algorithm is, we can get at the heart 

of what it mean to be intelligent, and incorpor that knowledg into futur machines. 

but isn’t that what AI be alreadi doing? isn’t most of AI built on “ 

” similar to those in the brain? not really. while it be true 

that today’ AI techniqu refer neuroscience, they use an overli simplifi neuron model, one that 

omit essenti featur of real neurons, and they be connect in way that do not reflect the realiti of 

our brain’ complex architecture. these differ be many, and they matter. they be whi AI today 

may be good at label imag or recogn spoken word but be not abl to reason, plan, and act in 

creativ ways. 

neural network 

(http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/) 

our recent advanc in understand how the neocortex work give u insight into how futur think 

machin will work. I be go to describ three aspect of biolog intellig that be essential, but 

larg miss from today’ ai. they be learn by rewiring, spars representations, and embodiment, 

which refer to the use of movement to learn about the world. 

brain exhibit some remark learn properties. first, we learn quickly. alearn by rewiring: 

what intellig machin need to learn from the neocortex - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the... 

3 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36 



few glanc or a few touch with the finger be often suffici to learn someth new. second, 

learn be incremental. We can learn someth new without retrain the entir brain or forget 

what we learn before. third, brain learn continuously. As we move around the world, plan and 

acting, we never stop learning. fast, incremental, and continu learn be essenti ingredi that 

enabl intellig system to adapt to a chang world. the neuron be respons for learning, and the 

complex of real neuron be what make it a power learn machine. 

In recent years, neuroscientist have learn some remark thing about the dendrite. one be that 

each of it branch act a a set of pattern detectors. It turn out that just 15 to 20 activ synapsi on a 

branch be suffici to recogn a pattern of activ in a larg popul of neurons. therefore, a singl 

neuron can recogn hundr of distinct patterns. some of these recogn pattern caus the neuron 

to becom active, but other chang the intern state of the cell and act a a predict of futur activity. 

neuroscientist use to believ that learn occur sole by modifi the effect of exist 

synapsi so that when an input arriv at a synaps it would either be more like or less like to make 

the cell fire. however, we now know that most learn result from grow 

between cells—bi “rewiring” the 

brain. Up to 40 percent of the synapsi on a neuron be replac with new one everi day. new synapsi 

result in new pattern of connect among neurons, and therefor new memories. becaus the 

branch of a dendrit be mostli independent, when a neuron learn to recogn a new pattern on one 

of it dendrites, it doesn’t interfer with what the neuron have alreadi learn on other dendrites. 

new synapsi 

(https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2013/10/131010205325.htm) 

thi be whi we can learn new thing without interfer with old memori and whi we don’t have to 

retrain the brain everi time we learn someth new. today’ neural network don’t have these 

properties. 

what intellig machin need to learn from the neocortex - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the... 

4 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36 



neuron mimicri explain 

intellig machin don’t have to model all the complex of biolog neurons, but the capabl 

enabl by dendrit and learn by rewir be essential. these capabl will need to be in futur AI 

systems. 

brain and comput repres inform quit differently. In a 

computer’ memory, all combin of 1 and 0 be potenti valid, so if you chang one bit it will 

typic result in an entir differ meaning, in much the same way that chang the letter to in 

the word result in an unrel word, . such a represent be therefor brittle. 

spars representations: 

i a 

fire fare 

brains, on the other hand, use what’ call 

, or sdrs. they’r call spars becaus rel few neuron be 

fulli activ at ani give time. which neuron be activ chang moment to moment a you move and 

think, but the percentag be alway small. If we think of each neuron a a bit, then to repres a piec of 

inform the brain us thousand of bit (mani more than the 8 to 64 use in computers), but onli a 

spars distribut represent (http://www.cortical.io 

/technology_representations.html) 

what intellig machin need to learn from the neocortex - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the... 

5 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36 



small percentag of the bit be 1 at ani time; the rest be 0. 

let’ say you want to repres the concept of “cat” use an sdr. you might use 10,000 neuron of 

which 100 be active. each of the activ neuron repres some aspect of a cat, such a “pet,” or “furry,” 

or “clawed.” If a few neuron die, or a few extra neuron becom active, the new sdr will still be a good 

represent of “cat” becaus most of the activ neuron be still the same. sdr be thu not brittl but 

inher robust to error and noise. when we build silicon version of the brain, they will be 

intrins fault tolerant. 

there be two properti of sdr I want to mention. one, the overlap property, make it easi to see how 

two thing be similar or differ in meaning. imagin you have one sdr repres “cat” and anoth 

repres “bird.” both the “cat” and “bird” sdr would have the same activ neuron repres 

“pet” and “clawed,” but they wouldn’t share the neuron for “furry.” thi exampl be simplified, but the 

overlap properti be import becaus it make it immedi clear to the brain how the two object be 

similar or different. thi properti confer the power to generalize, a capabl lack in computers. 

the second, the union property, allow the brain to repres multipl idea simultaneously. imagin I 

see an anim move in the bushes, but I get onli a glimpse, so I can’t be sure of what I saw. It might be 

a cat, a dog, or a monkey. becaus sdr be sparse, a popul of neuron can activ all three sdr 

at the same time and not get confused, becaus the sdr will not interfer with one another. the abil 

of neuron to constantli form union of sdr make them veri good at handl uncertainty. 

such properti of sdr be fundament to understanding, thinking, and plan in the brain. We can’t 

build intellig machin without embrac sdrs. 

the neocortex receiv input from the sensori organs. everi time we move our eyes, 

limbs, or body, the sensori input change. thi constantli chang input be the primari mechan the 

brain us to learn about the world. imagin I present you with an object you have never see before. for 

the sake of discussion, let’ say it’ a stapler. how would you learn about the new object? you might walk 

around the stapler, look at it from differ angles. you might pick it up, run your finger over it, and 

rotat it in your hands. you then might push and pull on it to see how it behaves. through thi interact 

process, you learn the shape of the stapler, what it feel like, what it look like, and how it behaves. you 

make a movement, see how the input change, make anoth movement, see how the input chang 

again, and so on. learn through movement be the brain’ primari mean for learning. It will be a 

central compon of all truli intellig systems. 

embodiment: 

thi be not to say that an intellig machin need a physic body, onli that it can chang what it sen 

by moving. for example, a virtual AI machin could “move” through the web by follow link and 

open files. It could learn the structur of a virtual world through virtual movements, analog to 

what we do when walk through a building. 

thi bring u to an import discoveri we make at numenta last year. In the neocortex, sensori input 

be process in a hierarchi of regions. As sensori input pass from one level of the hierarchi to another, 

more complex featur be extracted, until at some point an object can be recognized. deep-learn 

network also use hierarchies, but they often requir 100 level of process to recogn an image, 

wherea the neocortex achiev the same result with just four levels. deep-learn network also requir 

million of train patterns, while the neocortex can learn new object with just a few movement and 

sensations. the brain be do someth fundament differ than a typic artifici neural network, 

but what? 

what intellig machin need to learn from the neocortex - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the... 

6 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36 



, the 19th-centuri 

german scientist, be one of the first peopl to suggest an answer. He observ that, although our eye 

move three to four time a second, our visual percept be stable. He deduc that the brain must take 

account of how the eye be moving; otherwis it would appear a if the world be wildli jump about. 

similarly, a you touch something, it would be confus if the brain process onli the tactil input and 

didn’t know how your finger be move at the same time. thi principl of combin movement with 

chang sensat be call 

how and where sensorimotor integr occur in the brain be mostli a mystery. 

hermann von helmholtz (https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/hermann-helmholtz/) 

sensorimotor integration. (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articl 

/pmc3154729/) 

our discoveri be that sensorimotor integr occur in everi region of the neocortex. It be not a separ 

step but an integr part of all sensori processing. sensorimotor integr be a key part of the 

“intellig algorithm” of the neocortex. We at numenta have a theori and a model of exactli how 

neuron do this, one that map well onto the complex anatomi see in everi neocort region. 

what be the implic of thi discoveri for machin intelligence? consid two type of file you 

might find on a computer. one be an imag file produc by a camera, and the other be a computer-aid 

design file produc by a program such a autodesk. An imag file repres a two-dimension array of 

visual features. A cad file also repres a set of features, but each featur be assign a locat in 

three-dimension space. A cad file model complet objects, not how the object appear from one 

perspective. with a cad file, you can predict what an object will look like from ani direct and 

determin how an object will interact with other 3D objects. you can’t do these with an imag file. our 

discoveri be that everi region of the neocortex learn 3D model of object much like a cad program. 

everi time your bodi moves, the neocortex take the current motor command, convert it into a locat 

in the object’ refer frame, and then combin the locat with the sensori input to learn 3D model 

of the world. 

In hindsight, thi observ make sense. intellig system need to learn multidimension model of 

the world. sensorimotor integr doesn’t occur in a few place in the brain; it be a core principl of 

brain function, part of the intellig algorithm. intellig machin also must work thi way. 

attribut of the neocortex—learn by rewiring, spars distribut 

representations, and sensorimotor integration—wil be cornerston of machin intelligence. futur 

think machin can ignor mani aspect of biology, but not these three. undoubtedly, there will be 

other discoveri about neurobiolog that reveal other aspect of cognit that will need to be 

incorpor into such machin in the future, but we can get start with what we know today. 

these three fundament 

from the earli day of ai, critic dismiss the idea of tri to emul human brains, often with the 

refrain that “airplan don’t flap their wings.” In reality, wilbur and orvil wright studi bird in 

detail. To creat lift, they studi bird-w shape and test them in a wind tunnel. for propulsion, 

they go with a nonavian solution: propel and motor. To control flight, they observ that bird twist 

their wing to bank and use their tail to maintain altitud dure the turn. So that’ what they did, too. 

airplan still use thi method today, although we twist onli the tail edg of the wings. In short, the 

wright brother studi bird and then chose which element of bird flight be essenti for human 

flight and which could be ignored. that’ what we’ll do to build think machines. 

As I consid the future, I worri that we be not aim high enough. while it be excit for today’ 

comput to classifi imag and recogn spoken queries, we be not close to build truli intellig 

machines. I believ it be vital import that we do so. the futur success and even surviv of human 

what intellig machin need to learn from the neocortex - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the... 

7 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36 



may depend on it. for example, if we be ever to inhabit other planets, we will need machin to act on 

our behalf, travel through space, build structures, mine resources, and independ solv complex 

problem in environ where human cannot survive. here on earth, we face challeng relat to 

disease, climate, and energy. intellig machin can help. for example, it should be possibl to design 

intellig machin that sens and act at the molecular scale. these machin would think about protein 

fold and gene express in the same way you and I think about comput and staplers. they could 

think and act a million time a fast a a human. such machin could cure diseas and keep our world 

habitable. 

In the 1940s, the pioneer of the comput age sens that comput be go to be big and 

beneficial, and that it would like transform human society. but they could not predict exactli how 

comput would chang our lives. similarly, we can be confid that truli intellig machin will 

transform our world for the better, even if today we can’t predict exactli how. In 20 years, we will look 

back and see thi a the time when advanc in brain theori and machin learn start the era of true 

machin intelligence. 

jeff hawkin be the cofound of , a redwood city, calif., compani that 

aim to revers engin the neocortex. 

numenta (http://numenta.com/) 

advertis 

special report: can WE copi the brain? 
(/static/special-report-can-we-copy-the-brain) 

previou 
the brain a 
computer: bad 
at math, good 
at everyth 
els 

next 
how to digit 

a rat brain 
(/video/biomed 

/imaging/how-to- 

digitize-a-rat-brain) 

what intellig machin need to learn from the neocortex - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the... 

8 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36 



(/computing/hardware/the-brain-as- 

computer-bad-at-math-good-at- 

everything-else) 

(/the-human- 

os/biomed 

/bionics/brainy- 

startup-neurable- 

unveils-the-worlds- 

first-braincontrolled- 

vr-game) 

(/the-human- 

os/biomed 

/imaging/ai-makes- 

anthrax-bioterror- 

detection-easier) 

(/the-human- 

os/biomed 

/diagnostics/teenage- 

whiz-kid-invents-an- 

ai-system-to- 

diagnose-her- 

grandfathers-eye- 

disease) 

(/aerospace/satellit 

/is-there-a-giant- 

planet-lurking- 

beyond-pluto) 

(/biomedical/devic 

/smart-contact- 

lenses-and-eye- 

implants-will-give- 

doctors-medical- 

insights) 

(/comput 

/software/the-2017- 

top-programming- 

languages) 

what intellig machin need to learn from the neocortex - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the... 

9 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36 



what intellig machin need to learn from the neocortex - ieee spectrum http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the... 

10 sur 10 07/08/2017 19:36 


