
















































1 



whi a right to explan of autom decision-mak do not exist in the gener 

data protect regul 



sandra wachter,1,2 brent mittelstadt,2,3,1 luciano floridi1,2 




1oxford internet institute, univers of oxford, 1 St giles, oxford, ox1 3js, unit 

kingdom; 2the alan ture institute, british library, 96 euston rd, london, nw1 2db, 

unit kingdom; 3depart of scienc and technolog studies, univers colleg 

london, 22 gordon square, london, wc1e 6bt, unit kingdom. 



correspondence: sandra wachter, sandra.wachter@oii.ox.ac.uk 





abstract 

sinc approv of the EU gener data protect regul (gdpr) in 2016, it have be 

wide and repeatedli claim that the gdpr will legal mandat a ‘right to explanation’ of 

all decis make by autom or artifici intellig algorithm systems. thi right to 

explan be view a an ideal mechan to enhanc the account and transpar 

of autom decision-making. however, there be sever reason to doubt both the legal 

exist and the feasibl of such a right. In contrast to the right to explan of specif 

autom decis claim elsewhere, the gdpr onli mandat that data subject receiv 

meaningful, but properli limited, inform (articl 13-15) about the logic involved, a well 

a the signific and the envisag consequ of autom decision-mak systems, 

what we term a ‘right to be informed’. further, the ambigu and limit scope of the ‘right 

not to be subject to autom decision-making’ contain in articl 22 (from which the 

alleg ‘right to explanation’ stems) rais question over the protect actual afford to 

data subjects. these problem show that the gdpr lack precis languag a well a explicit 

and well-defin right and safeguard against autom decision-making, and therefor run 

the risk of be toothless. We propos a number of legisl and polici step that, if taken, 

may improv the transpar and account of autom decision-mak when the 

gdpr come into forc in 2018. 



keyword 

accountability; artifici intelligence; algorithms; autom decision-making; data protection; 

right to explanation; right of access; transparency. 









2 



fund 

thi studi be fund by the alan ture institut (luciano floridi and sandra wachter), the 

petra iot hub - a epsrc project (sandra wachter, luciano floridi and brent mittelstadt), 

and a research grant from the univers of oxford’ john fell fund (brent mittelstadt). 







3 



1 introduction1 

In recent months, researchers,2 govern bodies,3 and the media4 have claim that a ‘right 

to explanation’ of decis make by autom and artifici intellig algorithm system 

be legal mandat by the forthcom EU gener data protect regulation5 2016/679 





1 We be deepli indebt to prof. peggi valcke, prof. massimo durante, prof. ugo pagallo, dr. natascha scherzer 

and mag. priska lueger for their invalu comment and insight feedback, from which the paper greatli 

benefitted. We want to especi thank dr. alessandro spina whose intens review and in-depth comment 

strengthen the argument in the paper. further we be greatli thank to dr. jori van hoboken for the inspir 

convers a well a write feedback on the draft that significantli improv the qualiti of the paper. further 

we want to thank prof. tal zarski and prof. lee bygrav not onli for their pioneer and ground-break work 

that inspir thi paper, but also their posit feedback, in-depth review and invalu comments. last but not 

least we want to thank the anonym review for the time spent read and comment so thoroughli on the 

paper. 
2 see for example: bryce goodman and seth flaxman, ‘eu regul on algorithm decision-mak and a 

“right to explanation”’ [2016] arxiv:1606.08813 [cs, stat] <http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.08813> access 30 june 

2016; francesca rossi, ‘artifici intelligence: potenti benefit and ethic considerations’ (european 

parliament: polici depart C: citizens’ right and constitut affair 2016) brief PE 571.380 

<http://www.europarl.europa.eu/regdata/etudes/brie/2016/571380/ipol_bri(2016)571380_en.pdf>; 

mireil hildebrandt, ‘the new imbroglio - live with machin algorithms’, the art of ethic in the 

inform societi (2016) <https://works.bepress.com/mireille_hildebrandt/75/> access 28 decemb 2016; 

ieee global initiative, ‘ethic align design - A vision for priorit human wellb with 

artifici intellig and autonom systems’ (ieee 2016) version 1 

<http://standards.ieee.org/develop/indconn/ec/ead_v1.pdf> access 19 januari 2017; ben wagner, ‘effici 

vs. accountability? – algorithms, big data and public administration’ <https://cihr.eu/efficiency-vs- 

accountability-algorithms-big-data-and-public-administration/> access 14 januari 2017; fusion, ‘eu 

introduc “right to explanation” on algorithm | fusion’ (2016) <http://fusion.net/story/321178/european- 

union-right-to-algorithmic-explanation/> access 10 novemb 2016. quot ryan calo. 
3 see for example: inform commissioner’ office, ‘overview of the gener data protect regul 

(gdpr)’ (inform commissioner’ offic 2016) 1.1.1 <https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/data-protection- 

reform/overview-of-the-gdpr/individuals-rights/rights-related-to-automated-decision-making-and-profiling/> 

access 10 novemb 2016; hous of common scienc and technolog committee, ‘robot and artifici 

intelligence’ (hous of common 2016) HC 145 

<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmselect/cmsctech/145/145.pdf> access 10 novemb 

2016; european parliament committe on legal affairs, ‘report with recommend to the commiss on 

civil law rule on robotics’ (european parliament 2017) 2015/2103(inl) 

<http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getdoc.do?pubref=-//ep//nonsgml+report+a8-2017- 

0005+0+doc+pdf+v0//en> access 11 novemb 2016. 
4 see for example: joon ian wong, ‘the UK could becom a leader in AI ethics—if thi EU data law 

surviv brexit’ <http://qz.com/807303/uk-parliament-ai-and-robotics-report-brexit-could-affect-eu-gdpr-right- 

to-explanation-law/> access 10 novemb 2016; cade metz, ‘artifici intellig Is set Up the internet 

for a huge clash with europe’ (wired, 2016) <https://www.wired.com/2016/07/artificial-intelligence-setting- 

internet-huge-clash-europe/> access 10 novemb 2016; fusion (n 2); bernard marr, ‘new report: reveal 

the secret Of AI Or kill machin learning?’ <http://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2017/01/12/new- 

report-revealing-the-secrets-of-ai-or-killing-machine-learning/#258189058e56> access 14 januari 2017; 

liisa jaakonsaari, ‘who set the agenda on algorithm accountability?’ (euractiv.com, 26 octob 2016) 

<https://www.euractiv.com/section/digital/opinion/who-sets-the-agenda-on-algorithmic-accountability/> 

access 3 march 2017; nick wallace, ‘eu’ right to explanation: A harm restrict on artifici 

intelligence’ <https://www.datainnovation.org/2017/01/eus-right-to-explanation-a-harmful-restriction-on- 

artificial-intelligence/> access 3 march 2017. 
5 regul (eu) 2016/679 OF the european parliament and OF the council of 27 

april 2016 on the protect of natur person with regard to the process of person data and on the 

free movement of such data, and repeal direct 95/46/ec (gener data protect regulation) 2016. 







4 



(gdpr). the right to explan be view a a promis mechan in the broader pursuit 

by govern and industri for account and transpar in algorithms, artifici 

intelligence, robotics, and other autom systems.6 autom system can have mani 

unintend and unexpect effects.7 public assess of the extent and sourc of these 

problem be often difficult,8 owe to the use of complex and opaqu algorithm mechanisms.9 

the alleg right to explan would requir data control to explain how such 

mechan reach decisions. signific hype have be mount over the empow effect 

of such a legal enforc right for data subjects, and the disrupt of data intens 

industries, which would be forc to explain how complex and perhap inscrut autom 

method work in practice. 

however, there be sever reason to doubt the existence, scope, and feasibl of a 

‘right to explanation’ of autom decisions. In thi paper, we examin the legal statu of the 

‘right to explanation’ in the gdpr, and identifi sever barrier undermin it 

implementation. We argu that the gdpr do not, in it current form, implement a right to 

explanation, but rather what we term a limit ‘right to be informed’. here be a quick overview. 

In section 2, we disentangl the type and time of explan that can be offer of 

autom decision-making. the right to explanation, a popularli proposed, be thought to grant 

an explan of specif autom decisions, after such a decis have be made.10 





6 the prolifer of unaccount and inscrut autom system have proven a major concern among 

govern bodies, a reflect in numer recent report on the futur ethic and social impact of autom 

systems. see for instance: catherin stupp, ‘commiss to open probe into tech companies’ algorithm next 

year’ (euractiv.com, 8 novemb 2016) <http://www.euractiv.com/section/digital/news/commission-to-open- 

probe-into-tech-companies-algorithms-next-year/> access 11 novemb 2016; partnership on ai, ‘partnership 

on artifici intellig to benefit peopl and society’ (partnership on artifici intellig to benefit peopl 

and society, 2016) <https://www.partnershiponai.org/> access 11 novemb 2016; nation scienc and 

technolog council, ‘prepar for the futur of artifici intelligence’ (execut offic of the presid 

2016) 

<https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/whitehouse_files/microsites/ostp/nstc/preparing_for_the_futu 

re_of_ai.pdf> access 11 novemb 2016; european parliament committe on legal affair (n 3); hous of 

common scienc and technolog committe (n 3); govern offic for science, ‘artifici intelligence: 

An overview for policy-makers’ (govern offic for scienc 2016) 

<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/artificial-intelligence-an-overview-for-policy-makers> access 

11 novemb 2016. 
7 brent mittelstadt and others, ‘the ethic of algorithms: map the debate’ [2016] 3 big data & societi 2. 
8 christian sandvig and others, ‘audit algorithms: research method for detect discrimin on 

internet platforms’ [2014] data and discrimination: convert critic concern into product inquiri 

<http://social.cs.uiuc.edu/papers/pdfs/ica2014-sandvig.pdf> access 13 februari 2016. 
9 mike ananny, ‘toward an ethic of algorithm convening, observation, probability, and timeliness’ (2016) 

41 science, technolog & human valu 93. 
10 thi be the type of explan of autom decision-mak imagin in recit 71 gdpr, which state “in 

ani case, such process should be subject to suitabl safeguards, which should includ specif inform to 







5 



In section 3, we ass three possibl legal base for a right to explan in the gdpr: 

1) the right not to be subject to autom decision-mak and safeguard enact thereof 

(articl 22 and recit 71); 

2) notif duti of data control (articl 13-14 and recit 60-62); and 

3) the right to access (articl 15 and recit 63). 

the aforement claim for a right to explanation11 muddl the first and second legal bases. 

It conflat (1) legal bind requir of articl 22 and non-bind provis of recit 

71 and (2) notif duti (articl 13-14) that requir data subject to be provid with 

inform about “the exist of autom decision-making, includ profiling, refer 

to in articl 22(1) and (4) and, at least in those cases, meaning inform about the logic 

involved, a well a the signific and the envisag consequ of such process for the 

data subject” [ital added]. 

have challeng the legal basi for a right to explanation, we then consid whether 

the right of access in articl 15 provid a strong legal basis. follow our analysi of the 

implement and jurisprud of the 1995 data protect direct (95/46/ec), we argu 

that the gdpr’ right of access allow for a limit right to explan of the function of 

autom decision-mak system – what we refer to a the ‘right to be informed’. however, 

the right of access do not establish a right to explan of specif autom decis of 

the type current imagin elsewher in public discourse. not onli be a right to explan of 

specif decis not grant by the gdpr, it also appear to have be intent not 

adopt in the final text of the gdpr after appear in an earli draft. 

In section 4, we consid the limit of scope and applicability, if a right to 

explan be to exist. We show that a ‘general’ right to explanation, applic to all 

autom decisions, would not exist even if recit 71 be legal binding. A right to 

explanation, deriv from the right of access (articl 15) or safeguard describ in articl 

22(3), would onli appli to a narrow rang of decis “sole base on autom processing” 

and with “legal” or “similarli significant” effect for the data subject (articl 22(1) gdpr). 

We examin the limit case in which the right would apply, includ the impact of a critic 





the data subject and the right to obtain human intervention, to express hi or her point of view, to obtain an 

explan of the decis reach after such assess and to challeng the decision.” 
11 goodman and flaxman (n 2). 







6 



ambigu of languag that allow the broader “right not to be subject to autom decision- 

making” (articl 22 gdpr) to be interpret either a a prohibition, or right to object. 

section 5 conclud the articl with recommend for a number of legisl and 

polici step that, if implemented, may improv the transpar and account of 

autom decision-mak when the gdpr come into forc in 2018. 

2 what be meant by a right to explanation? 

befor examin whether the gdpr specifi a right to explanation, it be necessari to examin 

what one may mean by an ‘explanation’ of autom decision-making. two kind of 

explan may be in question, depend on whether one refer to: 

● system functionality, that is, the logic, significance, envisag consequ and 

gener function of an autom decision-mak system, e.g. the system’ 

requir specification, decis trees, pre-defin models, criteria, and 

classif structures; or to 

● specif decisions, that is, the rationale, reasons, and individu circumst of a 

specif autom decision, e.g. the weight of features, machine-defin case- 

specif decis rules, inform about refer or profil groups.12 

furthermore, one can also distinguish between explan in term of their time in relat 

to the decision-mak process: 

 an ex ant explan occur prior to an autom decision-mak take place. note 

that an ex ant explan can logic address onli system functionality, a the 

rational of a specif decis cannot be know befor the decis be made; 

 an ex post explan occur after an autom decis have take place. note that an 

ex post explan can address both system function and the rational of a specif 

decision. 

An exampl may help clarifi how these distinct interact. take an autom credit score 

system. prior to a decis be make (ex ante), the system provid can inform the data 

subject about the system functionality, includ the gener logic (such a type of data and 

featur considered, categori in the decis tree), purpos or signific (in thi case, to 





12 thi be specif a kind of explan possibl onli onc a decis have be taken. It refer to a particular 

decision, not the decision-mak method or system itself. thi be the type of explan imagin in recit 71 

gdpr, which call for “an explan of the decis reach after such assessment.” the recit explicitli 

refer to a singular decis that have be reached. 







7 



assign a credit score), and envisag consequ (for example, the credit score can be use 

by lender to ass credit worthiness, affect the term of credit such a interest rate). after 

a decis have be make (ex post), an explan of system function can still be provid 

to the data subject. however, the provid can also explain to the data subject the logic and 

individu circumst of their specif decision, such a her credit score, the data or featur 

that be consid in her particular case, and their weight within the decis tree or 

model. In other words, the provid can explain how a particular score be assigned. further, 

when pre-defin simplist or linear model be use and fulli disclosed, predict about 

the rational of a specif decis be possibl in principl ex ante. however, in both case the 

provider’ abil to offer an explan of the rational of a specif decis may be limit 

by sever legal (see section 4) and technic factors, includ the use of complex probabilist 

analyt and decision-mak methods.13 

these distinct between two kind and two differ time of explan be 

implicit in the gdpr. their import will be highlight a we examin the possibl legal 

base for a right to explanation. 



3 whi there be no ‘right to explanation’ in the gdpr 

three distinct possibl legal base for a right to explan of autom decision-mak can 

be found in the gdpr. A right to explan can possibl be deriv from: 

1) safeguard against autom decision-mak a requir under articl 22(3), and 

comment upon by recit 71; 

2) notif duti under articl 13-14 comment upon by recit 60-62; or 

3) the right of access under articl 15, and comment upon by recit 63. 

these base be respect refer to a a right to explan deriv from (1) safeguards, 

(2) notif duties, and (3) the right of access. We will ass each in turn. On the whole, 

the claim that a right be grant by the gdpr to an ex post explan of specif decis (at 

a minimum) that seemingli appli to ani instanc of autom decision-mak be base on 

a combin of safeguard and notif duties. It combin non-bind recit 71 with 

bind provis of articl 13-14 and 22 to argu that “the law will […] effect creat 





13 jenna burrell, ‘how the machin “thinks:” understand opac in machin learn algorithms’ [2016] 

big data & society. 







8 



a “right to explanation,” wherebi a user can ask for an explan of an algorithm decis 

that be make about them.”14 thi claim be incorrect for sever reasons, explain below. 

3.1 A right to explan deriv from safeguard against autom decision-mak 

start with the claim15 for a right to explan deriv from safeguards, articl 22 (see: 

figur 1) and recit 71 of the gdpr address a data subject’ right not to be subject to 

autom decision-making. articl 22(3), which address safeguard against autom 

decision-making, state that 

the data control shall implement suitabl measur to safeguard the data subject' 

right and freedom and legitim interests, at least the right to obtain human 

intervent on the part of the controller, to express hi or her point of view and to 

contest the decis [ital added]. 



critically, a right to explan be not mentioned. rather, after a decis have be made, and 

assum the decis meet a condit specifi in articl 22(3)a (to enter or fulfil a contract) 

or articl 22(3)c (with explicit consent), data subject be grant addit safeguard to 

obtain human intervention, express views, or contest a decis (articl 22(3)), but not to 

obtain an explan of the decis reached. 









14 goodman and flaxman (n 2). the ‘right to explan be propos a follows. On p. 1: “the law will also 

effect creat a “right to explanation,” wherebi a user can ask for an explan of an algorithm decis 

that be make about them.” further, on p. 3: “paragraph 71 of the recit (the preambl to the gdpr, which 

explain the rational behind it but be not itself law) explicitli requir data control to “implement appropri 

technic and organiz measures” that “prevents, inter alia, discriminatori effects” on the basi of process 

sensit data.” further, on p. 6: “the provis outlin in articl 13-15 specifi that data subject have the 

right to access inform collect about them, and also requir data processor to ensur data subject be 

notifi about the data collected. however, it be import to distinguish between these rights, which may be 

term the right to access and notification, and addit “safeguard for the right and freedom of the data 

subject” requir under articl 22 when profil take place. although the articl do not elabor what these 

safeguard be beyond “the right to obtain human intervention”, articl 13 and 14 state that, when profil take 

place, a data subject have the right to “meaning inform about the logic involved.” thi requir prompt 

the question: what do it mean, and what be required, to explain an algorithm’ decision?” 
15 ibid; rossi (n 2). 







9 





In all of the gdpr, a right to explan be onli explicitli mention in recit 71, which 

state that a person who have be subject to autom decision-mak 

should be subject to suitabl safeguards, which should includ specif inform to 

the data subject and the right to obtain human intervention, to express hi or her point 

of view, to obtain an explan of the decis reach after such assess and to 

challeng the decis [ital added]. 



If legal binding, thi provis would requir an ex post explan of specif decisions, a 

recit 71 address safeguard to be in place onc a decis have be reached. To show whi 

recit 71 do not establish a legal bind right, a brief asid into the legal statu of recit 

be required. 







10 



recit provid guidance16 on how to interpret the articles, but be not themselv 

legal binding.17 As klima and vaiciukait explain, “recit have no posit oper of 

their own” and “cannot caus legitim expect to arise.”18 baratta further expands: 

In principl the ecj do not give effect to recit that be draft in norm terms. 

recit can help to explain the purpos and intent behind a norm instrument. they 

can also be take into account to resolv ambigu in the legisl provis to 

which they relate, but they do not have ani autonom legal effect.19 


jurisprud of the european court of justic (ecj) show that the role of recit be to 

dissolv ambigu in the oper text of a framework. the ecj have comment directli on 

the legal statu of recitals, clarifi that: “whilst a recit in the preambl to a regul may 

cast light on the interpret to be give to a legal rule, it cannot in itself constitut such a 

rule.”20 

return to the gdpr, articl 22(3) list the minimum requir that have to be 

met for law autom decision-making. there be no ambigu in the languag that would 

requir further interpret with regard to the minimum requir that must be met by 

data controllers. As long a these requir be met, autom decision-mak be law 

and in complianc with the gdpr. with thi said, futur jurisprud (see section 4) can still 

interpret the mean of “suitabl measur to safeguard,” and establish futur mandatori or 

case-to-cas requir to be met by data controllers, includ a right to explanation. thi 

is, however, onli one possibl future. A right to explan be thu not current legal 

mandat by the requir set in articl 22(3). 





16“recit explain the background to the legisl and the aim and object of the legislation. they are, 

therefore, import to an understand of the legisl which follows.” europa, ‘guid to the 

approxim of EU environment legisl annex I’ (environment, 2015) 

<http://ec.europa.eu/environment/archives/guide/annex1.htm> access 3 march 2017. see also judgement of 15 

5 1997 - case c-355/95 P textilwerk deggendorf gmbh (twd) v commiss of the european commun 

and feder republ of germani [1997] european court of justic c-355/95 P [21]: “in that regard, it should 

be state that the oper part of an act be indissoci link to the statement of reason for it, so that, when it 

have to be interpreted, account must be take of the reason which lead to it adoption.” 
17 for a detail overview of the jurisprud of the european court of justic on the limit role of recit in 

EU law see roberto baratta, ‘complex of EU law in the domest implement process’ (2014) 2 the theori 

and practic of legisl 293. An oppos view be offer by pagallo, who claim that secondari rule of law 

(e.g. recitals) can alter primari rule of law. ugo pagallo, ‘three lesson learn for intellig transport 

system that abid by the law’ (2016) novemb 2016 juslett IT RZ 13 <http://jusletter- 

it.weblaw.ch/issues/2016/24-november-2016/three-lessons-learne_9251e5d324.html>. 
18 tada klima and jurat vaiciukaite, ‘the law of recit in european commun legislation’ (2008) 15 

ilsa journal of intern & compar law 32–3 

<https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1159604> access 22 januari 2017. the paper discu 

in detail the legal statu of recit in european law. 
19 baratta (n 17) 17. 
20 case 215/88 casa fleischhandel [1989] european court of justic ecr 2789 [31]; see also baratta (n 17) 13. 







11 



In addition, right have to be explicitli legal establish prior to their enforcement. 

thi idea stem from the relationship between legal right and duties. the scope of a right can 

be subject to interpretation; a legal basi for it exist must, however, first be beyond doubt. 

right of data subject typic correspond with a duti on the side of the data controller.21 

neglig in relat to legal duti can be punish through fine and other procedures. It 

would be highli controversi to impos fine on data control without have previous 

clarifi explicitli and beyond doubt what duti must be met. do otherwis would conflict 

with the principl of fair trial (articl 6 of the european convent on human right and 

articl 47 of the charter of fundament right of the european union) and the rule of law.22 

crimin and administr procedur have to be laid down precisely. 

It can be conclud that data subject will not be grant a legal bind ex post right 

to explan of specif autom decis on the basi of legal safeguard in articl 22 a 

it current stands. that thi be the case do not appear to be the result of an oversight or 

fiddl with subtl interpret (e.g. the mean of “suitabl measur to safeguard” in 

articl 22(3)). On the contrary, the omiss of a right to explan from articl 22 appear 

to be intentional. the safeguard specifi in recit 71 be almost ident to those in articl 

22(3), with the signific differ of the further inclus of a right “to obtain an explan 

of the decis reach after such assessment” in recit 71. the purpos omiss of thi 

text from articl 22 may not be an oversight but suggest that legisl do not intend to 

implement a right to explan of specif decis in the gdpr. what happened? 

look at previou draft of the gdpr and commentari from the trilogu 

negotiations,23 one can see that legisl have stricter safeguard in place on autom 

decision-mak and profiling, but that these be eventu dropped, includ a legal 

bind right to explan of specif decisions.24 An earli indic of the debat around 





21 peter jones, ‘group rights’, the stanford encyclopedia of philosophi (summer 2016 edit (forthcoming), 

2016) <http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2016/entries/rights-group/>. 
22 

christoph grabenwarter, the european convent for the protect of human right and fundament 

freedoms: A commentari (01 edition, beck/hart publish 2014). 
23 the ‘trilogu negotiations’ describ a seri of meet between the european commission, council and 

parliament to adopt a final text for the gdpr. for an introduct and discuss of the legal basi of trilogue, 

see: oliv proust, ‘unravel the mysteri of the gdpr trilogues’ (privacy, secur and inform law, 

2015) <http://privacylawblog.fieldfisher.com/2015/unravelling-the-mysteries-of-the-gdpr-trilogues/> access 

16 decemb 2016. 
24 rita heimes, ‘top 10 oper impact of the gdpr: part 5 - profiling’ <https://iapp.org/news/a/top-10- 

operational-impacts-of-the-gdpr-part-5-profiling/> access 10 novemb 2016: “A hotli contest provis of 

the gdpr, the “profiling” restrict ultim adopt be narrow than initi proposed.” 







12 



the right to explan can be see in the novemb 2013 report of the european parliament25 

(ep) and the decemb 2014 report of the european council in respons to the origin gdpr 

text propos by the european commission26 (ec) in 2012. 

the ec’ propos text do not contain a right to explanation. the EP propos the 

follow amend to articl 20 (now articl 22 in the adopt version of the gdpr), 

paragraph 5: 

profil which lead to measur produc legal effect concern the data subject 

or do similarli significantli affect the interests, right or freedom of the concern 

data subject shall not be base sole or predominantli on autom process and 

shall includ human assessment, includ an explan of the decis reach after 

such an assessment. the suitabl measur to safeguard the data subject' legitim 

interest refer to in paragraph 2 shall includ the right to obtain human assess 

and an explan of the decis reach after such assess […] [ital added]. 


the ep’ prefer text mandat a “right to obtain human assess and an explan of 

the decis reach after such assessment.” these safeguard would have be part of articl 

20, mean that they would have be legal binding. however, the propos safeguard 

be not adopt in trilogue. thi chang suggest that legisl intent chose to make 

the right to explan non-bind by place it in recit 71. 

the european council’ 2014 draft,27 on the other hand, onli requir that 

the data control shall implement suitabl measur to safeguard the data subject’ 

right and freedom and legitim interests, such a the right to obtain human 

intervent on the part of the controller, to express hi or her point of view and to 

contest the decis [ital added]. 



the council suggest to add the text: 





25 european parliament committe on civil liberties, justic and home affairs, ‘report on the propos for a 

regul of the european parliament and of the council on the protect of individu with regard to the 

process of person data and on the free movement of such data (gener data protect regulation) - 

a7-0402/2013’ (european parliament 2013) a7–0402/2013 

<http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getdoc.do?type=report&reference=a7-2013-0402&language=en> 

access 10 novemb 2016. 
26 european commission, ‘regul of the european parliament and the council on the protect of 

individu with regard to the process of person data and on the free movement of such data (gener 

data protect regulation)’ (european commiss 2012) 2012/0011 (cod) <http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data- 

protection/document/review2012/com_2012_11_en.pdf> access 10 novemb 2016. 
27 european digit rights, ‘comparison of the parliament and council text on the gener data protect 

regulation’ (european digit right intern 2016) 140 

<https://edri.org/files/ep_council_comparison.pdf> access 20 novemb 2016. thi sourc provid a side- 

by-sid comparison of the aforement draft from the european parliament (n 25) and european commiss 

(n 26), a well a amend to the commission’ text propos by the european council. 







13 



to express hi or her point of view, to get an explan of the decis reach after 

such assess and the right to contest the decis [ital added], 



to recit 58 (equival to recit 71 gdpr).28 the council thu suggest to place the right 

to explan add in the ep’ draft in a recital. thi approach be eventu take in the 

final text adopt in 2016. 

interestingly, despit year of negotiations, the final word of the gdpr concern 

protect against profil and autom decision-mak hardli chang from the relev 

articl and recit of the data protect direct 1995. As with the gdpr, a ‘right to 

explanation’ do not appear in articl 15 of the direct (see figur 2), which address 

autom individu decisions. 

although articl 22 gdpr have not greatli chang from articl 15 of the directive, a 

few chang be still noteworthy. first, the onli safeguard against autom decision-mak 

mention in the direct be the opportun to express one’ views. articl 22(3) addit 

name contest the decis and the right to obtain human intervent a suitabl measures. 

secondly, explicit consent be includ a a case in which autom decision-mak be allow 

(articl 22(2)c). finally, a oppos to the provis in articl 15 of the directive, it be no 

longer necessari that the data subject request the contract in order for autom decision- 

make to be lawful. 





28 european digit right (n 27) 40. 







14 





3.2 A right to explan deriv from notif duti 

articl 13 and 14 gdpr specifi notif duti for data control concern the 

process of data collect from the data subject (articl 13) or from a third parti (articl 

14). In the aforement claim, these articl be cite a a basi for a right to an ex post 

explan of specif decisions. the claim start with articl 13(2) and 14(2), which state 

that data control need to 

provid the data subject with the follow inform necessari to ensur fair and 

transpar processing. 



accord to articl 13(2)f and articl 14(2)g, thi inform includ 

the exist of autom decision-making, includ profiling, refer to in articl 

22(1) and (4) and, at least in those cases, meaning inform about the logic 

involved, a well a the signific and the envisag consequ of such process 

for the data subject [ital added]. 



thi duti appli in case of autom process meet the requir of articl 22(1) 

or 22(4) (more on thi later). 

It have be suggest that the notif duti in articl 13-14, in combin with 

the safeguard defin in articl 22(3), grant an ex post right to explan of the “exist 







15 



of […] logic involv […] signific […] and envisag consequences” of autom 

decision-making.29 thi claim be mistaken for two reasons. 

first, onli an ex ant explan of system function be explicitli requir by 

articl 13(2)f and 14(2)g. these notif duti preced decision-making. notif 

occur befor a decis be made, at the point when data be collect for processing. thi hold 

true even if articl 14 introduc some ambigu when data be collect from third parti 

rather than data subject (insofar a the control need onli to notifi the data subject within 

30 day of collection). As explain in section 2, onli an explan of system function 

be logic possibl prior to decision-making. therefor articl 13-14 cannot be use a 

evid of an ex post right to explan of specif decis that can logic onli be give 

onc a decis have be make (timelin problem).30 

secondly, the claim link articl 13(2)f and 14(2)g to the safeguard in articl 22(3). 

thi link be not make in the gdpr. articl 13(2)f and 14(2)g appli onli to articl 22(1) and 

articl 22(4), which do not address safeguard against autom decision-making. the 

suppos link – between notif about the logic involved, signific and envisag 

consequ of autom decision-mak in articl 13-14, and the ex post right to 

explan incorrectli attribut to articl 22(3) (which onli featur in recit 71) – be 

therefor unten and can be dismissed. the claim also conflat the legal bind 

notif duties, specifi in articl 13-14, and the non-bind right, specifi in recit 

71. 

It follow that the claim for an ex post right to explan of specif decisions31 be not 

correct. ani suggest to the contrari fail to distinguish between (1) the legal bind duti 

to notifi the data subject of the logic involved, signific and envisag consequ of 

autom decision-mak system befor decision-mak occur (timelin problem) 





29 goodman and flaxman (n 2). 
30 see also suzann rodway, ‘just how fair will process notic need to Be under the gdpr’ (2016) 16 

privaci & data protect 16. note the paper focu on the EC draft but talk in gener about the aim and 

purpos of notif duties. the author explain that these provis mainli mean that data control have to 

updat their privaci notices. further: “whether ani autom decis will be make use the data (includ 

for profil purposes) and, if so, a meaning explan about the logic use in those decis and the possibl 

consequ of those decis for the data subject. exampl includ whether a credit card applic might 

be declin or a job applic rejected.” thi suggest that articl 13-14 onli creat a notif duti to 

inform about the gener usag of autom decision-mak befor a decis have be made, and to inform 

about the possibl futur consequences. further support for thi argument can be found in recit 60-62 gdpr. 
31 goodman and flaxman (n 2). 







16 



(articl 13-14), and (2) the data subject’ non-bind right to an explan of specif 

decis (recit 71) after decision-mak occurs. 

the languag use in articl 13(2)f and 14(2)g also support the interpret that 

onli an ex ant explan be required. data control must inform the data subject about the 

exist of autom decision-making, includ profil […] [and provid data 

subject with] meaning inform about the logic involved, a well a the 

signific and the envisag consequ of such processing. 



the languag use suggest that data subject must be provid with inform about how 

an autom decision-mak system work in general, for which purposes, and with what 

predict impact, befor autom decis be made. notabl thi cannot includ ani 

inform about how a specif decis be make or reached, but rather address how the 

system itself functions, e.g. it decis tree or rules, or predict about how input will be 

processed. for fulli disclos simplist or linear models, thi may show how specif decis 

would be reach in the future.32 

3.3 A right to explan deriv from the right of access 

In contrast to prior claim (see section 1), it may also be possibl to deriv a right to explan 

from the right of access establish in articl 15 gdpr. articl 15(1)h be ident to articl 

13(2)f and 14(2)h: data subject be grant a right to be inform about the exist of 

autom decision-mak and to obtain meaning inform about the significance, 

envisag consequences, and logic involved. specifically, the subject should be inform about 

the existence, purposes, and logic of data processing, and the intent and legal consequ 

of such processing. By have thi information, the data subject should be abl to examin the 

law of data process and invok legal remedies.33 

together, articl 13-15 form what have be call the ‘magna carta’ of data subject’ 

right to obtain inform about the data held about them, and to scrutinis the legitimaci of 

data processing.34 articl 13-14 creat notif duti for data controllers, while articl 





32 burrel (n 13). 
33 bori P. paal, ‘ds-gvo art. 15 auskunftsrecht der betroffenen person’ in paal and pauli (eds), datenschutz- 

grundverordnung (1st edn, beck-onlin 2017) rn. 3. recit 63 gdpr also support thi interpret in state 

that “A data subject should have the right of access to person data […] and to exercis that right […] in order 

to be awar of, and verify, the law of processing” [ital added]. 
34 florian schmidt-wudy, ‘ds-gvo art. 15 auskunftsrecht der betroffenen person’ in wolff and brink (eds), 

datenschutz-grundverordnung (18th edn, beck-onlin 2016) rn. 2. 







17 



15 establish a correspond right of access for data subjects.35 In contrast to the notif 

duti of data control in articl 13-14, the right of access have to be invok by the data 

subject. the articl be a unit, insofar a they provid the data subject access to ident 

information, and use the same language. 

although seemingli insignificant, the chang from a notif duti to an access right 

have import consequ for the time of explan requir from the data controller. 

given that the phrase of articl 15(1)h be ident to articl 13(2)f and 14 (2)g, one could 

assum that the right of access similarli onli grant access to an ex ant explan of system 

functionality. however, the right of access be depend upon the request of the data subject 

and have no deadline; the ‘timelin problem’ of articl 13(2)f and 14(2)g do not apply. At 

first glance, the data subject can request thi inform at ani time, includ after an 

autom decis have be made, make an ex post explan of the rational of specif 

decis plausible. 

nonetheless, it be reason to doubt that the right of access grant a right to ex post 

explan of specif decis alreadi reached. consid the semant of articl 15(1)h. 

the phrase “envisag consequences” be future-oriented, suggest that the data control 

must inform the data subject of possibl consequ of the autom decision-mak 

befor such process occurs. thi interpret follow the timelin constraint of ident 

provis in articl 13(2)f and 14(2)g discuss above, which onli allow for ex ant 

explanations. data control be requir to predict the possibl consequ of their 

autom decision-mak methods. the term “envisaged” limit these predict to ex ant 

explan of system functionality, for instanc concern the gener purpos of the system, 

or the type of impact to be expect from the type of decis it makes. for instance, a credit 

agenc could predict that the score they produc will impact on credit worthi (e.g. interest 

rates). If appli to decis alreadi made, the phrase becom incoherent.36 It would seem 





35 mario martini, ‘ds-gvo art. 22 automatisiert entscheidungen im einzelfal einschließlich profiling’ in paal 

and pauli (eds), datenschutz-grundverordnung (1st edn, beck-onlin 2017) rn. 4-6. 
36 peter bräutigam and florian schmidt-wudy, ‘da geplant auskunfts- und herausgaberecht de betroffenen 

nach art. 15 der eu-datenschutzgrundverordnung’ (2015) 31 comput und recht 56, 62 support thi 

interpret in comment on the ep’ draft of the gdpr. the ep’ draft contain the same phrase a the 

final adopt text: articl 15(h) requir inform about “the signific and envisag consequ of such 

processing.” the author note that the phrase be veri imprecise. An exampl be give of an internet provid 

be oblig to inform that autom process method be be use to determin creditworthiness, which 

could lead to the consequ that the person have to pay in advanc (rather than be offer credit). thi exampl 

suggest that the author believ that articl 15(h) aim to inform about system function rather than to provid 

inform about how an individu decis be reached. 







18 



to requir data control to predict the person consequ of decision-mak for 

individu data subject after an autom decis have be made, includ how the decis 

could be use by other data control and processors. 

the semant of the german translat of articl 15(1)h gdpr provid further 

support. the german articl 15(1)h states: 

tragweit und angestrebten auswirkungen einer derartigen verarbeitung für die 

betroffen person [ital added]. 



thi sentenc translat to “the scope and intend consequ of such process for the 

person concerned” [our translation, ital added]. thi indic that the data control must 

inform the data subject about the consequ the control wish to achiev with autom 

decision-making. accord to thi phrasing, the data control be not ask to predict 

consequ but rather explain the scope, intention, and the purpos of such processing. thi 

suggest that the right of access be not address how an individu decis be reached, but 

rather the duti of the data control to provid inform about the existence, aim and 

consequ of such processing. thi equat to an explan of system functionality.37 

there be similar reason to doubt that articl 15(1)h grant an ex post right to 

explan of specif decisions. data control be requir to provid inform about 

the “exist of autom decision-making” [ital added]. thi phrase do not suggest an 

explan of how a decis be reached. rather, the data control be onli requir to 

inform the data subject that autom decision-mak method be be use to process her 

data. 

the phrase of articl 15(1)h, a with articl 13-14, point to an explan of 

system functionality. however, data control be also requir to provid “meaning 

inform about the logic involved” in autom decision-making. As note in section 3.2, 

thi phrase, a use in articl 13-14, have be argu by other to grant an ex post right to 

explanation. If correct, articl 15(1)h would grant a right to explan of specif decisions, 

not onli system functionality, a the data subject can request the relev inform both 





37 prior draft of articl 15 also support thi view. the german translat of the EC draft state in articl 15(h) 

“die tragweit der verarbeitung und die mit ihr angestrebten auswirkungen, zumindest im fall der maßnahmen 

gemäß artikel 20,” which translat to “the scope [rather than significance] of the data process and it intend 

consequences.” In addition, the EP draft state in articl 15(h) “die tragweit der verarbeitung und die mit ihr 

angestrebten wirkungen.” the phrase “angestrebten wirkungen” translat to “the scope and it intend effects,” 

not consequences. even though the adopt languag in the gdpr be vaguer, prior draft demonstr articl 15 

be intend to inform data subject about data processor’ “intend effects” for the data subject by use 

autom decision-mak methods. for further discussion, see: ibid 61 ff. 







19 



befor and after a decis have be made. however, there be further reason to doubt that thi 

be the case. 

for articl 15(1)h to be coher a a whole, “meaning inform about the logic 

involved” must be interpret in connect with the other term (exist of, meaning 

inform about signific and envisag consequences) use of articl 15(1)h, which be 

limit to explan of system functionality. interpret “logic involved” to grant an ex 

post explan of specif decis would mean the other term of articl 15(1)h would be 

incoherent, if the right of access be invok after a decis be made. thi interpret be 

further support by a comparison of the languag use in articl 15(1)h and recit 71. data 

control be oblig to provid inform about the 

exist of autom decision-mak […] meaning inform about the logic 

involved, a well a the signific and the envisag consequ of such process 

(articl 15(1)h), [a oppos to] an explan of the decis reach (recit 71). 



the phrase of articl 15(1)h be future-oriented, and appear to refer to the exist and 

plan scope of decision-mak itself, rather than to the circumst of a specif decis 

a suggest in recit 71. If an explan of specif autom decis be intend to 

be grant by articl 15(1)h, a in recit 71, the usag of differ languag between the two 

would be odd. 

nevertheless, give the lack of an explicit deadlin for invok the right of access, one 

cannot be certain, on the basi of semant alone, that the right of access be limit to 

explan of system functionality. despit this, we argu that, a with notif duti in 

articl 13-14, and regardless of when it be invok by the data subject, the gdpr’ right of 

access onli grant an explan of autom decision-mak address system 

functionality, not the rational and circumst of specif decisions. thi conclus be 

support by implement of the 1995 directive’ right of access by member states, which 

have mostli limit inform oblig to system functionality. If interpret of the 

gdpr follow histor precedence, it right of access will be similarli limited. To articul 

thi claim further, it be necessari to examin in detail member state implement and 

interpret of the directive’ right of access. 

3.3.1 right of access in the 1995 data protect direct 95/46/ec 

It be import to note that a right of access that grant data subject some explan of 

autom decision-mak be not new, and have not proven an effect transpar 







20 



mechanism.38 rather, thi right have exist sinc the 1995 data protect directive, and have 

be implement in nation law by most european member states.39 similar to the scope of 

the gdpr’ right of access, the directive’ right of access provid mean for data subject to 

discov whether a control be process person data. If so, the data subject be then entitl 

to know the extent of data be processed. thi shall enabl the data subject to scrutinis what 

data be use and take appropri action such a request rectif or erasure.40 notably, 

the directive’ right of access have gener not be interpret a grant a right to 

explan of specif decis alreadi reached, a it be not part of the safeguard at the time 

autom decis be make in articl 15(2)a of the directive; thi distinct be compar 

to the differ between articl 15 and 22 of the gdpr. the direct name onli one 

safeguard against autom decision-making, name the right for the data subject to “put hi 

point of view.” A right to explan of specif decis a a safeguard to ensur law 

autom decision-mak be not envisaged. 

the implement and interpret of the directive’ right of access vari across 

the member states. despit much debate,41 consensu have not emerg concern the type of 

inform data control must disclos to provid data subject with “knowledg of the 

logic involv in ani automat process of data” per articl 12(a).42 A report publish in 





38 c-141/12 and c-372/12 [2014] european court of justic ecli:eu:c:2014:2081. 
39 douw korff, ‘new challeng to data protect studi - work paper no. 2: data protect law in the 

eu: the difficulti in meet the challeng pose by global social and technic developments’ (european 

commiss DG justice, freedom and secur 2010) 

<http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1638949> access 8 decemb 2016. 
40 see recit 41 of the direct “wherea ani person must be abl to exercis the right of access to data relat 

to him which be be processed, in order to verifi in particular the accuraci of the data and the law of 

the processing…” see also: paal (n 33) rn. 19-22, who note that the gener purpos of the right of access 

accord to articl 15 gdpr be the realis of the so call “two step model.” In a first step data subject have 

to right to a) know if be data be process and b) if so, what data be use and in some case data control 

have to provid addit inform (such a the logic involv in autom processing). 
41 see for instanc debat in the UK hous of lord concern the mean of “logic involved” and “trade 

secrets” in the 1998 data protect act: grand committe on the data protect bill, ‘offici report of the 

grand committe on the data protect bill [h.l.] (hansard, 23 februari 1998)’ (uk parliament - hous of 

lord 1998) <http://hansard.millbanksystems.com/grand_committee_report/1998/feb/23/official-report-of-the- 

grand-committee#s5lv0586p0_19980223_gcr_1> access 15 decemb 2016. see also philip coppel, 

inform rights: law and practic (bloomsburi publish 2014) chapter 5 section 3 which discu how 

trade secret limit the right of access and to know about the logic involv in autom processing, and provid 

an overview of the right of access a implement by member states. 
42 As an example, council of europe, ‘the protect of individu with regard to automat process of 

person data in the context of profiling’ (council of europ 2010) recommend cm/rec(2010)13 138 

argu that the right of access in articl 12 of the direct equat to a right to be informed, not a right to an 

explan of a decis reached: “principl 5.1 state that the data subject should be entitl to know about the 

person data concern him or her and the logic which serv a a basi for the profiling. It be inde essenti 

that a data subject exercis the right of access should be inform of the statist method and infer use 







21 



2010 on the implement of the direct across member state suggest that it be left to 

the member state to defin the scope and requir of the right of access. the report urg 

clarif of the requir and limit on the right of access concern inform 

about the “logic involved” due to the grow import of autom decisions.43 In part, the 

lack of consensu over the mean and requir of “logic involved” owe to the rel 

lack of jurisprud on the right of access. despit the direct have be in forc for over 

20 years, the requir and limit of the right of access appli to autom decision- 

make have not be extens clarifi or test in court across europe.44 

the limit jurisprud avail reveal limit on the directive’ right of 

access. sever overrid interest and except have be identifi that significantli limit 

both the scope of applic and content of the explanation. In general, data subject be 

entitl to receiv some inform about the gener function of an autom decision- 

make system, but littl to no inform about the rational or circumst of a specif 

decision. the 2010 report reflect this, note that the languag use in the direct reflect a 

veri narrow scope of applic for the right of access due to a number of except and 

limit or overrid interests.45 recit 41 of the direct clarifi that the right of access 

can be limit by trade secret and intellectu property, especi relat to software.46 these 

interest have proven strong limit factor on the right of access a implement and test 

by member states. 

sever exampl can be offered. french data protect law47 grant data subject a 

right to receiv inform about the “logic involved” a long a it do not contraven 

copyright regulations. To allow data subject to challeng decisions, inform must be 

provid about the gener logic and type of data take into account, “but not (or at least not 





for hi or her profiling, the logic underpin the process and the envisag consequ of the profile’ 

attribution” [ital added]. 
43 korff, ‘new challeng to data protect study-work paper no. 2’ (n 39) 86. 
44 ibid 85. 
45 ibid 86. 
46 note that recit 41 of the direct also state in relat to trade secret that “these consider must not, 

however, result in the data subject be refus all information” [ital added]. see also: lee A bygrave, 

‘autom profiling: mind the machine: articl 15 of the EC data protect direct and autom 

profiling’ (2001) 17 comput law & secur review 17. the author note that articl 12 and 15(1) consid 

togeth suggest that the data control must understand and document the logic involv in an autom 

decision, includ the categori of data considered, and their role in the decision-mak process. however, the 

extent to which thi inform must be give to the data subject can be limit by overrid interest of the 

controller, includ trade secrets. 
47 korff, ‘new challeng to data protect study-work paper no. 2’ (n 39) 86. 







22 



fully) of the weight that be attached” to specif features.48 the full code of the autom 

decision-mak system or algorithm do not need to be revealed.49 A similar approach be 

take in the uk’ data protect act 1998, which also limit the right of access to protect 

trade secrets.50 As with french law, data control 

must inform data subject of the factor which they take into account in the “evaluation” 

underli the decision, but without have to reveal the exact weight give to each of 

these factor (i.e. the copyright-protect algorithm use in the autom decision- 

take process).51 



german data protect law have similarli recognis a distinct between explan of 

system function and specif autom decis in §6(a) of the bundesdatenschutzgesetz, 

which jointli implement articl 12 (right of access) and 15 (safeguard for autom 

individu decisions) of the directive.52 notably, germani implement a right allow data 





48 douw korff, ‘new challeng to data protect studi - countri report: france’ (european commiss 

DG justice, freedom and secur 2010) 27 <https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1638955> access 15 decemb 

2016. 
49 ibid. 
50 articl 8(5) of the UK data protect act 1998 state that “section 7(1)(d) be not to be regard a requir 

the provis of inform a to the logic involv in ani decision-tak if, and to the extent that, the 

inform constitut a trade secret” [ital added]. 
51 douw korff, ‘new challeng to data protect studi - countri report: unit kingdom’ (european 

commiss DG justice, freedom and secur 2010) 48 

<http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1638938> access 15 decemb 2016. 
52 concern how an explan be requir both a a safeguard against autom decision-mak and 

through the right of access, see: douw korff, ‘new challeng to data protect studi - countri report: 

germany’ (european commiss DG justice, freedom and secur 2010) 27 <http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data- 

protection/document/studies/files/new_privacy_challenges/final_report_country_report_a4_germany.pdf> 

access 15 decemb 2016. 

concern § 6(a)2(2) right to explanation: kai von lewinski, ‘bdsg § 6a automatisiert einzelentscheidung’ 

in wolff and brink (eds), beck’scher online-kommentar datenschutzrecht (17th edn, beck-onlin 2016) rn. 

45-49; ibid rn. 47-48.1 state the requir explan can be short and must onli includ the main reason for 

the decision. the data subject must be abl to understand whi a decis have not be make in her favour. 

for discuss of § 6(a)3 (the extend right of access and it limit due to trade secrets), see: peter gola, 

christoph klug and barbara körffer, ‘bdsg § 6a automatisiert einzelentscheidung’ in gola and schomeru 

(eds), bundesdatenschutzgesetz (12th edn, 2015) rn. 18-19. lewinski rn. 50-53 comment on § 6(a)3 (the 

extend right of access) explain that the data subject need to have a basi to evalu that an autom 

decis be accurate. thi suggest that there be a least some basi to obtain an explan after the decis have 

be make under the extend right of access. however, it be note that trade secret restrict thi right: onli the 

basi of decis paramet have to be disclosed, but not detail of the parameters. the “logic structure” must 

be disclosed, which refer to the “decis tree”, but not the softwar or the code. ibid rn. 47-48.1 also note 

that the scope (the extent to which inform must be disclosed) of the right of access and the safeguard in § 

6(a)2 be comparable. 

On safeguard in § 6, gola, klug and körffer rn. 1-20, comment on§6(a), explain a right to explan be 

grant under § 6(a)2(2), which be one of the safeguard relat to the second exempt of the gener 

prohibit of autom decision-making. safeguard in thi articl requir the data control to inform about 

how the decis be reach (3 step model: to be inform about the fact that such a decis be take and, 

upon request of the data subject, to receiv an explan of the decis reach and the right to contest the 

decision). for a discussion, see: ibid rn. 12-14c. the first except under § 6(a)2(1) (perform of a contract 







23 



subject’ to request an explan of autom decis that be not make in their favour. 

the right be implement a an explicit safeguard against autom decis in §6(a)2(2) of 

the bundesdatenschutzgesetz. the right be voluntarili enact a a safeguard beyond the 

requir set in articl 15 of the directive, which grant the right to express view a the 

onli safeguard against autom individu decisions. interestingly, the right to an explan 

a an extra safeguard provid some insight into how the directive’ requir to explain 

the “logic involved” be interpret by german legislators. §6(a)3 of the german data 

protect act separ extend the right of access enshrin in §19 and §34, allow data 

subject to obtain inform about the “logic structure” of autom processing, which 

refer back to articl 12(a) of the directive.53 If “knowledg of logic involved” in articl 12(a) 

be intend to establish a right to obtain an explan about decis reached, it would not 

have be necessari for german legisl to enact separ a right to explan 

(§6(a)2(2)) in the same articl contain the extend right of access (§6(a)3), especi 

consid both right must be invok by the data subject. even if one wish to argu that 

§6(a)2(2) and §6(a)3 refer to the same type of explan (i.e. of specif decisions), the use 

of differ word across the articl – “main reason for the decis and have it explained” 

in §6(a)2(2), “logic structur of the autom process of the data that concern [the data 

subject]” [our translation] in §6(a)3) – suggest that the two mechan entitl the data subject 

to differ type of information.54 





and if the decis have be make in favour of the data subject) do not explicitli requir an explan 

(unlik § 6(a)2(2)). rather, the right of access in § 6(a)3 will appli in these case which, per above, could be 

interpret a a right to obtain an explan after the decis have be made. the phrase of § 6(a)3 

(extend right of access) can be interpret both ways: a grant an explan both befor and after a 

decis have be made; see: lewinski rn. 1-4. further, the schufa judgment (see: section 3.3.1) show that 

judg interpret the right of access to grant a limit right to obtain an explan after a decis have be 

made; see: ibid rn. 50-51. 

for further discuss of the overlap of autom decision-mak under § 6a and score provis under § 

28b see: gola, klug and körffer Rn 6-7, 15-17. note that the german comment mention do not see a 

differ between § 6(a)2 right to explan and § 6(a)3 right of access when discuss the limit 

impos by trade secret on inform give to the data subject. see also: lewinski rn. 1-4; gola, klug and 

körffer rn. 14-14a. 
53 philip scholz, ‘bdsg § 6a automatisiert einzelentscheidung’ in simiti (ed), bundesdatenschutzgesetz (8th 

edn, 2014) rn. 38. 
54 lewinski (n 52) rn. 50-52 state that the word of the german data protect act be not clear regard 

whether the right of access refer to inform about the “process” (mean the system) or “a decis made.” 







24 



follow this, german legal commentari and jurisprudence55 address the extend 

right of access (§6(a)3) suggest that the inform it requir be limit mostli to system 

functionality. the data control do not need to disclos the softwar used, a the softwar 

be consid to be a trade secret.56 some german comment believ that some (or the “top 

four”) featur factor into a decis have to be disclosed, but not the algorithm use due to 

trade secrets.57 data control be not oblig to explain how the softwar be work or, 

especially, to give ani detail about it code. the data control be onli oblig to explain 

the logic of the “decis tree.” the “weighting” [our translation] of specif featur and the 

paramet use to make the decis do not have to be disclosed. thi be meant to protect trade 

secret and manipul of the decision-mak system.58 

thi interpret of the right of access a be limit to system function in 

order not to contraven trade secret be also reflect in german jurisprudence. accord to 

sever commentators,59 the german schufa60 judgments61 show that data subject do not 

have a right to investig fulli the accuraci of autom process system (in thi case, 

credit scoring), a the underli formula be protect a trade secrets. the protect formula 

would consist of, for example, statist values, weight of certain element to calcul 

probabl (e.g. the likelihood of loan repayment), and refer or comparison groups. 





55 bgh: kein umfassend auskunftsanspruch gegen schufa 2014 (vi ZR 156/13) bdsg § 34 abs. 4; mario 

martini, ‘big data al herausforderung für den persönlichkeitsschutz und da datenschutzrecht’ [2014] dvbi 

1481. 
56 gola, klug and körffer (n 52) rn. 18-19 “über die allgemeinen auskunftsansprüch nach § 19 bzw. § 34 sind 

nach absatz 3 auch angaben zu machen über den logischen aufbau der automatisierten verarbeitung. dem 

betroffenen soll in erster lini veranschaulicht werden, be mit seinen daten geschieht. Er soll in die lage 

versetzt werden, gesichtspunkt vorzubringen, die inhaltlich überprüfung der automatisiert vorgenommen 

„vermuteten“ bewertung ermöglichen. unter dem gesichtspunkt de schutz von geschäftsgeheimnissen und 

de urheberrechtsschutz umfasst die auskunftspflicht jedoch nicht die verwendet softwar (zur sog. 

scoreformel al geschäftsgeheimni vgl. bgh, njw 2014, 1235, der die frage der reichweit de 

auskunftsanspruch über den logischen aufbau der automatisierten verarbeitung mangel vorliegen einer 

automatisierten einzelentscheidung dahinstehen ließ).“ 
57 korff, ‘new challeng to data protect study-countri report’ (n 52) 27 ff. 
58 lewinski (n 52) rn. 50-53 
59 bräutigam and schmidt-wudi (n 36) 62; jen hammersen and ulrich eisenried, ‘ist „redlining” in 

deutschland erlaubt? plädoyer für ein weit auslegung de auskunftsanspruchs’ [2014] ZD zeitschrift für 

datenschutz 342. 
60 amongst others, judgment of the german feder court bgh, ZD 2014, 306. It be import to note that the 

german court refus to talk about the extent to which the data subject be entitl to know about the logic involv 

a the court rule that in thi case there be no autom decision, a explain in: gola, klug and körffer (n 

52) rn. 18-19. 
61 judgment of the german feder court bundesgerichtshof 28.01.2014 – VI ZR 156/13. also. LG giessen. 

06.03.2013 – 1 S 301/12. also, AG giessen 11.10.2014 – 47 C 206/12. 







25 



the judgment indic that all three element of the right of access enshrin in articl 

12(a) of the direct aim to provid gener inform about the usag and purpos of data 

processing. concret element of the screen procedur do not have to be disclosed.62 the 

data subject be entitl to know which data and featur be take into account when the 

decis be made, in order to be abl to contest the decis or demand that inaccur or 

incomplet data be rectified. however, the weight of these elements, the method (score 

formula), the statist values, and the inform about the refer groups63 use do not 

have to be disclosed.64 the judgment state that jurisprudence, academ literature, and legal 

commentari commonli agre that the abstract method use to defin credit score do not have 

to be disclosed, and that thi posit be in accord with the intent of german data 

protect legislation.65 

It be worth note that the schufa judgment do not explicitli address autom 

decision-making, a the court decid an autom decis be not make becaus autom 

process be onli use for prepar of evidence, while the actual decis be make by 

a human being.66 the judgment be nonetheless insight insofar a they demonstr a strong 

tendenc to protect trade secret in relat to the right of access. As discuss below, thi case 

provid an exampl of an import limit on a right to explan establish on ani of 

the three legal base in the gdpr identifi above. autom decision-mak be defin in 

both the direct and gdpr a decision-mak base sole on autom processes.67 quit 

crucially, thi creat a loophol wherebi even nomin involv of a human in the 





62 judgment of the german feder court: score und datenschutz bgh, 28. 1. 2014 - VI ZR 156/13 (lg gießen, 

AG gießen) p. 169. 
63 ‘refer groups’ refer to profil or classif that inform the assess of creditworthiness. for a 

discussion, see for instance: mittelstadt and other (n 7); mireil hildebrandt and serg gutwirth, profil the 

european citizen (springer 2008). 
64 judgment of the german feder court : bgh: umfang einer von der schufa zu erteilenden auskunft bgh, 

urteil vom 28.1.2014 - VI ZR 156/13 (lg gießen, AG gießen) p. 490. the judgment show that the right of 

access be veri limited. 
65 the court, however, acknowledg that there be discuss about whether or not inform about the weight 

of featur and refer group should be includ in disclosures, and to what extent. 
66 reflect this, the court subsequ refus to discu the extent to which the logic involv need to be 

disclos by the data controller. rather, it address the gener oblig of data control to provid 

inform about the data be processed, deriv from the right of access. 
67 articl 15(1) of the direct defin ‘autom individu decisions’ a "a decis which produc legal 

effect concern him or significantli affect him and which be base sole on autom process of data 

intend to evalu certain person aspect relat to him, such a hi perform at work, creditworthiness, 

reliability, conduct, etc.” similarly, articl 22(1) gdpr defin ‘autom decision-making’ a “a decis 

base sole on autom processing, includ profiling, which produc legal effect concern him or her or 

similarli significantli affect him or her.” 







26 



decision-mak process allow for an otherwis autom mechan to avoid invok 

element of the right of access (both in the direct and gdpr) address autom 

decisions. 

finally, austrian legisl similarli implement the requir of articl 12a and 

15 of the direct in § 49(3)68 of the austrian data protect act. As oppos to german 

law, the right to obtain an explan about how an individu decis be reach be not 

implement a a safeguard. onli the right to express one’ view be name a one of the 

mandatori safeguards, a mandat by articl 15 of the directive. §49(3) establish an 

extend right of access (§26) which be the data subject’ right to know, upon request, about 

the logic of the process of autom decision-making.69 

austrian jurisprudence70 be veri vagu on the right of access and autom decision- 

making. exist decis do not fulli explain how much the data control be oblig to 

disclos under the right of access, and be in some sens contradictory. In most decisions, an 

oblig be recognis to explain how the system in question functions.71 In contrast, one 

decis state that the right of access accord to §26 and the right to know about the logic 

of the process (§49(3)) also includ the criterion and the weight of the criterion which would 

then allow the data subject to understand how a decis be reached. however, the austrian 

data protect commiss simultan acknowledg that trade secret can limit thi 

right. the commiss conclud that the extent to which the data control need to disclos 





68 bundesgesetz über den schutz personenbezogen daten (datenschutzgesetz 2000 - dsg 2000) 2000 (dsg 

2000) 49 ab (3). - “dem betroffenen ist bei automatisierten einzelentscheidungen auf antrag der logisch 

ablauf der automatisierten entscheidungsfindung in allgemein verständlich form darzulegen. § 26 abs. 2 bi 

10 gilt sinngemäß.” 
69 decis of the austrian data protect commiss 24.04.2009, app. nr. k121.461/0003-dsk/2009. 
70 amongst others, decis of the austrian data protect commission: 24.04.2009 app. nr. k121.461/0003- 

dsk/2009, address the need to explain the system used; 27.08.2010 - app. nr. k121.599/0014-dsk/2010; 

22.05.2013- app. nr. k121.935/0006-dsk/2013; 25.04.2008 - app. nr. 121.348/0007-dsk/2008, address the 

need to explain the system used; 08.05.2009 - app. nr. k121.470/0007-dsk/2009, address whether a process 

count a an autom decision; 20.03.2009 - app. nr. k121.467/0007-dsk/2009; 25.04.2008- app. nr. 

k121.348/0007-dsk/2008; 25.04.2008 - app. nr. k121.348/0007-dsk/2008; 25.05.2012 - app. nr. 

k121.791/0008-dsk/2012; 9.06.2009 - app. nr. k121.460/0008-dsk/2009; 19.06.2009 - app. nr. 

k121.494/0013-dsk/2009; 02.02.2007 - app. nr. k121.238/0006-dsk/2007; austrian administr court 

judgment 11.12.2009- 2 app. nr. 009/17/0223; 15.11.2012- app. nr. 2008/17/0096; 20.02.2008- app. nr. 

2005/15/0161. 
71 accord to a decis of the austrian data protect commiss 25.04.2008- app. nr. k121.348/0007- 

dsk/2008, the oblig be with the data control to inform about the procedur of autom decision-mak 

in an understand manner: “die pflicht, dem betroffenen den ablauf der automatisierten entscheidungsfindung 

in allgemein verständlich form darzulegen.” 







27 



decis criterion and weight must be determin on a case by case basis.72 In anoth case, 

the commiss deni the exist of an individu autom decis becaus the criterion 

use be base on a larg group rather than on the individual. therefore, the right of access 

and to know about the logic of autom process do not apply, if the basi of that decis 

be a group (“peer group” [our translation]) rather than (data about) the individual.73 thi 

distinct highlight a tension in the definit of autom decision-mak and profil in 

the directive, insofar a autom process of data describ groups, rather than 

individuals, do not allow for invoc of the right of access.74 

3.3.2 from the direct to the gdpr: the right to be inform 

the directive’ right of access provid an explan of the system’ function which have 

be heavili limit by trade secrets. the loophol – through which autom process that 

mere produc evid for decision-mak (rather than actual make decisions) be not 

subject to the right of access (specifically, the provis to disclos inform about the “logic 

involved”) – have also proven to be a signific limit factor. A rel lack of jurisprud 

across member state have not help clarifi and unifi the requirements. thi be problemat 

give the current and emerg growth in autom decision-mak and data processing. 

the gdpr appear to offer less protect to data subject concern explan of 

autom decision-mak than some current data protect law in europ base on the 

directive.75 In particular, the gdpr’ right of access appear to not offer more protect for 





72 decis of the austrian data protect commiss 12.12.2007 app. nr. k121.313/0016-dsk/2007. see also 

12.12.2007 app. nr. k121.313/0016-dsk/2007. It be import to note that in the latter decis the commiss 

talk about a hypothet oblig of the data controller, sinc the applic do not lodg a request under § 

49(3) but rather invok hi gener right of access under § 26. the commiss state that if the data subject have 

lodg a complaint under § 49(3), the data control would need to disclos thi information, but how far trade 

secret would limit the disclosur would need to be examin on a case to case basis, therefor there be no 

preced yet. 
73 In thi decis it be found that there be no autom decis becaus the decis be base on a group 

(“peer group”) rather than the individu and it be state that such an autom decis (market purposes) 

would not have enough signific effect and consequ to have § 49 (3) apply; see: decis of the austrian 

data protect commiss 10.03.2016 app. nr. dsb-d122.322/0001-dsb/2016. 
74 thi loophol point toward the need to recognis some type of group privaci right in data protect law, a 

process of identifi data be not requir to learn about and take action toward an individual. for further 

discussion, see: mittelstadt and other (n 7); brent mittelstadt, ‘from individu to group privaci in big data 

analytics’ [2017] philosophi & technology; linnet taylor, luciano floridi and bart van der sloot (eds), group 

privacy: new challeng of data technolog (1st edn, springer 2017); alessandro mantelero, ‘person data 

for decision purpos in the age of analytics: from an individu to a collect dimens of data protection’ 

(2016) 32 comput law & secur review 238; lee A bygrave, data protect law: approach it 

rationale, logic and limit (kluwer law intl 2002) ch 15. 
75 martini (n 35) rn. 42-44 explain how other provis of the gdpr fall behind and weaken the current data 

protect standards, e.g. in term of contractu relat a a legitim reason for autom decisions, in that 







28 



data subjects’ interest than the directive’ right of access.76 the use of future-ori 

semant in the gdpr (unlik the direct which do not explicitli acknowledg a decision- 

make timeline), a well a it terminolog overlap with notif duties, suggest that the 

gdpr intend to further limit the right of access regard autom decision-mak to 

explan of system functionality.77 the phrase of articl 15 gdpr in particular point 

toward a gener explan of the exist and function of autom decision-mak 

systems. articl 12(a) of the direct grant data subject a right to obtain “knowledg of the 

logic involv in ani automat process of data concern him at least in the case of the 

autom decis refer to in articl 15 ( 1 ).”78 It be interest to note that thi phrase be 

open to great interpret than articl 15 gdpr, 79 which requir onli inform about 

“the exist of autom decision-making, includ profiling, refer to in articl 22(1) 

and (4) and, at least in those cases, meaning inform about the logic involved, a well a 

the signific and the envisag consequ of such process for the data subject”. As 

argu above, thi phrase in the gdpr requir that the data subject be inform mere about 

the usag and function of autom decision-mak methods. the chang of word 

indic that the intent of the right of access in the gdpr be to grant access to inform 

about the “usage” and function of such autom decision-making. again, thi suggest 

an even strong intent to limit the right to explan of system functionality, not the 

rational and circumst of specif decisions. 





regard see also alexand roßnagel, philipp richter and maxi nebel, ‘besser internetdatenschutz für 

europa. vorschläg zur spezifizierung der ds-gvo’ (2013) 3 zeitschrift für datenschutz 103. 
76 hammersen and eisenri (n 59), comment on the ec’ origin 2012 draft, note that the interpret of 

the directive’ right of access through jurisprud suggest that the right grant a veri weak type of explan 

of autom process of data. the data subject be not provid a basi to scrutin the outcom of autom 

process of data, includ the method or algorithm used, or refer groups. the gdpr have not strengthen 

the right of access compar to the direct in ani notabl way, mean similar limit be like to apply. 
77 the directive’ right of access do not refer to the future, or use ident languag to notif duties. the 

latter point be unremarkable, a the direct do not contain notif duties. We can thu onli discu whether 

a right to explan of system function or specif decis be deriv by member state from the right 

of access in articl 12 of the directive, a oppos to ex ant or ex post explanations. 
78 

recit 41 of the direct make a similar claim. 
79 the right of access onli exist if the data control have person data of the data subjects, see: mireil 

hildebrandt, ‘the dawn of a critic transpar right for the profil era’, digit enlighten yearbook 

2012 (io press 2012). further, the right of access be limit a far a data of other data subject be concerned, 

see: mireil hildebrandt and serg gutwirth (n 63). 







29 



legal scholar be alreadi debat the scope of the right of access in the gdpr. 

accord to german commentary80 on the gdpr, it be suffici to be inform about the 

envisag consequ in a veri simpl manner. for instance, an explan of how a low 

rate of creditworthi can affect the choic of payment option would be sufficient.81 the 

type of explan recognis in prior german jurisprudence82 and german commentari on 

the gdpr83 be limit by overrid interest of the data controller, e.g. protect of trade 

secrets, or prevent of ‘game the system’ by users. the process that the algorithm use 

do not have to be disclosed.84 furthermore, the rate of similar group have histor not 

need to be disclosed.85 

these recent commentari on the gdpr follow the gener interpret and prior 

jurisprud on the right of access in the 1995 directive. accord to commentators, data 

control do not need to explain fulli the rational and circumst of a specif decis 

to provid data subject with “meaning inform about the logic involved” (articl 

15(1)h gdpr). rather, the inform offer by data control will address gener system 

functionality, and could be heavili curtail to protect the controller’ interest (e.g. trade 

secrets, intellectu property).86 It be worth note that addit limit can also be 

impos to protect the interest of other parti via union or member state law.87 paal also 

note that the purpos of articl 15 gdpr be to allow data subject to be inform about the 

usag and function of autom decision-making. As the scope of inform data 

control be requir to disclos in articl 15 be the same a in articl 13, articl 15 similarli 

requir onli limit inform about the function of the autom decision-mak 

system. paal also note that “meaning information” do not creat an oblig to disclos 





80 paal, ‘ds-gvo art. 13 informationspflicht bei erhebung von personenbezogenen daten bei der betroffenen 

person’ in paal and pauli (eds), datenschutz-grundverordnung (1st edn, beck-onlin 2017); martini (n 35) rn. 

42-44. 
81 paal (n 80). 
82 bgh, 2812014 - VI ZR 156/13 - bgh: umfang einer von der schufa zu erteilenden auskunft Rn 489-494 

[2014] bgh VI ZR 156/13, 2014 mmr rn. 494; bräutigam and schmidt-wudi (n 36) 61. 
83 paal (n 80). 
84 ibid. 
85 bgh (n 55). 
86 recit 47 and 63 gdpr address protect of the interest of data controllers. recit 63 notes, in relat to 

the right of access, “that right should not advers affect the right or freedom of others, includ trade secret 

or intellectu properti and in particular the copyright protect the software.” 
87 articl 23(1) gdpr address possibl further limit on oblig and right under articl 12-22, 

includ the right of access; articl 89(2) similarli allow for limit on right and oblig for process 

for scientif or histor research or statist purposes. finally, articl 89(3) address limit for process 

for archiv purpos or in the public interest. 







30 



the algorithm, but onli to provid basic inform about it logic. schmidt-wudi argu that 

if necessari to ass the accuraci of data processing, inform about the algorithm could 

be given, with appropri limit to protect trade secrets.88 however, the type of 

inform to be provid be not specified. 

As with the directive, the practic requir and util of the gdpr’ right of 

access will similarli onli be reveal through test and clarif via jurisprud and 

expert opinion, such a from the articl 29 work party, the new european data protect 

board establish by articl 68 gdpr,89 the european data protect supervisor, or it ethic 

advisori group90 (see section 5). however, the implement of the directive’ right of 

access strongli suggest that the gdpr’ right of access will be far from the ex post ‘general’ 

right to explan of system function and specif decisions, which we have argu it be 

mistakenli attribut to the gdpr. rather, through the right of access, the gdpr will grant a 

‘right to be informed’ about the exist of autom decision-mak and system 

functionality, limit in applic along the line abov and those describ in the follow 

section. 



4 what if a right to explan be granted? 

although a meaning right to explan of specif autom decis will not be 

introduc by the gdpr, the contribut of such a right to the account and transpar 

of autom decision-mak may provid compel reason for legisl or data 





88 On “meaning information” and articl 13, see: paal (n 33) rn. 19-22. the gener purpos of the right of 

access accord to articl 15 gdpr be the realis of the so call “two step model.” In a first step data 

subject have the right to a) know if their data be be process and b) if so, what data be used. In some case 

data control have to provid addit inform (such a the logic involv in processing). further, ibid 

rn. 31 the author suggest that the content and scope of the disclosur accord to articl 13 be the same a in 

articl 15. the author cite bräutigam and schmidt-wudi (n 36) in discuss the scope of articl 13 gdpr a 

one of the sourc to limit the data controller’ oblig under articl 15. thi suggest that articl 13 and 15 

gdpr do not differ in the oblig of the data control to disclos information. see also: paal (n 80) rn. 31- 

33. On disclosur of the algorithm, see: paal paal/pauly, datenschutz-grundverordnung, ds-gvo art. 13 

informationspflicht bei erhebung von personenbezogenen daten bei der betroffenen person, rn. 31 -32. On the 

necess of disclosur to verifi accuracy, see: schmidt-wudi in beck'scher online-kommentar 

datenschutzrecht, wolff/brink 19. edition, ds-gvo artikel 15 auskunftsrecht der betroffenen person, rn. 76- 

80 
89 the board fill a similar role to the articl 29 work parti establish by the directive. interestingly, the 

board have explicitli be call upon in articl 70(1)f to “issu guidelines, recommend and best 

practices…for further specifi the criterion and condit for decis base on profil pursuant to articl 

22(2).” In do so, the gdpr be implicitli acknowledg that the applic of the three case specifi in 

articl 22(2) (contract, union or member state law, or consent) remain an open issue. 
90 european data protect supervisor, ‘ethic advisori group’ (2015) 

<https://secure.edps.europa.eu/edpsweb/edps/edps/ethics> access 8 march 2017. 







31 



control to introduc one in the future. It be possibl to envisag at least four main scenario 

that may lead to a right of explan of specif autom decis in practice: 

1. An addit legal requir be enact by member states, separ from the gdpr, 

grant a right of explan of specif decis (similar to action take by german 

legisl under the 1995 directive) (see also section 5). 

2. base on gdpr articl 22 and recit 71, data control voluntari choos to offer a 

right to explan of specif decis a a “suitabl […] safeguard”. the right would 

be an addit and voluntari safeguard to those alreadi requir by articl 22(3). 

control could do thi on the basi that an explan be requir to invok one of 

the three legal requir articl 22(3) safeguards, i.e., express their views, obtain 

human intervention, or contest a decision. 

3. futur jurisprud broadli interpret the safeguard against autom decision- 

make (articl 22(3)) to establish a right to explan of specif decisions. thi 

could occur, for example, on the basi that an explan of the rational of an 

autom decis be requir in order to contest it or express views. futur guidelin 

of the european data protect board could support thi interpretation. 

4. futur jurisprud establish that the right of access (articl 15 gdpr) provid a 

basi for explan of specif autom decisions, a a requir to provid 

inform about the “exist of […] logic involv […] signific […] [or] 

envisag consequences” of autom decision-mak (articl 15(h)1). thi 

interpret could also be support in futur guidelin of the european data 

protect board. 



Of these scenarios, the third and fourth seem to be the most plausibl at the moment. 

concern the third, articl 22(3) guarante that human intervent be avail for 

autom decis render in fulfil of a contract or with explicit consent (see below). 

On thi basis, one may argu that, although it be certainli not explicit in the phrase of articl 

22(3), the right to obtain human intervention, express view or contest a decis be 

meaningless if the data subject cannot understand how the contest decis be taken. the 

right to contest have alreadi be interpret by member states, in enact the 1995 directive, 

a mere a right to forc a control to make a new decision. thi interpret be found in 

the UK data protect act 1998 (articl 12(2)b): subject can demand a new decis to be 

made, albeit without ani way to ass the reliabl of the old decision. A broad read of 







32 



articl 22(3), accord to which an explan be requir to contest a decision, would 

strengthen the right to contest. In thi case, the argument for a right to explan of specif 

decis could be further buttress by draw on the right to fair trial and effect remedi 

enshrin in articl 6 and 13 of the european convent on human right and articl 47 of 

the charter of fundament right of the european union. without an explan of how the 

algorithm works, both right be hard to enforce, becaus the decisions/evid use will be 

imposs to contest in court.91 

concern the fourth option, implement of the right of access in the 1995 

direct have show the need for interpret of vagu provis by member state and 

nation courts. As note above, consensu have not emerg over the mean or requir 

impli for data control when explain the “logic involved” in autom individu 

decisions. austrian jurisprud have demonstr that the scope of “logic involved” be 

suffici broad to includ that some element of the rational or circumst of a specif 

decis be explain along with system functionality, albeit limit sever by data 

controller’ interest (e.g. trade secrets). despit aim to unifi data protect law across the 

member states, the gdpr’ right of access will need to be similarli interpret and tested. 

given that the refer to “logic involved” occur in both the direct and gdpr, it be 

plausibl (but unlikely) that futur legal interpret of the right of access could establish a 

right to explan of specif decisions. 



4.1 limit on a right to explan deriv from the right of access (articl 15) 

or safeguard against autom decision-mak (articl 22(3)) 

assum one or inde a combin of the previou four scenario occurs, and henc that a 

right to explan of specif decis be granted, other provis in the gdpr may still 

limit it scope significantly. A ‘general’ right to explan a propos elsewher (see section 

1), seemingli applic to all type of autom processing, would not exist. A primari 

limit be the narrow definit of autom decision-mak in articl 22(1),92 defin a 





91 tal zarsky, ‘transpar predictions’ (2013) 2013 univers of illinoi law review 

<http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2324240> access 17 june 2016. A right to contest 

realis through expert human intervent may be the most pragmat safeguard against autom decisions. 

elsewher it have be argu that transpar disclosur prove more impact if tailor toward train third 

parti or regul a oppos to data subject themselves. 
92 bygrav (n 46) discu compar limit on the definit of ‘autom individu decisions’ in the 

1995 directive. 







33 



a decis base sole on autom processing, includ profiling, which produc 

legal effect concern [the data subject] or similarli significantli affect him or her. 



An autom process must meet thi definit for articl 15(1)h (right of access) or 22(3) 

to apply, and thu for a futur right to explan establish on either basi to be invoked. 

autom decision-mak must have “legal or other signific effects,” with a 

decis base “sole on autom process of data” (articl 22(1)). the latter requir 

open a loophol wherebi ani human involv in a decision-mak process could mean 

it be not ‘autom decision-making’.93 while the requir level of human involv be not 

clear in practice, the phrase ‘solely’ suggest even some nomin human involv may be 

sufficient. there be still uncertainti a to whether the usag of autom process for the 

prepar of a decis ultim act upon by a human constitut a decis “sole base 

on autom processing,” if the human do not interfere, verify, or modifi the decis or 

decision-mak rationale.94 prepar of evid for a decision, and make the decis 

itself, be not necessarili equival acts.95 martini believ that autom process of data 

for “assist to make a decision” or “prepar of a decision” be not within the scope of 

articl 22.96 decis base predominantli on autom processes, but with nomin human 

involvement, would thu not invok articl 15(1)h (right of access) or articl 22(3) 

(safeguard against autom decision-making), and thu would not requir an explan of 

system function or the rational of specif decisions, assum that such a right to 

explan of specif decis be establish on either basis.97 

interpret of articl 15 of the directive, which be also limit to decis “base 

sole on autom data processing,” do not provid clarification. the strict read of 

‘solely’ by martini be reflect in the schufa judgment alreadi discuss (see: section 





93 thi posit be also adopt in: fusion (n 2); bygrav (n 46); hildebrandt (n 79) 51 in refer to the ec’ 

2012 draft, explain that human intervent will render articl 20 inapplicable. 
94 martini (n 35) rn. 16-19. 
95 bygrav (n 46). 
96 martini (n 35) rn. 20. 
97 possibl ground for oppos view to martini can be found in dimitrio pachtiti v european commiss F- 

35/08 [2010] european civil servic tribun ecli:eu:f:2010:51 [63], <http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal- 

content/en/all/?uri=celex%3a62008fj0035> access 22 februari 2017: “furthermore, although it be true 

that, a the commiss observes, the correct of the admiss test be carri out by comput and that, 

therefore, it be base on an autom procedur with no subject discretion, the fact remain that the conduct 

of that autom procedur involv a decis on the merits, in so far a the ‘advisori committee’[…] first, 

determin the level of difficulti of the multipl choic question set dure the admiss test and, second, 

cancel certain questions, a recount in paragraph 26 of thi judgment. those be evid task to be carri 

out by a competit select board.” 







34 



3.3.1). In contrast, bygrav argu that a rel notion of ‘solely’ be requir for the phrase 

to be meaningful. accord to thi position, decis formal attribut to humans, but 

origin “from an autom data-process oper the result of which be not activ 

assess by either that person or other person befor be formalis a a decision,” would 

fall under the scope of ‘autom decision-making’.98 It be not clear how thi provis in the 

gdpr will be interpret in the future. 

the scope of data process to which articl 22 (and recit 71) appli be narrow 

in the adopt version of the gdpr compar to prior drafts. the phrase “a decis base 

sole on autom processing” prove a point of content between the EC and EP drafts. 

articl 20(5) of the ep’ propos amendments99 to the ec’ draft100 add the phrase 

‘predominantly’ to the measur to which the articl would appli (“profil which lead to 

measur produc legal effect concern the data subject or do similarli significantli 

affect the interests, right or freedom of the concern data subject shall not be base sole 

or predominantli on autom process and shall includ human assess […]” [ital 

added]). follow this, the EP want to restrict autom decis on a broader basi than 

the ec, i.e. those predominantli and not onli sole on autom processes. with 

“predominantly” not be adopt in the final text of the gdpr, it would appear the strict 

read of “solely” be intended. 

question can also be rais over what constitut “legal effects” or “similarli 

signific effects”101 requir for articl 22 to apply. recit 71 provid some guidance, a 

it describ certain situat of “significances” e.g. onlin credit applic and e-recruit 

practices. where a decis have no legal or signific effect, articl 22 do not apply. for an 

autom decis to have legal effect on the data subjects, it would need to affect their legal 

status.102 sinc in most case the data subject have no legal right to be hire or to be approv 

for a credit application, case of be deni an interview or credit by an autom process 

would not fall under these categories.103 admittedly, such case could be consid to have 

“similarli significant” effects. however, the term “similarli significant” be itself vagu and 





98 bygrav (n 46). 
99 european parliament committe on civil liberties, justic and home affair (n 25). 
100 european commiss (n 26). 
101 martini (n 35) rn. 25-28. legal effect must influenc the legal statu of the data subject, wherea signific 

effect could mean [our translat of rn. 27] “be deni to be part of a contract or be deni to choos a 

payment method e.g. paypal.” 
102 bygrav (n 46). 
103 lewinski (n 52) rn. 28-31; ibid rn. 32-37. 







35 



requir interpretation; signific vari on the percept of the data subject (effect of 

receiv a reject letter will depend on the econom situat of the data subject, for 

instance), wherea impact on legal statu can be determin accord to the letter of the 

law.104 further, in practic it may caus a burden for the data subject to prove that process 

affect them significantly.105 altern an extern standard for what constitut signific 

effect could be defined. 

As these constraint demonstrate, the definit of autom decision-mak in 

articl 22(1) significantli narrow the scope of ani futur right to explanation. autom 

decision-mak that do not meet the definit provid in articl 22(1) would not be 

constrain by provis of articl 22, or the addit measur requir a part of 

notif duti (articl 13(2)f and 14(2)g) or the right of access (articl 15(1)h), includ 

inform regard the “logic involved” (see: section 3.3). A right to explan 

implement through ani of the four path specifi abov would similarli not apply, still 

significantli narrow the right’ potenti applic to a veri narrow rang of case 

meet all the requir in articl 22(1) and discuss in thi section. 

A further factor would constrain the inform offer a part of an explanation. As 

indic in the discuss of the right of access in the 1995 directive, ani futur right to 

explan would like also be limit by overrid interest of the data controller. recit 

63 of the gdpr similarli establish that the right of access should not infring upon the right 

and freedom of others, includ data controllers. the right can be limit for the sake of trade 

secret or intellectu properti rights, especi regard copyright of software. As with the 

right of access itself, the specif disclosur requir of recit 63 requir interpretation.106 

the recit note that 

the result of those consider should not be a refus to provid all inform to 

the data subject. 







104 bygrav (n 46). 
105 hajar malekian, ‘profil under gener data protect regul (gdpr): stricter regime?’ [2016] 

researchg 

<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/304102392_profiling_under_general_data_protection_regulation_ 

gdpr_stricter_regime> access 20 novemb 2016. 
106 recit 63 suggest the right of access should allow a data subject to “know and obtain commun in 

particular with regard to the purpos for which the person data be processed, where possibl the period for 

which the person data be processed, the recipi of the person data, the logic involv in ani automat 

person data process and, at least when base on profiling, the consequ of such processing.” 







36 



jurisprud and legal commentari concern the directive’ right of access (see section 

3.3.1) suggest that the balanc between the data subject’ right of access and data controllers’ 

right and freedom will requir limit disclosur of the “logic involved” in autom 

decision-making, primarili concern system function rather than the rational and 

circumst of specif decisions. 



4.2 limit exclus to a right to explan deriv from safeguard against 

autom decision-mak (articl 22(3)) 

In addit to the abov limit on a futur right to explanation, a number of further 

limit be exclus to a right deriv from articl 22(3). In the first instance, articl 22(2) 

state three condit that, if met by an autom decision-mak process, caus articl 

22(1) not to apply: 

(a) be necessari for enter into, or perform of, a contract between the data subject 

and a data controller; 

(b) be authoris by union or member state law to which the control be subject and 

which also lay down suitabl measur to safeguard the data subject' right and 

freedom and legitim interests; or 

(c) be base on the data subject' explicit consent. 

articl 22(3) specifi that safeguard (i.e. the right to human intervention, expression, and 

contest) onli appli when autom decision-mak meet articl 22(2)a or c. the scope of 

ani futur right to explan enact in relat to the safeguard specifi in articl 22(3) 

be therefor limit to case meet claus (a) or (c), i.e. those necessari for enter or 

perform a contract,107 or with the subject’ explicit consent. It be worth note that the 

safeguard in 22(3) do not appli when a decis be make in accord with union or member 

state law (articl 22(2)b). In the latter case, explicit and specif safeguard be not described. 

rather, “suitabl measur to safeguard the data subject” must be laid down in the relev 

union or member state law. thi claus potenti exclud a signific rang of case of 

autom decision-mak from the safeguard in articl 22(3) and ani right to explan 

deriv thereof. german commentari on the gdpr have suggest that the “suitabl measures” 





107 martini (n 35) rn. 31-32, accord to whom the necess for the perform of a contract hing on the 

agre goal of the contract between the data control and the data subject. however, the author do not 

consid the vagu of the passag and fail to address the lack of consent which be not a precondit a be it 

list under lit. C. 







37 



call for in articl 22(2)b do not includ the disclosur of the algorithm use due to the risk 

pose to trade secrets; however, measur to minimis and correct discrimin and bia 

should be implemented.108 

the exempt for autom decis relat to contract rais a further limitation. 

articl 22 do not defin when autom decision-mak be “necessary” for enter or 

perform a contract, which run the risk of ‘necessity’ be defin sole by the data 

controller. additionally, it be import to note that articl 22(2)a envis a situat that be 

differ from explicit consent (which be list a a separ except in articl 22(2)c). 

legisl be contempl a situat where data control make autom decis 

that be necessari for a contract, but without seek consent first. If consent would be 

necessary, it would have be enough to list the contractu except under articl 22(2)c. 

thi structur suggest that there can be situat in which the data subject do not consent 

to an autom decis and, apart from the gener notif requir and right of 

access in articl 13-15, do not know about the decision. data control be therefor 

allow to decid that autom decision-mak be necessari for contractu obligations, 

while the data subject be unabl to object to it. In thi case, the data subject retain the right to 

contest, express view or obtain human intervent for a decis reach under articl 22(3), 

but not to object to it be make in the first place. 

4.2.1 two interpret of articl 22 

sever other restrict on articl 22(3) and ani futur right to explan deriv thereof 

depend upon whether articl 22 be interpret a a prohibit or a right to object. articl 22(1) 

gdpr state that “the data subject shall have the right not to be subject to a decis base 

sole on autom processing, includ profiling, which produc legal effect concern 

him or her or similarli significantli affect him or her.” due to it languag (“a right not to”), 

articl 22(1) can be interpret in two ways: a a prohibition109 or a right to object to autom 

decision-making. the two interpret offer veri differ protect to the interest of data 

subject and data controllers. 





108 ibid rn. 33-37. 
109 ibid rn. 1-7, 15 argu that it be a prohibition, howev it be acknowledg that the placement of articl 22 in 

the “right section of the data subjects” caus confusion. the argument be base on the german implement 

of the 1995 direct into nation law, which be in fact phrase a a prohibition. however, the author also 

state that the legal statu (right to object or prohibition) of articl 15 of the direct and articl 22 gdpr be 

disputed: see ibid rn. 14 a, 29. 







38 



the first interpret read articl 22(1) a a prohibition, mean that data 

control would be oblig not to engag in autom decision-mak prior to show 

that a condit in articl 22(2)a-c be met. the second interpret read articl 22(1) a 

establish for data subject a right to object to autom decision-making, which will not 

appli if one of the requir in articl 22(2)a-c be met. these interpret be 

differenti by whether action be requir by the data subject to restrict autom decision- 

making. the action in question, a formal object by the data subject, requir both awar 

of the exist of autom decision-mak and a willing to intercede, both of which 

requir intent effort on the part of the data subject. 

notably, thi ambigu have exist sinc the data protect direct 1995.110 the 

word of articl 15 of the directive111 allow the ‘right not to be subject of an autom 

decision’ refer to in section 1 (“member state shall grant the right to everi person not to 

be subject to a decis which produc legal effect concern him or significantli affect 

him and which be base sole on autom process […]” [ital added]) to be interpret 

a a prohibit or a right to object.112 the ambigu lead member state to implement thi 

right and associ protect differently. 

articl 15 of the direct have be implement by austria, belgium, germany, 

finland, the netherlands, portugal, sweden and ireland a a gener prohibition,113 with some 

exceptions. the UK have a differ model: data subject be entitl to request that no 

autom decis be make about them, but not in the case of so-cal “exempt decisions.” In 





110 bird & bird, ‘profil and autom decision-taking’ <http://www.twobirds.com/~/media/pdfs/gdpr- 

pdfs/35--guide-to-the-gdpr--profiling-and-automated-decisiontaking.pdf?la=en> access 10 novemb 2016 

explain how differ countri either have prohibit or right to object: “thi could either be read a a 

prohibit on such process or that the process may take place but that individu have a right to object to 

it. thi ambigu be also present in the data protect direct and member state differ in their approach 

to the point.” 
111 martini (n 35) rn. 42-44 explain how the german make use of the margin of appreci of articl 15 of 

the direct and phrase it like a prohibition. 
112 

hildebrandt (n 79) 50 hint toward but do not make it explicit: “it may be that if I don't exercis the right, 

the autom decis be not a violat of the directive.” additionally, “the draft regulation, however, 

stipul that a person may onli be subject to autom decis under specifi conditions, impli that 

thi right be not mere a right to object.” she further explain how the same can be true for the origin draft 

articl 20 gdpr propos of 25th januari 2012; bygrav (n 46) 3 see articl 15 of the direct a 

suffici ambigu to be interpret a both a prohibit and a right to object. 
113 korff, ‘new challeng to data protect study-work paper no. 2’ (n 39) 84. see also p. 84 ff for further 

detail on how other member state implement the directive. 







39 



case where data subject have not lodg such a request, data control have to inform them 

about the fact that an autom decis have be make a well a about the outcome.114 

due to the similar of languag and content between articl 15 of the direct and 

articl 22 gdpr, the vari implement of articl 15 a a prohibit or right to object 

by member state support the interpret that articl 22 be ambigu and can be read a a 

prohibit or right to object. resolv the ambigu prior to 2018 be critical, a the two 

interpret have veri differ consequ for data subject and data controllers. 

4.2.2 impact of the interpret of articl 22 on a right to explan 

If articl 22 be interpret a a prohibition, data control will not be allow to make 

autom decis about a data subject until one of the three requir specifi in articl 

22(2) (necessari to enter or to perform a contract, authoris by law, or explicit consent) be 

met. data subject do not need to act to prevent autom decision-making, but be rather 

protect by default. supervisori author would shoulder the burden of enforc articl 

22 by ensur autom decision-mak be carri out legally, and could levi penalti and 

fine in case of illeg decision-making. data controllers, when make autom decis 

under articl 22(2)a or c, would need to enact safeguard a specifi in articl 22(3). As 

explain abov (see section 4), these safeguard could be voluntarili or legal extend to 

includ a right to explanation. 

If articl 22 be interpret a a right to object, autom decision-mak be restrict 

onli to case in which the data subject activ objects. when an object be entered, decision- 

make must be show to meet articl 22(2)a-c. for autom decis that meet a 

requir of articl 22(2), the data subject cannot object. however, when articl 22(2)a or 

c be met – mean that the decis be make under contract or with consent – the safeguard 

specifi in articl 22(3) would also apply. In these cases, the data subject would be abl to 

request human intervention, express her views, and contest the decis and, if enact in the 

future, demand a right to explan (see: section 3.1). critically, if articl 22 grant a right 

to object autom decision-mak be legal unchalleng by default, even if it do not 

meet ani of the requir set out in articl 22(2), so long a the data subject do not enter 

an objection. thi limit increas the burden on data subject to protect activ their 





114 korff, ‘new challeng to data protect study-countri report’ (n 51) 37 ff. 







40 



interest relat to profil and autom decision-mak by monitor and object to 

autom decision-making. 

with thi comparison in mind, interpret articl 22 a a prohibit grant great 

protect by default to data subject’ interests, at least in the case in which articl 22(3) 

would apply. As a prohibition, data control would be legal oblig to limit autom 

decision-mak meet the definit in articl 22(1) to the three case identifi in articl 

22(2) (contract, union or member state law, consent). 

In contrast, a right to object would not pre-empt restrict the type of autom 

decision-mak undertaken by data control to the three case defin in articl 22(2). 

rather, these restrict would onli appli when a data subject lodg an object against a 

specif instanc of decision-making. At that point, process not meet a requir of 

articl 22(2) would need to stop, and the safeguard specifi in articl 22(2)b or articl 22(3) 

would never be triggered. articl 22 a a right to object would thu circumv a right to 

explan introduc through articl 22(3) by allow autom decision-mak not 

meet a requir in articl 22(2) to occur until the data subject enter an objection. such 

‘legal’ but pre-object decision-mak would not be subject to a right to explan deriv 

from articl 22(3). with that said, a right to explan deriv from the right of access would 

not be similarli circumvented. In thi case a data subject’ right to explan would appli to 

ani decision-mak meet the definit provid in articl 22(1), even if the decision- 

make prove to not meet a requir of articl 22(2) follow the data subject’ 

objection. 

To summarise, if a right to explan be enact in the future, at best data subject will 

onli deserv an explan when autom decis have (1) legal or similarli signific 

effects, and (2) be base sole on autom processes. further, if a right to explan be 

deriv specif from articl 22(3), explan will be requir onli if autom 

decision-mak be (3) carri out to enter or under contract, or with explicit consent; and (4) 

when overrid interest of the data control (e.g. trade secrets) do not exist, a specifi in 

recit 63. further restrict on a right to explan deriv from articl 22(3) depend 

upon the prevail interpret of articl 22 a a prohibit or a right to object. 

To disambigu thi limit type of right to explan from the ‘general’ right to 

explan in futur discuss of the impact of the gdpr on autom process of data, 

and to reflect accur the scope of limit on ani such right, we recommend address 

instead a ‘right to be informed’ about the exist of autom decision-mak and system 







41 



functionality. the right to be inform address the inform provid to data subject 

about autom decision-making, take into account all of the limit on the scope of 

applic and type of inform to be provid by data control a describ in the 

preced two sections. the right to be inform further account for preced set in the 1995 

directive, and the impact these preced will like have on futur interpret of the 

gdpr’ notif duti (articl 13-14), right of access (articl 15), and right not to be 

subject to autom decision-mak (articl 22) 



5 conclusion: the futur of account autom decision-mak 

despit claim to the contrary, a meaning right to explan be not legal mandat by the 

gener data protect regulation. given the prolifer of autom decision-mak and 

autom process of data to support human decision-mak (i.e. ‘not solely’), thi be a 

critic gap in transpar and accountability. the gdpr appear to give strong protect 

against autom decision-mak but, a it stands, the protect may prove ineffectual. 

however, transpar and account autom decision-mak can still be achiev befor 

the gdpr come into forc in 2018. 

A right to explan of specif decis be not legal mandat by the safeguard 

contain in articl 22(3), or notif duti in articl 13 and 14. As proven by the 1995 

directive, the right of access be ambiguous. however, the gdpr’ right of access provid a 

right to explan of system functionality, what we call a ‘right to be informed’, restrict by 

the interest of data control and futur interpret of articl 15. ani futur right to 

explan will further be constrain by the definit of ‘autom decision-making’ in 

articl 22(1), which be limit to decis base sole on autom process with legal or 

similarli signific effect for the data subject. As it stands, a meaning right of explan 

to the rational and circumst of specif autom decis be not forthcoming. 

analysi of prior draft of the gdpr have reveal sever tension between the 

european parliament, commission, and council. the placement of the right to explan in 

non-bind recit 71 appear to be a purpos chang deliber in trilogue. the EP 

gener sought strong protect for data subject against autom decision-mak than 

the EC or council. specifically, the EP want to includ a right to explan in articl 20,115 





115 european digit right (n 27) 140. 







42 



wherea the council would have prefer to have the right to explan in recit 58.116 the 

EC do not includ such a right at all. further, the EP want to protect citizen from autom 

decis that have legal or signific effect when predominantly,117 and not just solely,118 

base on autom processes. human assess would also have be required.119 

As the gdpr be intend to unifi data protect law across all european member 

states, the interpret of articl 22 a a prohibit or right to object be critic important. 

which interpret will win out in the implement of the gdpr in 2018 be not yet clear. 

both be viabl a suggest by the split in the implement of articl 15 in the data 

protect direct 1995 by member states. without clarif prior to enforcement, 

articl 22 will allow for conflict interpret of the right of data subject and control 

concern autom decision-mak across member states. conflict may soon becom 

inevit becaus the two interpret protect veri differ interests. 

articl 22 interpret a a prohibit offer great protect to the interest of data 

subject by prohibit all autom decision-mak not meet a requir of articl 

22(2). In contrast, when interpret a a right, articl 22 creat a loophol that allow data 

control to undertak autom decision-mak without meet a requir in articl 

22(2), unless the data subject objects. onc an object be entered, decision-mak must be 

show to meet one of these requir or must stop altogether. As a right, the data subject’ 

interest in not be subject to autom decision-mak be undermined, insofar a 

signific effort (i.e. enter an objection) be requir from the subject to protect her interests. 

articl 22 therefor roughli favour the interest of data subject when interpret a a 

prohibition, and the interest of data control when interpret a a right. 

the ambigu of the right not to be subject to autom decision-mak (articl 22), and 

the loophol and weak it creates, show that the gdpr be lack precis languag and 

explicit and well-defin right and safeguards, and therefor run the risk of be toothless. 

sever action may be recommend to correct some of the weak identifi in our 

analysis. the follow recommend be intend a guidanc for legisl and polici 





116 ibid 40. 
117 ibid 140. 
118 both the EC and european council onli sought protect for decis sole base on autom processing, 

see: ibid 139. 
119 ibid 140. 







43 



step to correct the defici we have identifi in the protect afford to data subject 

against autom decision-making. 

legisl progress can be achiev by modifi the gdpr prior to it enforcement, or 

passag of addit law by member states. addit legisl step by member state 

be highli likely, a see with the uk’ hous of commons’ scienc and technolog 

committee’ recent inquiri on “algorithm in decision-making,”120 which be inspir in part 

by inform consult by ‘sens about science’ (a uk-bas charit trust) with the 

author of thi paper. the inquiri gather expert opinion on how to achiev account and 

transpar in algorithm decision-making, includ identif of barrier (e.g. trade 

secrets), mechan for oversight, and requir to make decis explainable. As 

evid that the recommend make here can be the start point for new laws, the 

inquiri explicitli refer to the right and duti laid out in the gdpr. On the polici side, the 

recommend can influenc futur guidelin issu by bodi such a the articl 29 

work party, the european data protect board, the european data protect supervisor, 

and it ethic advisori group. 

We make the follow recommendations: 



1) add a right to explan to legal bind articl 22(3) 

If a right to explan be intend a suggest in recit 71, it should be explicitli add to 

a legal bind articl of the gdpr. such an implement should clarifi the scope of 

applic of the right with regard to the impact of articl 22 interpret a a prohibit or 

right to object. alternatively, member state can be encourag to implement law on top of 

the gdpr that requir an explan of specif decisions. A right to explan of specif 

decis could be consid a suitabl safeguard necessit by articl 22(2)b and 22(3) if 

an explan be necessari to contest a decision, a alreadi prescrib in 22(3). the right to 

contest a decision, to obtain human intervent or to express view grant in articl 22(3) 

may be meaningless if the data subject cannot understand how the contest decis be 

made. To thi end, a right to explan can be introduc requir data control to provid 

inform about the rational of the contest decision. clear requir should be 





120 common select committee, ‘algorithm in decision-mak inquiri launched’ (uk parliament, 2017) 

<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/science-and-technology- 

committee/news-parliament-2015/algorithms-in-decision-making-inquiry-launch-16-17/> access 8 march 

2017. 







44 



introduc state the evid to be suppli by the data controller. evid regard the 

weight of features, decis tree or classif structure, and gener logic of the decision- 

make system may be sufficient. however, the risk for innov and benefici process 

pose by a right to explan that requir autom decision-mak method to be human 

interpret should be serious considered.121 



2) clarifi the mean of the “exist of,” “meaning information,” “logic involved,” 

“significance,” and “envisag consequences” in articl 15(1)h to indic a ‘right to 

be informed’ 

the languag and mean of core concept in articl 15 be ambiguous. thi leaf open the 

possibl of a right to explan of the rational of specif decis (see section 3.3.2). 

however, thi interpret be implaus for a number of reasons. As explain in section 

3.3, the semant and histori of the right to access, and the duplic of provis in articl 

13-14, suggest that the right of access be intend mere a a counterweight to the notif 

duti of data controllers, and not a a mean to introduc a new right (i.e. a right to explan 

of specif decisions) beyond the scope of articl 13-14.122 critically, interpret articl 15 

to introduc a right to explan of specif decis would not match the intend purpos 

of the right of access, which accord to recit 63 gdpr be meant to allow the data subject 

“to be awar of, and verify, the law of processing.” languag should be add to clarifi 

that articl 15 be intend either a a counterweight to articl 13-14, and thu provid a 

limit ‘right to be informed’ about the exist of autom decision-mak a well a 

system functionality, or a a right to explan of specif decisions. the intend mean 

of the five core concept of articl 15(1)h should be make explicit, and their impact on the 

inform requir for data control to commun to data subject under the right to 

access (and, similarly, articl 13-14 notif duties). 



3) clarifi the languag of articl 22(1) to indic when decis be base sole on 

autom process 

articl 22 be limit in applic to decis base sole on autom processing. 

however, it be unclear what the phrase mean in practice. the potenti loophol (similarli 





121 mittelstadt and other (n 7). 
122 paal (n 33) rn. 19-22. 







45 



see in the german schufa judgments), by which nomin involv of a human at ani 

stage of the autom process mean the process be not sole automated, should be closed. 

there be still uncertainti if the usag of autom process for the prepar of a decis 

constitut sole autom processes, if the human that take the final decis do not wish 

to interfer or to adopt the decision. clarif can be offer by return to the phrase 

“sole or predominantli base on” propos by the ep123 in articl 20(5), or by provid 

specif exampl of decision-mak base sole and predominantli on autom 

process of data. 



4) clarifi the languag of articl 22(1) to indic what count a a legal or signific 

effect of autom decision, includ profil 

articl 22 onli appli for autom decision-mak with “legal effects” or “similarli 

signific effects.”124 recit 71 onli name two exampl of such effects: automat refus 

of an onlin credit applic and e-recruit practices. the scope of these phrase should be 

make explicit: do they, for instance, refer onli to effect identifi in the articl of the gdpr, 

or to some broader definition? At a minimum, the perspect to be take in defin 

“signific effects” should be identified. Do effect need to be signific from the subject 

perspect of the data subject or accord to some extern standard? 



5) clarifi the languag of articl 22(2)a, “necessari for entering, or perform of a 

contract” 

articl 22(2)a name thi case a an except of either the prohibit of autom decision- 

make or the right to object to autom decision-making. sinc it be like that the necess 

of such measur will be defin by the data control and lit (a) do not requir consent of 

the data subject (sinc thi be a separ except list under lit (c), thi exempt run the 

risk of weaken the right of data subjects. 



6) clarifi the languag of articl 22 to indic a prohibit 





123 european parliament committe on civil liberties, justic and home affair (n 25). 
124 As alreadi propos by the articl 29 work party, see articl 29 data protect work party, ‘advic 

paper on essenti element of a definit and a provis on profil within the EU gener data 

protect regulation’ (2013) 29 <http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/article-29/documentation/other- 

document/files/2013/20130513_advice-paper-on-profiling_en.pdf> access 10 march 2017. 







46 



ideally, the languag that allow for two plausibl interpret should be clarifi prior to 

2018 when the gdpr come into force. due to the number of loophol and weaken of 

articl 22(3) safeguard introduc if articl 22 be interpret a a right to object, a well a 

wide implement of articl 15 of the 1995 direct a a prohibition, we recommend that 

the languag use in articl 22(2) (“paragraph 1 shall not appli if the decision:”) be revis to 

indic clearli and explicitli that articl 22 be intend a a prohibit against autom 

decision-making. 



7) As a counterweight to trade secrets, introduc an extern audit mechan for 

autom decision-making, or set intern audit requir for data control 

both the right of access and ani futur right to explan will face signific limit due 

to the sensit of trade secret and intellectu properti rights. As our examin of the 

1995 direct shows, explan grant under the right of access be normal limit to 

system function and significantli limit to protect data control interests. An ideal 

solut would allow for examin of autom decision-mak systems, includ the 

rational and circumst of specif decisions, by a trust third party. thi approach limit 

the risk to data control of expos trade secrets, while also provid an oversight 

mechan for data subject that can oper when explan be infeas or too complex 

for lay comprehension. the power of supervisori author could be expand in thi 

regard. alternatively, a european regul could be creat specif for audit 

algorithms, befor (certifications) and/or after algorithm be be deployed.125 



8) support further research into the feasibl of explan altern account 

mechan 

even if a right to explan be legal grant in the future, the feasibl and practic 

requir to offer explan to data subject remain unclear. In line with current work 

on interpret autom decision-mak and machin learn methods,126 research need 





125 compar approach to regul big data and algorithm have be suggest by: viktor mayer- 

schönberger and kenneth cukier, big data : A revolut that will transform how We live, work and think 

(john murray 2013); andrew tutt, ‘an fda for algorithms’ (social scienc research network 2016) ssrn 

scholarli paper ID 2747994 <http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2747994> access 13 april 2016. 
126 for a detail discuss on regulatori and interpret issu relat to algorithms, see: daniel keat 

citron and frank A pasquale, ‘the score society: due process for autom predictions’ (social scienc 

research network 2014) ssrn scholarli paper ID 2376209 <https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2376209> 







47 



to be conduct in parallel to determin whether and how explan can and should be 

offer to data subject (or proxi thereof) with differ level of expertis and interests. 

what count a a meaning explan for one individu or group may not be meaning 

for another; requir for ‘meaning explanations’ must be set if a legal right to 

explan be to be practic useful. the right to explan be also not the onli way to 

achiev account and transpar in autom decision-making.127 further attent 

should be give to the develop and deploy of altern legal safeguard that can 

supplement the protect offer by the gdpr. data control work in highli sensit 

or riski sector could, for instance, be requir to use human interpret decision-mak 

methods.128 method and (ethical) requir for audit algorithms129 should also be 

further developed, both a standalon account tool and a mechan to provid an 

evid trail for provid explan of autom decisions. 



As the ambigu highlight in these recommend indicate, the gdpr can be a toothless 

or power mechan to protect data subject depend on it eventu legal interpretation. 

the effect of the new framework will larg be determin by supervisori authorities, 

the articl 29 work party, the european data protect board, the european data 

protect supervisor, it ethic advisori group,130 a well a nation court and their futur 

judgments.131 As it stands, transpar and account autom decision-mak be not yet 

guarante by the gdpr; nor be a right to explan of specif decis forthcoming. At 

best, data subject will be grant a ‘right to be informed’ about the exist of autom 

decision-mak and system functionality. these shortcom should be address befor the 

gdpr come into forc in 2018. 





access 4 march 2017; alfredo vellido, josé david martín-guerrero and paulo JG lisboa, ‘make machin 

learn model interpretable.’, esann (cites 2012). 
127 for addit discuss of transpar and the gdpr, see: dimitra kamarinou, christoph millard and 

jatind singh, ‘machin learn with person data’ 

<https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2865811> access 8 march 2017. 
128 burrel (n 13). 
129 sandvig and other (n 8); mittelstadt and other (n 7); brent mittelstadt, ‘audit for transpar in content 

person systems’ (2016) 10 intern journal of commun 12. see also the discuss of ex post 

test of outcomes, and ex ant accept of error in zarski (n 91). 
130 disclosure: luciano floridi be a member of the european data protect supervisors’ ethic advisori group. 
131 

articl 83(5)b invest supervisori author with the power to impos fine up to 4% of the total 

worldwid annual turnov in case where right of the data subject (articl 12 to 22) have be infringed. thi 

lever can be use to enforc complianc and to enhanc data protection. 


