






































cqt highlight â•ﬂ whi you might trust a quantum comput with secret â•ﬁ even over the internet 


home 

about Us 

our mission 

for visitor 

for student 

join Us 

peopl 

staff & student 

director 

alumni 

research 

By group and topic 

public 

these 

highlight 

event 

latest happen 

colloquia 

calendar 

visitor 

workshop & 

confer 

outreach 

overview 

for industri 

for public 

for school 

for media 

art + scienc 

contact Us 

search 

It may be possibl to control a quantum comput over the internet without reveal what you be calculating, thank to the mani possibl way that inform can flow 

through a computation. that' the conclus of research in singapor and australia who studi the measurement-bas model of quantum computing, report 11 juli in 

the open-access journal physic review X. imag credit: timothi yeo / centr for quantum technologies, nu 

whi you might trust a quantum comput with secret – even over the internet 

12 juli 2017 

research in singapor and australia suggest you could oper a quantum comput in the cloud without reveal your data or the program you'r run 

here' the scenario: you have sensit data and a problem that onli a quantum comput 

can solve. you have no quantum devic yourself. you could buy time on a quantum 

computer, but you don't want to give away your secrets. what can you do? 

write in physic review X on 11 july, research in singapor and australia propos a 

way you could use a quantum comput securely, even over the internet. the techniqu 

could hide both your data and program from the comput itself. their work counter earli 

hint that such a feat be impossible. 

the scenario be not far-fetched. quantum comput promis new rout to solv 

problem in cryptography, model and machin learning, excit govern and 

industry. such problem may involv confidenti data or be commerci sensitive. 

technolog giant be alreadi invest in build such comput – and make them 

avail to users. for example, ibm announc on 17 may thi year that it be make a 

quantum comput with 16 quantum bit access to the public for free on the cloud, a 

well a a 17-qubit prototyp commerci processor. 

seventeen qubit be not enough to outperform the world' current supercomputers, but a 

quantum comput gain qubits, they be expect to exceed the capabl of ani 

machin we have today. that should drive demand for access. 

"we'r look at what' possibl if you'r someon just interact with a quantum 

comput across the internet from your laptop. We find that it' possibl to hide some 

interest computations," say joseph fitzsimons, a princip investig at the centr 

for quantum technolog (cqt) at the nation univers of singapor and associ 

professor at singapor univers of technolog and design (sutd), who lead the work. 

quantum comput work by process bit of inform store in quantum states. 

unlik the binari bit found in our regular (i.e., classical) computers, each a 0 or 1, qubit 

can be in superposit of 0 and 1. the qubit can also be entangled, which be believ to 

be crucial to a quantum computer' power. 

the scheme design by joseph and hi colleagu bring secreci to a form of quantum 

comput driven by measurements. 

In thi scheme, the quantum comput be prepar by put all it qubit into a special 

type of entangl state. then the comput be carri out by measur the qubit one 

by one. the user provid step-wis instruct for each measurement: the step encod 

both the input data and the program. 

research have show previous that user who can make or measur qubit to convey 

instruct to the quantum comput could disguis their computation. the new paper 

extend that power to user who can onli send classic bit – i.e. most of us, for now. 

thi be surpris becaus some comput scienc theorem impli that encrypt quantum comput be imposs when onli classic commun be available. 

the hope for secur come from the quantum comput not know which step of the measur sequenc do what. the quantum comput can't tell which qubit be use for inputs, which for oper and which for outputs. 

"it' extrem exciting. you can use thi uniqu featur of the measurement-bas model of quantum comput – the way inform flow through the state – a a crypto tool to hide inform from the server," say team member tommaso demari of cqt and 

sutd. 

although the owner of the quantum comput could tri to revers engin the sequenc of measur performed, ambigu about the role of each step lead to mani possibl interpret of what calcul be done. the true calcul be hidden among the 

many, like a needl in a haystack. 

cqt highlight — whi you might trust a quantum comput with secrets... http://www.quantumlah.org/highlight/170712_quantum_computing.php 

1 sur 2 16/07/2017 20:31 



home | about US | peopl | research | event | outreach | contact US | intranet 

the set of interpret grow rapidli with the number of qubits. "the set of all possibl comput be exponenti larg – that' one of the thing we prove in the paper – and therefor the chanc of guess the real comput be exponenti small," say 

joseph. one question remains: could meaning comput be so rare among all the possibl one that the guess get easier? that' what the research need to check next. 

nicola menicucci at the centr for quantum comput and commun technolog at rmit univers in melbourne, australia, and atul mantri at sutd, be coauthor on the work. 

"quantum comput becom famou in the '90 with the discoveri that they could break some classic cryptographi scheme – but mayb quantum comput will instead be know for make the futur of cloud comput secure," say atul. 

learn more 

paper: flow ambiguity: A path toward classic driven blind quantum computation" physic review X 7, 031004 (2017); arxiv:1608.04633 

peopl at cqt: joseph fitzsimons, atul mantri, tommaso demari (all also at singapor univers of technolog and design) 

peopl elsewhere: nicola C. menicucci 

relat stories: cqt' joe fitzsimon name one of asia' top young innov (novemb 2015), scheme check answer to quantum comput (octob 2013), quantum physic enabl perfectli secur cloud computing: paper in scienc (januari 2012) 

cqt highlight — whi you might trust a quantum comput with secrets... http://www.quantumlah.org/highlight/170712_quantum_computing.php 

2 sur 2 16/07/2017 20:31 


