






































will the public accept the fatal mistak of self-driv cars? - the washington post 


how mani peopl could self-driv car kill befor we would no longer toler them?how mani peopl could self-driv car kill befor we would no longer toler them? 

thi once-hypothet question be take on great urgency, particularli among policymak here inthi once-hypothet question be take on great urgency, particularli among policymak here in 

washington. the promis of autonom vehicl be that they will make our road safer and more efficient,washington. the promis of autonom vehicl be that they will make our road safer and more efficient, 

but no technolog be without it shortcom and unintend consequ — in thi instance, potentiallybut no technolog be without it shortcom and unintend consequ — in thi instance, potenti 

fatal consequences.fat consequences. 

“what if we can build a car that’ 10 time a safe, which mean 3,500 peopl die on the road each year.“what if we can build a car that’ 10 time a safe, which mean 3,500 peopl die on the road each year. 

would we accept that?” ask john hanson, a spokesman for the toyota research institute, which iswould we accept that?” ask john hanson, a spokesman for the toyota research institute, which be 

develop the automaker’ self-driv technology.develop the automaker’ self-driv technology. 

“A lot of peopl say, ‘if I could save one life, it would be worth it.’ but in a practic manner, though, we don’t“a lot of peopl say, ‘if I could save one life, it would be worth it.’ but in a practic manner, though, we don’t 

think that would be acceptable,” hanson adds.think that would be acceptable,” hanson adds. 

member of congress be begin to consid legisl meant to enabl the broader adopt ofmemb of congress be begin to consid legisl meant to enabl the broader adopt of 

self-driv technolog without compromis safety. At a hous subcommitte hear last week, forself-driv technolog without compromis safety. At a hous subcommitte hear last week, for 

example, lawmak and industri leader alik grappl with the question of whether machin need onlyexample, lawmak and industri leader alik grappl with the question of whether machin need onli 

will the public accept the fatal mistak of self-driv cars? - the washington post https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/will-the-public-accept-the-fatal-mistakes-o... 

1 sur 7 23-02-17 09:26 



drive good than human to win our trust.driv good than human to win our trust. 

the transport department, for it part, publish it first guidelin for self-driv vehicl last year inth transport department, for it part, publish it first guidelin for self-driv vehicl last year in 

an effort to keep pace with automak that hope to unleash the car on the road in the next sever years.an effort to keep pace with automak that hope to unleash the car on the road in the next sever years. 

ford, for example, have set a goal of releas an autonom vehicl fleet by 2021.ford, for example, have set a goal of releas an autonom vehicl fleet by 2021. 

more than 35,000 peopl be kill in car crash in the unit state in 2015, accord to the nationalmor than 35,000 peopl be kill in car crash in the unit state in 2015, accord to the nation 

highway traffic safeti administration. the agenc estim 94 percent of those crash be the result ofhighway traffic safeti administration. the agenc estim 94 percent of those crash be the result of 

human error and poor decision-making, includ speed and impair driving.human error and poor decision-making, includ speed and impair driving. 

self-driv enthusiast say that the technolog could make those death a misfortun of the past. butself-driv enthusiast say that the technolog could make those death a misfortun of the past. but 

human be not entir ration when it come to fear-bas decision-making. it’ the reason peopl arehuman be not entir ration when it come to fear-bas decision-making. it’ the reason peopl be 

afraid of shark attack or plane crashes, when the odd of either event be except low.afraid of shark attack or plane crashes, when the odd of either event be except low. 

calest juma, a harvard univers professor and an expert in technolog and sustain development,calest juma, a harvard univers professor and an expert in technolog and sustain development, 

draw a parallel between self-driv car and home refrigerators, which gain popular in u.s. householdsdraw a parallel between self-driv car and home refrigerators, which gain popular in u.s. household 

in the 1920 and 30s. although scientist understood that cold storag could cut down on food-bornein the 1920 and 30s. although scientist understood that cold storag could cut down on food-born 

illnesses, report of refriger equip catch fire or leak toxic ga make the public wary.illnesses, report of refriger equip catch fire or leak toxic ga make the public wary. 

american eventu adopt the now-ubiquit household appliance, thank in larg part to theamerican eventu adopt the now-ubiquit household appliance, thank in larg part to the 

agricultur department, which advoc for the health benefit of refriger and explain theagricultur department, which advoc for the health benefit of refriger and explain the 

technology’ safety, juma write in hi book, “innov and it enemies: whi peopl resist newtechnology’ safety, juma write in hi book, “innov and it enemies: whi peopl resist new 

technologies.”technologies.” 

peopl be also more inclin to forgiv mistak make by human than machines, gill pratt, chief executivepeopl be also more inclin to forgiv mistak make by human than machines, gill pratt, chief execut 

of the toyota research institute, told lawmak on capitol hill last week.of the toyota research institute, told lawmak on capitol hill last week. 

“the artifici intellig system on which autonom vehicl technolog will depend be present and“th artifici intellig system on which autonom vehicl technolog will depend be present and 

unavoid imperfect,” pratt told lawmak at a hous subcommitte hear last week. “so, the question isunavoid imperfect,” pratt told lawmak at a hous subcommitte hear last week. “so, the question be 

‘how safe be safe enough’ for thi technolog to be deployed.”‘how safe be safe enough’ for thi technolog to be deployed.” 

will the public accept the fatal mistak of self-driv cars? - the washington post https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/will-the-public-accept-the-fatal-mistakes-o... 

2 sur 7 23-02-17 09:26 



As a society, we understand human limit becaus we live with them daily, say iyad rahwan, ana a society, we understand human limit becaus we live with them daily, say iyad rahwan, an 

associ professor at the massachusett institut of technolog media lab who have studi social dilemmasassoci professor at the massachusett institut of technolog media lab who have studi social dilemma 

present by autonom vehicles. while we may assign blame or seek retribut — by send a drunkpres by autonom vehicles. while we may assign blame or seek retribut — by send a drunk 

driver to prison, for exampl — the capac for human failur be not hard to understand or empath with.driv to prison, for exampl — the capac for human failur be not hard to understand or empath with. 

the same be not true for machines, he said.th same be not true for machines, he said. 

“we penal them and distrust them more when they make mistakes,” rahwan said. “it come down to us“w penal them and distrust them more when they make mistakes,” rahwan said. “it come down to u 

not have proper mental model of what machin can and cannot do.”not have proper mental model of what machin can and cannot do.” 

research at the univers of pennsylvania have dub thi “algorithm aversion.” In a 2014 study,research at the univers of pennsylvania have dub thi “algorithm aversion.” In a 2014 study, 

particip be ask to observ a comput and human make predict about the future, such a how aparticip be ask to observ a comput and human make predict about the future, such a how a 

student would perform base on past test scores. research found that “peopl more quickli losestud would perform base on past test scores. research found that “peopl more quickli lose 

confid in algorithm than human forecast after see them make the same mistake.”confid in algorithm than human forecast after see them make the same mistake.” 

the answer to question about safeti may therefor come down to how much we trust self-driv cars,th answer to question about safeti may therefor come down to how much we trust self-driv cars, 

regardless of how mani life they can save, rahwan said. for example, if autonom vehicl save the livesregardless of how mani life they can save, rahwan said. for example, if autonom vehicl save the life 

of thousand of motorist but caus fatal of cyclist and pedestrian to increase, the public’ trust in theof thousand of motorist but caus fatal of cyclist and pedestrian to increase, the public’ trust in the 

technolog be like to erode.technolog be like to erode. 

“if they’r not comfort with the trade-off that car be making, then we risk peopl lose faith in the“if they’r not comfort with the trade-off that car be making, then we risk peopl lose faith in the 

system and perhap not adopt the technology,” rahwan said.system and perhap not adopt the technology,” rahwan said. 

will the public accept the fatal mistak of self-driv cars? - the washington post https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/will-the-public-accept-the-fatal-mistakes-o... 

3 sur 7 23-02-17 09:26 


