






































your reaction to pic of leonardo dicaprio, anim could unlock your next smartphon 


your reaction to pic of leonardo 
dicaprio, anim could unlock your 
next smartphon 

By cori nealon 

propos biometr system measur 
brainwaves; creat brain password 
that’ ‘cancelable,’ mean it can be 
reset if hack 

buffalo, n.y. — To overcom password fatigue, mani smartphon 
includ facial recognition, fingerprint scan and other biometr 
systems. 

the troubl with these easy-to-us tool be that onc compromis — 
yes, they can be hack — you can’t reset them. 

“you can’t grow a new fingerprint or iri if that inform be divulged,” 
say wenyao xu, phd, assist professor of comput scienc and 
engin in the univers at buffalo school of engin and 
appli sciences. “that’ whi we’r develop a new type of password 
— one that measur your brainwav in respons to a seri of pictures. 
like a password, it’ easi to reset; and like a biometric, it’ easi to use.” 

the “brain password,” which would requir user to wear a headset, 
could have implic in banking, law enforcement, airport secur 
and other areas. 

“to the best of our knowledge, thi be the first in-depth research studi 
on a truli cancel brain biometr system. We refer to thi a ‘hard 
cancellation,’ mean the origin brain password can be reset without 
divulg the user’ identity,” say collabor zhanpeng jin, phd, 
associ professor of comput scienc and engin at ub. 

their work be describ in a studi that will be present june 11 at 
mobisi 2018, a flagship mobil comput confer host in 
germani by the associ for comput machinery. for a copi of 
the study, pleas email cori nealon at cmnealon@buffalo.edu. 

whi celeb and animals? 

Xu be motiv to creat a cancel biometr password after 
hacker stole the fingerprint file of 5.6 million worker from the u.s. 

your reaction to pic of leonardo dicaprio, anim could unlock your n... http://www.buffalo.edu/news/releases/2018/06/004.html 

1 sur 3 06-06-18 à 19:37 



offic of person manag in 2015. 

perhap the most access way to record brain activ be through 
electroencephalography, which us electrod to measur the brain’ 
uniqu pattern of electr activity. 

for their system, Xu and collabor reconfigur a virtual realiti 
headset, reduc the number of electrod to six. three record brain 
activity, two serv a ground and the last act a a refer point. 
typically, these headset have 32 to 64 electrodes. 

the electrod record brain activ measur three area of the 
organ: the intrapariet sulcu (control declar memory), the 
inferior pariet lobul (process face recognition) and the temporo 
pariet junction (read comprehension). 

research chose specif imag type to stimul each brain region. 
they use anim pictur for the intrapariet sulcu becaus one’ 
memori of a certain anim can be highli individualized. for example, a 
person who suffer a spider bite will have a differ reaction than 
someon who hasn’t. 

for the inferior pariet lobule, research reli on recogniz 
celebr such a leonardo dicaprio. for the temporo pariet 
junction, they use encourag phrase such a “aspir to inspire.” 

how the brain password work 

user be show the three imag in rapid success — 1.2 second to 
be exact. the process be repeat three addit times. By the end of 
the fourth time, after 4.8 seconds, the brain password be ready. 

research recruit 179 adult — 93 men, 86 woman — to test the 
brain password. test subjects’ averag age be 30. 

research collect data from three sessions, includ one that 
occur five month after the origin test. the goal of the last test be 
to see how brain password function over time. 

overall, brain password be more than 95 percent effective. the 
perform dip slightly, by 1 percent, on the last test. 

earli adopt and privaci concern 

while wear a headset may not appeal to common internet users, Xu 
say that may chang over time, especi if the devic be redesign 
into someth more like googl glass. 

plus, he says, compani with deep concern about cybersecur may 
be earli adopt of the technology. As for privaci concerns, Xu say the 
system — even if hack — would not divulg sensit information. 

your reaction to pic of leonardo dicaprio, anim could unlock your n... http://www.buffalo.edu/news/releases/2018/06/004.html 

2 sur 3 06-06-18 à 19:37 



“these password contain inform gather from onli three 
channel in less than five seconds. semant memori attack need much 
more time than that,” say xu, who plan to continu work on the 
system to make it more reliabl and appeal to users. 

the research be support by the nation scienc foundat (nsf) 
and nsf’ center for identif technolog research. 

your reaction to pic of leonardo dicaprio, anim could unlock your n... http://www.buffalo.edu/news/releases/2018/06/004.html 

3 sur 3 06-06-18 à 19:37 


